Augustine, On the Trinity, Books I-IV
Translation: Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Schaff et al. (1886-1900), Public Domain
Source: https://archive.org/details/EarlyChurchFathers38Volumes

BISHOP OF HIPPO, ON THE TRINITY: BOOK I 

BOOK I. 

IN WHICH THE UNITY AND EQUALITY OF THE SUPREME TRINITY IS ESTABLISHED 
FROM THE SACRED SCRIPTURES, AND SOME TEXTS ALLEGED AGAINST THE 
EQUALITY OF THE SON ARE EXPLAINED. 

CHAP. 1.-THIS WORK IS WRITTEN AGAINST THOSE WHO SOPHISTICALLY ASSAIL THE 
FAITH OF THE TRINITY, THROUGH MISUSE OF REASON. THEY WHO DISPUTE 
CONCERNING GOD ERR FROM A THREEFOLD CAUSE. HOLY SCRIPTURE, REMOVING 
WHAT IS FALSE, LEADS US ON BY DEGREES TO THINGS DIVINE. WHAT TRUE 
IMMORTALITY IS. WE ARE NOURISHED BY FAITH, THAT WE MAY BE ENABLED TO 
APPREHEND THINGS DIVINE. 

1. THE following dissertation concerning the Trinity, as the reader ought to be informed, has been written in 
order to guard against the sophistries of those who disdain to begin with faith, and are deceived by a crude 
and perverse love of reason. Now one class of such men endeavor to transfer to things incorporeal and 
spiritual the ideas they have formed, whether through experience of the bodily senses, or by natural human 
wit and diligent quickness, or by the aid of art, from things corporeal; so as to seek to measure and 
conceive of the former by the latter. Others, again, frame whatever sentiments they may have concerning 
God according to the nature or affections of the human mind; and through this error they govern their 
discourse, in disputing concerning God, by distorted and fallacious rules. While yet a third class strive 
indeed to transcend the whole creation, which doubtless is changeable, in order to raise their thought to the 
unchangeable substance, which is God; but being weighed down by the burden of mortality, whilst they both 
would seem to know what they do not, and cannot know what they would, preclude themselves from entering 
the very path of understanding, by an over-bold affirmation of their own presumptuous judgments; choosing 
rather not to correct their own opinion when it is perverse, than to change that which they have once 
defended. And, indeed, this is the common disease of all the three classes which I have mentioned, -viz., 
both of those who frame their thoughts of God according to things corporeal, and of those who do so 
according to the spiritual creature, such as is the soul; and of those who neither regard the body nor the 
spiritual creature, and yet think falsely about God; and are indeed so much the further from the truth, that 
nothing can be found answering to their conceptions, either in the body, or in the made or created spirit, or in 
the Creator Himself. For he who thinks, for instance, that God is white or red, is in error; and yet these things 
are found in the body. Again, he who thinks of God as now forgetting and now remembering, or anything of 
the same kind, is none the less in error; and yet these things are found in the mind. But he who thinks that 
God is of such power as to have generated Himself, is so much the more in error, because not only does 
God not so exist, but neither does the spiritual nor the bodily creature; for there is nothing whatever that 
generates its own existence. (1) 

2. In order, therefore, that the human mind might be purged from falsities of this kind, Holy Scripture, which 
suits itself to babes has not avoided words drawn from any class of things really existing, through which, as 
by nourishment, our understanding might rise gradually to things divine and transcendent. For, in speaking 
of God, it has both used words taken from things corporeal, as when it says, "Hide me under the shadow of 
Thy wings;"(2) and it has borrowed many things from the spiritual creature, whereby to signify that which 
indeed is not so, but must needs so be said: as, for instance, "I the Lord thy God am a jealous God;"(3) and, 
"It repenteth me that I have made man. "(4) But it has drawn no words whatever, whereby to frame either 
figures of speech or enigmatic sayings, from things which do not exist at all. And hence it is that they who are 
shut out from the truth by that third kind of error are more mischievously and emptily vain than their fellows; in 
that they surmise respecting God, what can neither be found in Himself nor m any creature. For divine 
Scripture is wont to frame, as it were, allurements for children from the things which are found in the creature; 
whereby, according to their measure, and as it were by steps, the affections of the weak may be moved to 
seek those things that are above, and to leave those things that are below. But the same Scripture rarely 
employs those things which are spoken properly of God, and are not found in any creature; as, for instance, 
that which was said to Moses, "I am that I am;" and, "I Am hath sent me to you. "(5) For since both body and 

soul also are said in some sense to be, Holy Scripture certainly would not so express itself unless it meant 
to be understood in some special sense of the term. So, too, that which the Apostle says, "Who only hath 
immortality. "(6) Since the soul also both is said to be, and is, in a certain manner immortal, Scripture would 
not say "only hath," unless because true immortality is unchangeableness; which no creature can possess, 
since it belongs to the creator alone. (7) So also James says, "Every good gift and every perfect gift is from 
above, and cometh down from the Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of 
turning. "(8) So also David, "Thou, shall change them, and they shall be changed; but Thou art the same. "(9) 

3. Further, it is difficult to contemplate and fully know the substance of God; who fashions things changeable, 
yet without any change in Himself, and creates things temporal, yet without any temporal movement in 
Himself. And it is necessary, therefore, to purge our minds, in order to be able to see ineffably that which is 
ineffable; whereto not having yet attained, we are to be nourished by faith, and led by such ways as are 
more suited to our capacity, that we may be rendered apt and able to comprehend it. And hence the 
Apostle says, that "in Christ indeed are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge;"(10) and yet has 
commended Him to us, as to babes in Christ, who, although already born again by His grace, yet are still 
carnal and psychical, not by that divine virtue wherein He is equal to the Father, but by that human infirmity 
whereby He was crucified. For he says, "I determined not to know anything among you, save Jesus Christ 
and Him crucified;"(1 1) and then he continues, "And I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much 
trembling." And a little after he says to them, "And I, brethren, could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but 
as unto carnal, (12) even as unto babes in Christ. I have fed you with milk, and not with meat: for hitherto ye 
were not able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able. "(13) There are some who are angry at language of this 
kind, and think it is used in slight to themselves, and for the most part prefer rather to believe that they who 
so speak to them have nothing to say, than that they themselves cannot understand what they have said. 
And sometimes, indeed, we do allege to them, not certainly that account of the case which they seek in their 
inquiries about God, -because neither can they themselves receive it, nor can we perhaps either 
apprehend or express it,— but such an account of it as to demonstrate to them how incapable and utterly unfit 
they are to understand that which they require of us. But they, on their parts, because they do not hear what 
they desire, think that we are either playing them false in order to conceal our own ignorance, or speaking in 
malice because we grudge them knowledge; and so go away indignant and perturbed. 

CHAP. 2. --IN WHAT MANNER THIS WORK PROPOSES TO DISCOURSE CONCERNING 
THE TRINITY. 

4. Wherefore, our Lord God helping, we will undertake to render, as far as we are able, that very account 
which they so importunately demand: viz., that the Trinity is the one and only and true God, and also how the 
Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are rightly said, believed, understood, to be of one and the same 
substance or essence; in such wise that they may not fancy themselves mocked by excuses on our part, but 
may find by actual trial, both that the highest good is that which is discerned by the most purified minds, and 
that for this reason it cannot be discerned or understood by themselves, because the eye of the human 
mind, being weak, is dazzled in that so transcendent light, unless it be invigorated by the nourishment of the 
righteousness of faith. First, however, we must demonstrate, according to the authority of the Holy Scriptures, 
whether the faith be so. Then, if God be willing and aid us, we may perhaps at least so far serve these 
talkative arguers-more puffed up than capable, and therefore laboring under the more dangerous 
disease-as to enable them to find something which they are not able to doubt, that so, in that case where 
they cannot find the like, they may be led to lay the fault to their own minds, rather than to the truth itself or to 
our reasonings; and thus, if there be anything in them of either love or fear towards God, they may return and 
begin from faith in due order: perceiving at length how healthful a medicine has been provided for the faithful 
in the holy Church, whereby a heedful piety, healing the feebleness of the mind, may render it able to 
perceive the unchangeable truth, and hinder it from falling headlong, through disorderly rashness, into 
pestilent and false opinion. Neither will I myself shrink from inquiry, if I am anywhere in doubt; nor be 
ashamed to learn, if I am anywhere in error. 

CHAP. 3. -WHAT AUGUSTIN REQUESTS FROM HIS READERS. THE ERRORS OF 
READERS DULL OF COMPREHENSION NOT TO BE ASCRIBED TO THE AUTHOR. 

5. Further let me ask of my reader, wherever, alike with myself, he is certain, there to go on with me; 
wherever, alike with myself, he hesitates, there to join with me in inquiring; wherever he recognizes himself to 
be in error, there to return to me; wherever he recognizes me to be so, there to call me back: so that we may 
enter together upon the path of charity, and advance towards Him of whom it is said, "Seek His face 
evermore. "(1) And I would make this pious and safe agreement, in the presence of our Lord God, with all 
who read my writings, as well in all other cases as, above all, in the case of those which inquire into the unity 

of the Trinity, of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit; because in no other subject is error more 
dangerous, or inquiry more laborious, or the discovery of truth more profitable. If, then, any reader shall say, 
This is not well said, because I do not understand it; such an one finds fault with my language, not with my 
faith: and it might perhaps in very truth have been put more clearly; yet no man ever so spoke as to be 
understood in all things by all men. Let him, therefore, who finds this fault with my discourse, see whether he 
can understand other men who have handled similar subjects and questions, when he does not understand 
me: and if he can, let him put down my book, or even, if he pleases, throw it away; and let him spend labor 
and time rather on those whom he understands. (2) Yet let him not think on that account that I ought to have 
been silent, because I have not been able to express myself so smoothly and clearly to him as those do 
whom he understands. For neither do all things, which all men have written, come into the hands of all. And 
possibly some, who are capable of understanding even these our writings, may not find those more lucid 
works, and may meet with ours only. And therefore it is useful that many persons should write many books, 
differing in style but not in faith, concerning even the same questions, that the matter itself may reach the 
greatest number-some in one way, some in another. But if he who complains that he has not understood 
these things has never been able to comprehend any careful and exact reasonings at all upon such 
subjects, let him in that case deal with himself by resolution and study, that he may know better; not with me 
by quarrellings and wranglings, that I may hold my peace. Let him, again, who says, when he reads my 
book, Certainly I understand what is said, but it is not true, assert, if he pleases, his own opinion, and refute 
mine if he is able. And if he do this with charity and truth, and take the pains to make it known to me (if I am 
still alive), I shall then receive the most abundant fruit of this my labor. And if he cannot inform myself, most 
willing and glad should I be that he should inform those whom he can. Yet, for my part, "I meditate in the law 
of the Lord,"(1) if not "day and night," at least such short times as I can; and I commit my meditations to 
writing, lest-they should escape me through forgetfulness; hoping by the mercy of God that He will make me 
hold steadfastly all truths of which I feel certain; "but if in anything I be otherwise minded, that He will himself 
reveal even this to me, "(2) whether through secret inspiration and admonition, or through His own plain 
utterances, or through the reasonings of my brethren. This I pray for, and this my trust and desire I commit to 
Him, who is sufficiently able to keep those things which He has given me, and to render those which He has 
promised. 

6. I expect, indeed, that some, who are more dull of understanding, will imagine that in some parts of my 
books I have held sentiments which I have not held, or have not held those which I have. But their error, as 
none can be ignorant, ought not to be attributed to me, if they have deviated into false doctrine through 
following my steps without apprehending me, whilst I am compelled to pick my way through a hard and 
obscure subject: seeing that neither can any one, in any way, rightly ascribe the numerous and various 
errors of heretics to the holy testimonies themselves of the divine books; although all of them endeavor to 
defend out of those same Scriptures their own false and erroneous opinions. The law of Christ, that is, 
charity, admonishes me clearly, and commands me with a sweet constraint, that when men think that I have 
held in my books something false which I have not held, and that same falsehood displeases one and 
pleases another, I should prefer to be blamed by him who reprehends the falsehood, rather than praised by 
him who praises it. For although I, who never held the error, am not rightly blamed by the former, yet the error 
itself is rightly censured; whilst by the latter neither am I rightly praised, who am thought to have held that 
which the truth censures, nor the sentiment itself, which the truth also censures. Let us therefore essay the 
work which we have undertaken in the name of the Lord. 

CHAP. 4.-WHAT THE DOCTRINE OF THE CATHOLIC FAITH IS CONCERNING THE 
TRINITY. 

7. All those Catholic expounders of the divine Scriptures, both Old and New, whom I have been able to read, 
who have written before me concerning the Trinity, Who is God, have purposed to teach, according to the 
Scriptures, this doctrine, that the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit intimate a divine unity of one and 
the same substance in an indivisible equality;(3) and therefore that they are not three Gods, but one God: 
although the Father hath begotten the Son, and so He who is the Father is not the Son; and the Son is 
begotten by the Father, and so He who is the Son is not the Father; and the Holy Spirit is neither the Father 
nor the Son, but only the Spirit of the Father and of the Son, Himself also co-equal with the Father and the 
Son, and pertaining to the unity of the Trinity. Yet not that this Trinity was born of the Virgin Mary, and crucified 
under Pontius Pilate, andand roseburied,, again the third day, and ascended into heaven, but only the Son. 
Nor, again, that this Trinity descended in the form of a dove upon Jesus when He was baptized;(4) nor that, 
on the day of Pentecost, after the ascension of the Lord, when "there came a sound from heaven, as of a 
rushing mighty wind, "(5) the same Trinity "sat upon each of them with cloven tongues like as of fire," but only 
the Holy Spirit. Nor yet that this Trinity said from heaven, "Thou art my Son, "(6) whether when He was 
baptized by John, or when the three disciples were with Him in the mount,(7) or when the voice sounded, 

saying, "I have both glorified it,and will glorify it again;"(8) but that it was a word of the Father only, spoken to 
the Son; although the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, as they are indivisible, so work indivisibly.(9) 
This is also my faith, since it is the Catholic faith. 

CHAP. 5. --OF DIFFICULTIES CONCERNING THE TRINITY: IN WHAT MANNER THREE ARE 
ONE GOD, AND HOW, WORKING INDIVISIBLY, THEY YET PERFORM SOME THINGS 
SEVERALLY. 

8. Some persons, however, find a difficulty in this faith; when they hear that the Father is God, and the Son 
God, and the Holy Spirit God, and yet that this Trinity is not three Gods, but one God; and they ask how they 
are to understand this: especially when it is said that the Trinity works indivisibly in everything that God 
works, and yet that a certain voice of the Father spoke, which is not the voice of the Son; and that none 
except the Son was born in the flesh, and suffered, and rose again, and ascended into heaven; and that 
none except the Holy Spirit came in the form of a dove. They wish to understand how the Trinity uttered that 
voice which was only of the Father; and how the same Trinity created that flesh in which the Son only was 
born of the Virgin; and how the very same Trinity itself wrought that form of a dove, in which the Holy Spirit 
only appeared. Yet, otherwise, the Trinity does not work indivisibly, but the Father does some things, the 
Son other things, and the Holy Spirit yet others: or else, if they do some things together, some severally, 
then the Trinity is not indivisible. It is a difficulty, too, to them, in what manner the Holy Spirit is in the Trinity, 
whom neither the Father nor the Son, nor both, have begotten, although He is the Spirit both of the Father 
and of the Son. Since, then, men weary us with asking such questions, let us unfold to them, as we are able, 
whatever wisdom God's gift has bestowed upon our weakness on this subject; neither "let us go on our way 
with consuming envy."(1) Should we say that we are not accustomed to think about such things, it would not 
be true; yet if we acknowledge that such subjects commonly dwell in our thoughts, carried away as we are 
by the love of investigating the truth, then they require of us, by the law of charity, to make known to them 
what we have herein been able to find out. "Not as though I had already attained, either were already 
perfect" (for, if the Apostle Paul, how much more must I, who lie far beneath his feet, count myself not to have 
apprehended!); but, according to my measure, "if I forget those things that are behind, and reach forth unto 
those things which are before, and press towards the mark for the prize of the high calling, "(2) I am 
requested to disclose so much of the road as I have already passed, and the point to which I have reached, 
whence the course yet remains to bring me to the end. And those make the request, whom a generous 
charity compels me to serve. Needs must too, and God will grant that, in supplying them with matter to read, I 
shall profit myself also; and that, in seeking to reply to their inquiries, I shall myself likewise find that for which 

I was inquiring. Accordingly I have undertaken the task, by the bidding and help of the Lord my God, not so 
much of discoursing with authority respecting things I know already, as of learning those things by piously 
discoursing of them. 

CHAP. 6. -THAT THE SON IS VERY GOD, OF THE SAME SUBSTANCE WITH THE 
FATHER. NOT ONLY THE FATHER, BUT THE TRINITY, IS AFFIRMED TO BE IMMORTAL. 
ALLTHINGS ARE NOT FROM THE FATHER ALONE, BUT ALSO FROM THE SON. THAT 
THE HOLY SPIRIT IS VERY GOD, EQUAL WITH THE FATHER AND THE SON. 

9. They who have said that our Lord Jesus Christ is not God, or not very God, or not with the Father the One 
and only God, or not truly immortal because changeable, are proved wrong by the most plain and 
unanimous voice of divine testimonies; as, for instance, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was 
with God, and the Word was God." For it is plain that we are to take the Word of God to be the only Son of 
God, of whom it is afterwards said, "And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us," on account of that 
birth of His incarnation, which was wrought in time of the Virgin. But herein is declared, not only that He is 
God, but also that He is of the same substance with the Father; because, after saying, "And the Word was 
God," it is said also, "The same was in the beginning with God: all things were made by Him, and without 
Him was not anything made. "(3) Not simply "all things;" but only all things that were made, that is; the whole 
creature. From which it appears clearly, that He Himself was not made, by whom all things were made. And 
if He was not made, then He is not a creature; but if He is not a creature, then He is of the same substance 
with the Father. For all substance that is not God is creature; and all that is not creature is God. (4) And if the 
Son is not of the same substance with the Father, then He is a substance that was made: and if He is a 
substance that was made, then all things were not made by Him; but "all things were made by Him," 
therefore He is of one and the same substance with the Father. And so He is not only God, but also very 
God. And the same John most expressly affirms this in his epistle: "For we know that the Son of God is 
come, and hath given us an understanding, that we may know the true God, and that we may be in His true 
Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and eternal life." (1) 

1 0. Hence also it follows by consequence, that the Apostle Paul did not say, "Who alone has immortality," of 
the Father merely; but of the One and only God, which is the Trinity itself. For that which is itself eternal life is 
not mortal according to any changeableness; and hence the Son of God, because "He is Eternal Life," is 
also Himself understood with the Father, where it is said, "Who only hath immortality." For we, too, are made 
partakers of this eternal life, and become, in our own measure, immortal. But the eternal life itself, of which we 
are made partakers, is one thing; we ourselves, who, by partaking of it, shall live eternally, are another. For if 
He had said, "Whom in His own time the Father will show, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of 
kings, and Lord of lords; who only hath immortality;" not even so would it be necessarily understood that the 
Son is excluded. For neither has the Son separated the Father from Himself, because He Himself, speaking 
elsewhere with the voice of wisdom (for He Himself is the Wisdom of God), (2) says, "I alone compassed the 
circuit of heaven. "(3) And therefore so much the more is it not necessary that the words, "Who hath 
immortality," should be understood of the Father alone, omitting the Son; when they are said thus: "That thou 
keep this commandment without spot, unrebukeable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ: whom in 
His own time He will show, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords; who 
only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto; whom no man hath seen, nor 
can see: to whom be honor and power everlasting. Amen. "(4) In which words neither is the Father specially 
named, nor the Son, nor the Holy Spirit; but the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of 
lords; that is, the One and only and true God, the Trinity itself. 

1 1 . But perhaps what follows may interfere with this meaning; because it is said, "Whom no man hath seen, 
nor can see:" although this may also be taken as belonging to Christ according to His divinity, which the 
Jews did not see, who yet saw and crucified Him in the flesh; whereas His divinity can in no wise be seen by 
human sight, but is seen with that sight with which they who see are no longer men, but beyond men. Rightly, 
therefore, is God Himself, the Trinity, understood to be the "blessed and only Potentate," who "shows the 
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ in His own time." For the words, "Who only hath immortality," are said in the 
same way as it is said, "Who only doeth wondrous things. "(5) And I should be glad to know of whom they 
take these words to be said. If only of the Father, how then is that true which the Son Himself says, "For what 
things soever the Father doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise?" Is there any, among wonderful works, 
more wonderful than to raise up and quicken the dead? Yet the same Son saith, "As the Father raiseth up 
the dead, and quickeneth them, even so the Son quickeneth whom He will. "(6) How, then, does the Father 
alone "do wondrous things," when these words allow us to understand neither the Father only, nor the Son 
only, but assuredly the one only true God, that is, the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit? (7) 

12. Also, when the same apostle says, "But to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, 
and we in Him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by Him, "(8) who can doubt that he 
speaks of all things which are created; as does John, when he says, "All things were made by Him"? I ask, 
therefore, of whom he speaks in another place: "For of Him, and through Him, and in Him, are all things: to 
whom be glory for ever. Amen. "(9) For if of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, so as to assign each 
clause severally to each person: of Him, that is to say, of the Father; through Him, that is to say, through the 
Son; in Him, that is to say, in the Holy Spirit, — it is manifest that the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit is 
one God, inasmuch as the words continue in the singular number, "To whom(10) be glory for ever." For at 
the beginning of the passage he does not say, "O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and 
knowledge" of the Father, or of the Son, or of the Holy Spirit, but "of the wisdom and knowledge of God!" 
"How unsearchable are His judgments, and His ways past finding out! For who hath known the mind of the 
Lord? or who hath been His counsellor? Or who hath first given to Him and it shall be recompensed unto him 
again? For of Him, and through Him, and in Him, are all things: to whom be glory for ever. Amen."(1) But if 
they will have this to be understood only of the Father, then in what way are all things by the Father, as is 
said here; and all things by the Son, as where it is said to the Corinthians, "And one Lord Jesus Christ, by 
whom are all things, "(2) and as in the Gospel of John, "All things were made by Him?" For if some things 
were made by the Father, and some by the Son, then all things were not made by the Father, nor all things 
by the Son; but if all things were made by the Father, and all things by the Son, then the same things were 
made by the Father and by the Son. The Son, therefore, is equal with the Father, and the working of the 
Father and the Son is indivisible. Because if the Father made even the Son, whom certainly the Son Himself 
did not make, then all things were not made by the Son; but all things were made by the Son: therefore He 
Himself was not made, that with the Father He might make all things that were made. And the apostle has 
not refrained from using the very word itself, but has said most expressly, "Who, being in the form of God, 
thought it not robbery to be equal with God;"(3) using here the name of God specially of the Father;(4) as 
elsewhere, "But the head of Christ is God."(5) 

13. Similar evidence has been collected also concerning the Holy Spirit, of which those who have 
discussed the subject before ourselves have most fully availed themselves, that He too is God, and not a 
creature. But if not a creature, then not only God (for men likewise are called gods (6)), but also very God; 
and therefore absolutely equal with the Father and the Son, and in the unity of the Trinity consubstantial and 

co-eternal. But that the Holy Spirit is not a creature is made quite plain by that passage above all others, 
where we are commanded not to serve the creature, but the Creator;(7) not in the sense in which we are 
commanded to "serve" one another by love, (8) which is in Greek <greek>douleuein</greek>, but in that in 
which God alone is served, which is in Greek <greek>latreuein</greek>. From whence they are called 
idolaters who tender that service to images which is due to God. For it is this service concerning which it is 
said, "Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shalt thou serve. "(9) For this is found also more 
distinctly in the Greek Scriptures, which have <greek>latreuseis</greek>. Now if we are forbidden to serve 
the creature with such a service, seeing that it is written, "Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and Him only 
shalt thou serve" (and hence, too, the apostle repudiates those who worship and serve the creature more 
than the Creator), then assuredly the Holy Spirit is not a creature, to whom such a service is paid by all the 
saints; as says the apostle, "For we are the circumcision, which serve the Spirit of God, "(10) which is in the 
Greek <greek>latreuontes</greek>. For even most Latin copies also have it thus, "We who serve the Spirit 
of God;" but all Greek ones, or almost all, have it so. Although in some Latin copies we find, not "We worship 
the Spirit of God," but, "We worship God in the Spirit." But let those who err in this case, and refuse to give up 
to the more weighty authority, tell us whether they find this text also varied in the MSS.: "Know ye not that your 
body is the temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you, which ye have of God?" Yet what can be more 
senseless or more profane, than that any one should dare to say that the members of Christ are the temple 
of one who, in their opinion, is a creature inferior to Christ? For the apostle says in another place, "Your 
bodies are members of Christ." But if the members of Christ are also the temple of the Holy Spirit, then the 
Holy Spirit is not a creature; because we must needs owe to Him, of whom our body is the temple, that 
service wherewith God only is to be served, which in Greek is called <greek>latreia</greek>. And 
accordingly the apostle says, "Therefore glorify God in your body."(1) 

CHAP. 7. --IN WHAT MANNER THE SON IS LESS THAN THE FATHER, AND THAN 
HIMSELF. 

14. In these and like testimonies of the divine Scriptures, by free use of which, as I have said, our 
predecessors exploded such sophistries or errors of the heretics, the unity and equality of the Trinity are 
intimated to our faith. But because, on account of the incarnation of the Word of God for the working out of our 
salvation, that the man Christ Jesus might be the Mediator between God and men, (2) many things are so 
said in the sacred books as to signify, or even most expressly declare, the Father to be greater than the 
Son; men have erred through a want of careful examination or consideration of the whole tenor of the 
Scriptures, and have endeavored to transfer those things which are said of Jesus Christ according to the 
flesh, to that substance of His which was eternal before the incarnation, and is eternal. They say, for 
instance, that the Son is less than the Father, because it is written that the Lord Himself said, "My Father is 
greater than I ."(3) But the truth shows that after the same sense the Son is less also than Himself; for how was 
He not made less also than Himself, who "emptied(4) Himself, and took upon Him the form of a servant?" 
For He did not so take the form of a servant as that He should lose the form of God, in which He was equal 
to the Father. If, then, the form of a servant was so taken that the form of God was not lost, since both in the 
form of a servant and in the form of God He Himself is the same only-begotten Son of God the Father, in the 
form of God equal to the Father, in the form of a servant the Mediator between God and men, the man Christ 
Jesus; is there any one who cannot perceive that He Himself in the form of God is also greater than Himself, 
but yet likewise in the form of a servant less than Himself? And not, therefore, without cause the Scripture 
says both the one and the other, both that the Son is equal to the Father, and that the Father is greater than 
the Son. For there is no confusion when the former is understood as on account of the form of God, and the 
latter as on account of the form of a servant. And, in truth, this rule for clearing the question through all the 
sacred Scriptures is set forth in one chapter of an epistle of the Apostle Paul, where this distinction is 
commended to us plainly enough. For he says, "Who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be 
equal with God; but emptied Himself, and took upon Him the form of a servant, and was made in the 
likeness of men: and was found in fashions as a man. "(6) The Son of God, then, is equal to God the Father in 
nature, but less in "fashion. "(7) For in the form of a servant which He took He is less than the Father; but in the 
form of God, in which also He was before He took the form of a servant, He is equal to the Father. In the form 
of God He is the Word, "by whom all things are made;"(8) but in the form of a servant He was "made of a 
woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were under the law."(9) In like manner, in the form of God 
He made man; in the form of a servant He was made man. For if the Father alone had made man without the 
Son, it would not have been written, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness. "(1 0) Therefore, 
because the form of God took the form of a servant, both is God and both is man; but both God, on account 
of God who takes; and both man, on account of man who is taken. For neither by that taking is the one of 
them turned and changed into the other: the Divinity is not changed into the creature, so as to cease to be 
Divinity; nor the creature into Divinity, so as to cease to be creature. 

CHAP. 8. -THE TEXTS OF SCRIPTURE EXPLAINED RESPECTING THE SUBJECTION OF 
THE SON TO THE FATHER, WHICH HAVE BEEN MISUNDERSTOOD. CHRIST WILL NOT 
SO GIVE UP THE KINGDOM TO THE FATHER, AS TO TAKE IT AWAY FROM HIMSELF. 
THE BEHOLDING HIM IS THE PROMISED END OF ALL ACTIONS. THE HOLY SPIRIT IS 
SUFFICIENT TO OUR BLESSEDNESS EQUALLYWITH THE FATHER. 

15. As for that which the apostle says, "And when all things shall be subdued unto Him, then shall the Son 
also Himself be subject unto Him that put all things under Him:" either the text has been so turned, lest any 
one should think that the "fashion"(1 1) of Christ, which He took according to the human creature, was to be 
transformed hereafter into the Divinity, or (to express it more precisely) the Godhead itself, who is not a 
creature, but is the unity of the Trinity, -a nature incorporeal, and unchangeable, and consubstantial, and 
co-eternal with itself; or if any one contends, as some have thought, that the text, "Then shall the Son also 
Himself be subject unto Him that put all things under Him," is so turned in order that one may believe that 
very "subjection" to be a change and conversion hereafter of the creature into the substance or essence 
itself of the Creator, that is, that that which had been the substance of a creature shall become the substance 
of the Creator;-such an one at any rate admits this, of which in truth there is no possible doubt, that this had 
not yet taken place, when the Lord said, "My Father is greater than I ." For He said this not only before He 
ascended into heaven, but also before He had suffered, and had risen from the dead. But they who think 
that the human nature in Him is to be changed and converted into the substance of the Godhead, and that it 
was so said, "Then shall the Son also Himself be subject unto Him that put all things under Him, "-as if to 
say, Then also the Son of man Himself, and the human nature taken by the Word of God, shall be changed 
into the nature of Him who put all things under Him,-must also think that this will then take place, when, after 
the day of judgment, "He shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father." And hence even 
still, according to this opinion, the Father is greater than that form of a servant which was taken of the Virgin. 
But if some affirm even further, that the man Christ Jesus has already been changed into the substance of 
God, at least they cannot deny that the human nature still remained, when He said before His passion, "For 
my Father is greater than I;" whence there is no question that it was said in this sense, that the Father is 
greater than the form of a servant, to whom in the form of God the Son is equal. Nor let any one, hearing what 
the apostle says, "But when He saith all things are put under Him, it is manifest that He is excepted which did 
put all things under Him,"(1) think the words, that He hath put all things under the Son, to be so understood of 
the Father, as that He should not think that the Son Himself put all things under Himself. For this the apostle 
plainly declares, when he says to the Philippians, "For our conversation is in heaven; from whence also we 
look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ: who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto 
His glorious body, according to the working whereby He is able even to subdue(2) all things unto 
Himself."(3) For the working of the Father and of the Son is indivisible. Otherwise, neither hath the Father 
Himself put all things under Himself, but the Son hath put all things under Him, who delivers the kingdom to 
Him, and puts down all rule and all authority and power. For these words are spoken of the Son: "When He 
shall have delivered up," says the apostle, "the kingdom to God, even the Father; when He shall have put 
down(4) all rule, and all authority, and all power." For the same that puts down, also makes subject. 

16. Neither may we think that Christ shall so give up the kingdom to God, even the Father, as that He shall 
take it away from Himself. For some vain talkers have thought even this. For when it is said, "He shall have 
delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father," He Himself is not excluded; cause He is one God 
together with the Father. But that word "until" deceives those who are careless readers of the divine 
Scriptures, but eager for controversies. For the text continues, "For He must reign, until He hath put all 
enemies under His feet;"(5) as though, when He had so put them, He would no more reign. Neither do they 
perceive that this is said in the same way as that other text, "His heart is established: He shall not be afraid, 
until He see His desire upon His enemies. "(6) For He will not then be afraid when He has seen it. What then 
means, "When He shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father," as though God and the 
Father has not the kingdom now? But because He is hereafter to bring all the just, over whom now, living by 
faith, the Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, reigns, to that sight which the same apostle 
calls "face to face;"(7) therefore the words, "When He shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the 
Father," are as much as to say, When He shall have brought believers to the contemplation of God, even 
the Father. For He says, "All things are delivered unto me of my Father: and no man knoweth the Son, but 
the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal 
Him. "(8) The Father will then be revealed by the Son, "when He shall have put down all rule, and all 
authority, and all power;" that is, in such wise that there shall be no more need of any economy of 
similitudes, by means of angelic rulers, and authorities, and powers. Of whom that is not unfitly understood, 
which is said in the Song of Songs to the bride, "We will make thee borders(9) of gold, with studs of silver, 
while the King sitteth at His table;"(1) that is, as long as Christ is in His secret place: since "your life is hid with 

Christ in God; when Christ, who is our(2) life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with Him in glory. "(3) 
Before which time, "we see now through a glass, in an enigma," that is, in similitudes, "but then face to 
face."(4) 

17. For this contemplation is held forth to us as the end of all actions, and the everlasting fullness of joy. For 
"we are the sons of God; and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when He shall 
appear, we shall be like Him; for we shall see Him as He is. "(5) For that which He said to His servant 
Moses, "I am that I am; thus shalt thou say to the children of Israel, I Am hath sent me to you;"(6) this it is which 
we shall contemplate when we shall live in eternity. For so it is said, "And this is life eternal, that they might 
know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast sent."(7) This shall be when the Lord shall 
have come, and "shall have brought to light the hidden things of darkness ;" (8) when the darkness of this 
present mortality and corruption shall have passed away. Then will be our morning, which is spoken of in 
the Psalm, "In the morning will I direct my prayer unto Thee, and will contemplate Thee. "(9) Of this 
contemplation I understand it to be said, "When He shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the 
Father;" that is, when He shall have brought the just, over whom now, living by faith, the Mediator between 
God and man, the man Christ Jesus, reigns, to the contemplation of God, even the Father. If herein I am 
foolish, let him who knows better correct me; to me at least the case seems as I have said.(1 0) For we shall 
not seek anything else, when we shall have come to the contemplation of Him. But that contemplation is not 
yet, so long as our joy is in hope. For "hope that is seen is not hope: for what a man seeth, why doth he yet 
hope for? But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it,"(1 1) viz. "as long as the King 
sitteth at His table. "(12) Then will take place that which is written, "In Thy presence is fullness of joy. "(13) 
Nothing more than that joy will be required; because there will be nothing more than can be required. For the 
Father will be manifested to us, and that will suffice for us. And this much Philip had well understood, so that 
he said to the Lord, "Show us the Father, and it sufficeth us." But he had not yet understood that he himself 
was able to say this very same thing in this way also: Lord, show Thyself to us, and it sufficeth us. For, that he 
might understand this, the Lord replied to him, "Have I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not 
known me, Philip? he that hath seen me hath seen the Father." But because He intended him, before he 
could see this, to live by faith, He went on to say, "Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in 
me?"(14) For "while we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord: for we walk by faith, not by 
sight."(15) For contemplation is the recompense of faith, for which recompense our hearts are purified by 
faith; as it is written, "Purifying their hearts by faith. "(16) And that our hearts are to be purified for this 
contemplation, is proved above all by this text, "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. "(17) 
And that this is life eternal, God says in the Psalm, "With long life will I satisfy him, and show him my 
salvation, "(18) Whether, therefore, we hear, Show us the Son; or whether we hear, Show us the Father; it is 
even all one, since neither can be manifested without the other. For they are one, as He also Himself says, 
"My Father and I are one."(1 9) Finally, on account of this very indivisibility, it suffices that sometimes the 
Father alone, or the Son alone, should be named, as hereafter to fill us with the joy of His countenance. 

18. Neither is the Spirit of either thence excluded, that is, the Spirit of the Father and of the Son; which Holy 
Spirit is specially called "the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive. "(20) For to have the fruition of 
God the Trinity, after whose image we are made, is indeed the fullness of our joy, than which there is no 
greater. On this account the Holy Spirit is sometimes spoken of as if He alone sufficed to our blessedness: 
and He does alone so suffice, because He cannot be divided from the Father and the Son; as the Father 
alone is sufficient, because He cannot be divided from the Son and the Holy Spirit; and the Son alone is 
sufficient because He cannot be divided from the Father and the Holy Spirit. For what does He mean by 
saying, "If ye love me, keep my commandments; and I will pray the Father, and He shall give you another 
Comforter, that He may abide with you for ever; even the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, "(1) 
that is, the lovers of the world? For "the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God. "(2) But it may 
perhaps seem, further, as if the words, "And I will pray the Father, and He shall give you another Comforter," 
were so said as if the Son alone were not sufficient. And that place so speaks of the Spirit, as if He alone 
were altogether sufficient: "When He, the Spirit of truth, is come, He will guide you into all truth. "(3) Pray, 
therefore, is the Son here excluded, as if He did not teach all truth, or as if the Holy Spirit were to fill up that 
which the Son could not fully teach? Let them say then, if it pleases them, that the Holy Spirit is greater than 
the Son, whom they are wont to call less. Or is it, forsooth, because it is not said, He alone,-or, No one else 
except Himself-will guide you into all truth, that they allow that the Son also may be believed to teach 
together with Him? In that case the apostle has excluded the Son from knowing those things which are of 
God, where he says, "Even so the things of God knoweth no one, but the Spirit of God:"(4) so that these 
perverse men might, upon this ground, go on to say that none but the Holy Spirit teaches even the Son the 
things of God, as the greater teaches the less; to whom the Son Himself ascribes so much as to say, "But 
because I have said these things unto you, sorrow hath filled your heart. Nevertheless I tell you the truth; it is 
expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you. "(5) 

CHAP. 9. -ALL ARE SOMETIMES UNDERSTOOD IN ONE PERSON. 

But this is said, not on account of any inequality of the Word of God and of the Holy Spirit, but as though the 
presence of the Son of man with them would be a hindrance to the coming of Him, who was not less, 
because He did not "empty Himself, taking upon Him the form of a servant, "(6) as the Son did. It was 
necessary, then, that the form of a servant should be taken away from their eyes, because, through gazing 
upon it, they thought that alone which they saw to be Christ. Hence also is that which is said, "If ye loved me, 
ye would rejoice because I said, "I go unto the Father; for my Father is greater than l:"(7) that is, on that 
account it is necessary for me to go to the Father, because, whilst you see me thus, you hold me to be less 
than the Father through that which you see; and so, being taken up with the creature and the "fashion" which I 
have taken upon me, you do not perceive the equality which I have with the Father. Hence, too, is this: 
"Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father."(8) For touch, as it were, puts a limit to their 
conception, and He therefore would not have the thought of the heart, directed towards Himself, to be so 
limited as that He should be held to be only that which He seemed to be. But the "ascension to the Father" 
meant, so to appear as He is equal to the Father, that the limit of the sight which sufficeth us might be 
attained there. Sometimes also it is said of the Son alone, that He himself sufficeth, and the whole reward of 
our love and longing is held forth as in the sight of Him. For so it is said, "He that hath my commandments, 
and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me; and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father; and I will love 
him, and will manifest myself to him. "(9) Pray, because He has not here said, And I will show the Father also 
to him, has He therefore excluded the Father? On the contrary, because it is true, "I and my Father are one," 
when the Father is manifested, the Son also, who is in Him, is manifested; and when the Son is manifested, 
the Father also, who is in Him, is manifested. As, therefore, when it is said, "And I will manifest myself to him," 
it is understood that He manifests also the Father; so likewise in that which is said, "When He shall have 
delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father," it is understood that He does not take it away from 
Himself; since, when He shall bring believers to the contemplation of God, even the Father, doubtless He 
will bring them to the contemplation of Himself, who has said, "And I will manifest myself to him." And so, 
consequently, when Judas had said to Him, "Lord, how is it that Thou wilt manifest Thyself unto us, and not 
unto the world?" Jesus answered and said to him, "If a man love me, he will keep my words: and my Father 
will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. "(10) Behold, that He manifests not 
only Himself to him by whom He is loved, because He comes to him together with the Father, and abides 
with him. 

19. Will it perhaps be thought, that when the Father and the Son make their abode with him who loves them, 
the Holy Spirit is excluded from that abode? What, then, is that which is said above of the Holy Spirit: "Whom 
the world cannot receive, because it seeth Him notbutye know Him; for He abideth with you, and is in you"? 
He, therefore, is not excluded from that abode, of whom it is said, "He abideth with you, and is in you;" 
unless, perhaps, any one be so senseless as to think, that when the Father and the Son have come that 
they may make their abode with him who loves them, the Holy Spirit will depart thence, and (as it were) give 
place to those who are greater. But the Scripture itself meets this carnal idea; for it says a little above: "I will 
pray the Father, and He shall give you another Comforter, that He may abide with you for ever."(1) He will 
not therefore depart when the Father and the Son come, but will be in the same abode with them eternally; 
because neither will He come without them, nor they without Him. But in order to intimate the Trinity, some 
things are separately affirmed, the Persons being also each severally named; and yet are not to be 
understood as though the other Persons were excluded, on account of the unity of the same Trinity and the 
One substance and Godhead of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit.(2) 

CHAP. 10. -IN WHAT MANNER CHRIST SHALL DELIVER UP THE KINGDOM TO GOD, 
EVEN THE FATHER. THE KINGDOM HAVING BEEN LIVERED TO GOD, EVEN THE 
FATHER, CHRIST WILL NOT THEN MAKE INTERCESSION FOR US. 

20. Our Lord Jesus Christ, therefore, will so deliver up the kingdom to God, even the Father, Himself not 
being thence excluded, nor the Holy Spirit, when He shall bring believers to the contemplation of God, 
wherein is the end of all good actions, and everlasting rest, and joy which never will be taken from us. For 
He signifies this in that which He says: "I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice; and your joy no 
man taketh from you. "(3) Mary, sitting at the feet of the Lord, and earnestly listening to His word, foreshowed 
a similitude of this joy; resting as she did from all business, and intent upon the truth, according to that 
manner of which this life is capable, by which, however, to prefigure that which shall be for eternity. For while 
Martha, her sister, was cumbered about necessary business, which, although good and useful, yet, when 
rest shall have succeeded, is to pass away, she herself was resting in the word of the Lord. And so the Lord 
replied to Martha, when she complained that her sister did not help her: "Mary hath chosen the best part, 
which shall not be taken away from her."(4) He did not say that Martha was acting a bad part; but that "best 

part that shall not be taken away." For that part which is occupied in the ministering to a need shall be "taken 
away" when the need itself has passed away. Since the reward of a good work that will pass away is rest 
that will not pass away. In that contemplation, therefore, God will be all in all; because nothing else but 
Himself will be required, but it will be sufficient to be enlightened by and to enjoy Him alone. And so he in 
whom "the Spirit maketh intercession with groanings which cannot be uttered, "(5) says, "One thing have I 
desired of the Lord, that I will seek after; that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to 
contemplate the beauty of the Lord. "(6) For we shall then contemplate God, the Father and the Son and the 
Holy Spirit, when the Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, shall have delivered up the 
kingdom to God, even the Father, so as no longer to make intercession for us, as our Mediator and Priest, 
Son of God and Son of man;(7) but that He Himself too, in so far as He is a Priest that has taken the form of a 
servant for us, shall be put under Him who has put all things under Him, and under whom He has put all 
things: so that, in so far as He is God. He with Him will have put us under Himself; in so far as He is a Priest, 
He with us will be put under Him. (8) And therefore as the [incarnate] Son is both God and man, it is rather to 
be said that the manhood in the Son is another substance [from the Son], than that the Son in the Father [is 
another substance from the Father]; just as the carnal nature of my soul is more another substance in 
relation to my soul itself, although in one and the same man, than the soul of another man is in relation to my 
soul.(1) 

21 . When, therefore, He "shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father,"-that is, when He 
shall have brought those who believe and live by faith, for whom now as Mediator He maketh intercession, 
to that contemplation, for the obtaining of which we sigh and groan, and when labor and groaning shall have 
passed away,-then, since the kingdom will have been delivered up to God, even the Father He will no 
more make intercession for us. And this He signifies, when He says: "These things have I spoken unto you 
in similitudes;(2) but the time cometh when I shall no more speak unto you in similitudes, (2) but I shall 
declare(3) to you plainly of the Father:" that is, they will not then be "similitudes," when the sight shall be 
"face to face." For this it is which He says, "But I will declare to you plainly of the Father;" as if He said I will 
plainly show you the Father. For He says, I will "declare" to you, because He is His word. For He goes on to 
say, "At that day ye shall ask in my name; and I say not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you: for the 
Father Himself loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came out from God. I came 
forth from the Father, and am come into the world: again, I leave the world, and go to the Father."(4) What is 
meant by "I came forth from the Father," unless this, that I have not appeared in that form in which I am equal 
to the Father, but otherwise, that is, as less than the Father, in the creature which I have taken upon me? And 
what is meant by "I am come into the world," unless this, that I have manifested to the eyes even of sinners 
who love this world, the form of a servant which I took, making myself of no reputation? And what is meant by 
"Again, I leave the world," unless this, that I take away from the sight of the lovers of this world that which they 
have seen? And what is meant by "I go to the Father," unless this, that I teach those who are my faithful ones 
to understand me in that being in which I am equal to the Father? Those who believe this will be thought 
worthy of being brought by faith to sight, that is, to that very sight, in bringing them to which He is said to 
"deliver up the kingdom to God, even the Father." For His faithful ones, whom He has redeemed with His 
blood, are called His kingdom, for whom He now intercedes; but then, making them to abide in Himself 
there, where He is equal to the Father, He will no longer pray the Father for them. "For," He says, "the Father 
Himself loveth you." For indeed He "prays," in so far as He is less than the Father; but as He is equal with 
the Father, He with the Father grants. Wherefore He certainly does not exclude Himself from that which He 
says, "The Father Himself loveth you;" but He means it to be understood after that manner which I have 
above spoken of, and sufficiently intimated, -namely, that for the most part each Person of the Trinity is so 
named, that the other Persons also may be understood. Accordingly, "For the Father Himself loveth you," is 
so said that by consequence both the Son and the Holy Spirit also may be understood: not that He does not 
now love us, who spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all;(5) but God loves us, such as we 
shall be, not such as we are, For such as they are whom He loves, such are they whom He keeps eternally; 
which shall then be, when He who now maketh intercession for us shall have "delivered up the kingdom to 
God, even the Father," so as no longer to ask the Father, because the Father Himself loveth us. But for what 
deserving, except of faith, by which we believe before we see that which is promised? For by this faith we 
shall arrive at sight; so that He may love us, being such, as He loves us in order that we may become; and 
not such, as He hates us because we are, and exhorts and enables us to wish not to be always. 

CHAP. 11. -BY WHAT RULE IN THE SCRIPTURES IT IS UNDERSTOOD THAT THE SON IS 
NOW EQUAL AND NOW LESS. 

22. Wherefore, having mastered this rule for interpreting the Scriptures concerning the Son of God, that we 
are to distinguish in them what relates to the form of God, in which He is equal to the Father, and what to the 
form of a servant which He took, in which He is less than the Father; we shall not be disquieted by 

apparently contrary and mutually repugnant sayings of the sacred books. For both the Son and the Holy 
Spirit, according to the form of God, are equal to the Father, because neither of them is a creature, as we 
have already shown: but according to the form of a servant He is less than the Father, because He Himself 
has said, "My Father is greater than l;"(1) and He is less than Himself, because it is said of Him, He emptied 
Himself;"(2) and He is less than the Holy Spirit, because He Himself says, "Whosoever speaketh a word 
against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him; but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not 
be forgiven Him. "(3) And in the Spirit too He wrought miracles, saying: "But if I with the Spirit of God cast out 
devils, no doubt the kingdom of God is come upon you. "(4) And in Isaiah He says,-in the lesson which He 
Himself read in the synagogue, and showed without a scruple of doubt to be fulfilled concerning 
Himself,-"The Spirit of the Lord God," He says, "is upon me: because He hath anointed me to preach good 
tidings unto the meek He hath sent me to proclaim liberty to the captives, "(5) etc.: for the doing of which 
things He therefore declares Himself to be "sent," because the Spirit of God is upon Him. According to the 
form of God, all things were made by Him;(6) according to the form of a servant, He was Himself made of a 
woman, made under the law.(7) According to the form of God, He and the Father are one;(8) according to the 
form of a servant, He came not to do His own will, but the will of Him that sent Him. (9) According to the form of 
God, "As the Father hath life in Himself, so hath He given to the Son to have life in Himself;"(10) according to 
the form of a servant, His "soul is sorrowful even unto death;" and, "O my Father," He says, "if it be possible, 
let this cup pass from me. "(11) According to the form of God, "He is the True God, and eternal life;"(12) 
according to the form of a servant, "He became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. "(13)-23. 
According to the form of God, all things that the Father hath are His, (14) and "All mine," He says, "are Thine, 
and Thine are mine;"(15) according to the form of a servant, the doctrine is not His own, but His that sent 
Him.(16) 

CHAP. 12. -IN WHAT MANNER THE SON IS SAID NOT TO KNOW THE DAY AND THE 
HOUR WHICH THE FATHER KNOWS. SOME THINGS SAID OF CHRIST ACCORDING TO 
THE FORM OF GOD, OTHER THINGS ACCORDING TO THE FORM OF A SERVANT. IN 
WHAT WAY IT IS OF CHRIST TO GIVE THE KINGDOM, IN WHAT NOT OF CHRIST. CHRIST 
WILL BOTH JUDGE AND NOT JUDGE. 

Again, "Of that day and that hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels which are in heaven; neither the Son, 
but the Father."(1 7) For He is ignorant of this, as making others ignorant; that is, in that He did not so know as 
at that time to show Hisdisciples:(18) as it was said to Abraham, "Now I know that thou fearest God, "(19) that 
is, now I have caused thee to know it; because he himself, being tried in that temptation, became known to 
himself. For He was certainly going to tell this same thing to His disciples at the fitting time; speaking of 
which yet future as if past, He says, "Henceforth I call you not servants, but friends; for the servant knoweth 
not what his Lord doeth: but I have called you friends; for all things that I have heard of my Father I have 
made known unto you;"(20) which He had not yet done, but spoke as though He had already done it, 
because He certainly would do it. For He says to the disciples themselves, "I have yet many things to say 
unto you; but ye cannot bear them now."(21) Among which is to be understood also, "Of the day and hour." 
For the apostle also says, "I determined not to know anything among you, save Jesus Christ, and Him 
crucified ;"(22) because he was speaking to those who were not able to receive higher things concerning the 
Godhead of Christ. To whom also a little while after he says, "I could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but 
as unto carnal. "(23) He was "ignorant," therefore, among them of that which they were not able to know from 
him. And that only he said that he knew, which it was fitting that they should know from him. In short, he knew 
among the perfect what he knew not among babes; for he there says: "We speak wisdom among them that 
are perfect."(24) For a man is said not to know what he hides, after that kind of speech, after which a ditch is 
called blind which is hidden. For the Scriptures do not use any other kind of speech than may be found in 
use among men, because they speak to men. 

24. According to the form of God, it is said "Before all the hills He begat me,"(1) that is, before all the 
loftinesses of things created and, "Before the dawn I begat Thee, "(2) that is, before all times and temporal 
things: but according to the form of a servant, it is said, "The Lord created me in the beginning of His 
ways. "(3) Because, according to the form of God, He said, "I am the truth;" and according to the form of a 
servant, "I am the way. "(4) For, because He Himself, being the first-begotten of the dead, (5) made a 
passage to the kingdom of God to life eternal for His Church, to which He is so the Head as to make the 
body also immortal, therefore He was "created in the beginning of the ways" of God in His work. For, 
according to the form of God, He is the beginning, (6) that also speaketh unto us, in which "beginning" God 
created the heaven and the earth;(7) but according to the form of a servant, "He is a bridegroom coming out 
of His chamber."(8) According to the form of God, "He is the first-born of every creature, and He is before all 
things and by him all things consist;" according to the form of a servant, "He is the head of the body, the 
Church. "(9) According to the form of God, "He is the Lord of glory. "(10) From which it is evident that He 

Himself glorifies His saints: for, "Whom He did predestinate, them He also called; and whom He called, 
them He also justified; and whom He justified, them He also glorified. "(1 1) Of Him accordingly it is said, that 
He justifieth the ungodly;(12) of Him it is said, that He is just and a justifier.(13) If, therefore, He has also 
glorified those whom He has justified, He who justifies, Himself also glorifies; who is, as I have said, the Lord 
of glory. Yet, according to the form of a servant, He replied to His disciples, when inquiring about their own 
glorification: "To sit on my right hand and on my left is not mine to give, but [it shall be given to them] for 
whom it is prepared by my Father."(14) 

25. But that which is prepared by His Father is prepared also by the Son Himself, because He and the 
Father are one. (15) For we have already shown, by many modes of speech in the divine Scriptures, that, in 
this Trinity, what is said of each is also said of all, on account of the indivisible working of the one and same 
substance. As He also says of the Holy Spirit, "If I depart, I will send Him unto you. "(16) He did not say, We 
will send; but in such way as if the Son only should send Him, and not the Father; while yet He says in 
another place, "These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present with you; but the Comforter, which is 
the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, He shall teach you all things. "(1 7) Here again it is so 
said as if the Son also would not send Him, but the Father only. As therefore in these texts, so also where He 
says, "But for them for whom it is prepared by my Father," He meant it to be understood that He Himself, with 
the Father, prepares seats of glory for those for whom He will. But some one may say: There, when He 
spoke of the Holy Spirit, He so says that He Himself will send Him, as not to deny that the Father will send 
Him; and in the other place, He so says that the Father will send Him, as not to deny that He will do so 
Himself; but here He expressly says, "It is not mine to give," and so goes on to say that these things are 
prepared by the Father. But this is the very thing which we have already laid down to be said according to 
the form of a servant: viz., that we are so to understand "It is not mine to give," as if it were said, This is not in 
the power of man to give; that so He may be understood to give it through that wherein He is God equal to 
the Father. "It is not mine," He says, "to give;" that is, I do not give these things by human power, but "to those 
for whom it is prepared by my Father;" but then take care you understand also, that if "all things which the 
Father hath are mine, "(18) then this certainly is mine also, and I with the Father have prepared these things. 

26. Fori ask again, in what manner this is said, "If any man hear not my words, I will not judge him?"(19) For 
perhaps He has said here, "I will not judge him," in the same sense as there, "It is not mine to give." But what 
follows here? "I came not," He says, "to judge the world, but to save the world;" and then He adds," He that 
rejecteth me, and receiveth not my words, hath one that judgeth him." Now here we should understand the 
Father, unless He had added, "The word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day." Well, 
then, will neither the Son judge, because He says, "I will not judge him," nor the Father, but the word which 
the Son hath spoken? Nay, but hear what yet follows: "For I," He says, "have not spoken of myself; but the 
Father which sent me, He gave me a commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak; and I 
know that His commandment is life everlasting: whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the Father said unto 
me, so I speak." If therefore the Son judges not, but "the word which the Son hath spoken;" and the word 
which the Son hath spoken therefore judges, because the Son "hath not spoken of Himself, but the Father 
who sent Him gave Him a commandment what He should say, and what He should speak:" then the Father 
assuredly judges, whose word it is which the Son hath spoken; and the same Son Himself is the very Word 
of the Father. For the commandment of the Father is not one thing, and the word of the Father another; for He 
hath called it both a word and a commandment. Let us see, therefore, whether perchance, when He says, "I 
have not spoken of myself," He meant to be understood thus,-l am not born of myself. For if He speaks the 
word of the Father, then He speaks Himself,(1) because He is Himself the Word of the Father. For ordinarily 
He says, "The Father gave to me;" by which He means it to be understood that the Father begat Him: not 
that He gave anything to Him, already existing and not possessing it; but that the very meaning of, To have 
given that He might have, is, To have begotten that He might be. For it is not, as with the creature so with the 
Son of God before the incarnation and before He took upon Him our flesh, the Only-begotten by whom all 
things were made; that He is one thing, and has another: but He is in such way as to be what He has. And 
this is said more plainly, if any one is fit to receive it, in that place where He says: "For as the Father hath life 
in Himself, so hath He given to the Son to have life in Himself."(2) For He did not give to Him, already 
existing and not having life, that He should have life in Himself; inasmuch as, in that He is, He is life. 
Therefore "He gave to the Son to have life in Himself means, He begat the Son to be unchangeable life, 
which is life eternal. Since, therefore, the Word of God is the Son of God, and the Son of God is "the true God 
and eternal life, "(3) as John says in his Epistle; so here, what else are we to acknowledge when the Lord 
says, "The word which I have spoken, the same shall judge him at the last day, "(4) and calls that very word 
the word of the Father and the commandment of the Father, and that very commandment everlasting life?" 
"And I know," He says, "that His commandment is life everlasting." 

27. 1 ask, therefore, how we are to understand, "I will not judge him; but the Word which I have spoken shall 
judge him:" which appears from what follows to be so said, as if He would say, I will not judge; but the Word 
of the Father will judge. But the Word of the Father is the Son of God Himself. Is it to be so understood: I will 

not judge, but I will judge? How can this be true, unless in this way: viz., I will not judge by human power, 
because I am the Son of man; but I will judge by the power of the Word, because I am the Son of God? Or if it 
still seems contradictory and inconsistent to say, I will not judge, but I will judge; what shall we say of that 
place where He says, "My doctrine is not mine?" How "mine," when "not mine?" For He did not say, This 
doctrine is not mine, but "My doctrine is not mine:" that which He called His own, the same He called not His 
own. How can this be true, unless He has called it His own in one relation; not His own, in another? 
According to the form of God, His own; according to the form of a servant, not His own. For when He says, "It 
is not mine, but His that sent me, "(5) He makes us recur to the Word itself. For the doctrine of the Father is the 
Word of the Father, which is the Only Son. And what, too, does that mean, "He that believeth on me, 
believeth not on me?"(6) How believe on Him, yet not believe on Him? How can so opposite and 
inconsistent a thing be understood-"Whoso believeth on me," He says, "believeth not on me, but on Him 
that sent me;"-unless you so understand it, Whoso believeth on me believeth not on that which he sees, lest 
our hope should be in the creature; but on Him who took the creature, whereby He might appear to human 
eyes, and so might cleanse our hearts by faith, to contemplate Himself as equal to the Father? So that in 
turning the attention of believers to the Father, and saying, "Believeth not on me, but on Him that sent me," 
He certainly did not mean Himself to be separated from the Father, that is, from Him that sent Him; but that 
men might so believe on Himself, as they believe on the Father, to whom He is equal. And this He says in 
express terms in another place, "Ye believe in God, believe also in me:"(7) that is, in the same way as you 
believe in God, so also believe in me; because I and the Father are One God. As therefore, here, He has as 
it were withdrawn the faith of men from Himself, and transferred it to the Father, by saying, "Believeth not on 
me, but on Him that sent me," from whom nevertheless He certainly did not separate Himself; so also, when 
He says, "It is not mine to give, but lit shall be given to them] for whom it is prepared by my Father," it is I think 
plain in what relation both are to betaken. For that other also is of the same kind, "I will not judge;" whereas 
He Himself shall judge the quick and dead.(1) But because He will not do so by human power, therefore, 
reverting to the Godhead, He raises the hearts of men upwards; which to lift up, He Himself came down. 

CHAP. 13. -DIVERSE THINGS ARE SPOKEN CONCERNING THE SAME CHRIST, ON 
ACCOUNT OF THE DIVERSE NATURES OF THE ONE HYPOSTASIS [THEANTHROPIC 
PERSON]. WHY IT IS SAID THAT THE FATHER WILL NOT JUDGE, BUT HAS GIVEN 
JUDGMENT TO THE SON. 

28. Yet unless the very same were the Son of man on account of the form of a servant which He took, who is 
the Son of God on account of the form of God in which He is; Paul the apostle would not say of the princes of 
this world, "For had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. "(2) For He was crucified 
after the form of a servant, and yet "the Lord of glory" was crucified. For that "taking" was such as to make 
God man, and man God. Yet what is said on account of what, and what according to what, the thoughtful, 
diligent, and pious reader discerns for himself, the Lord being his helper. For instance, we have said that He 
glorifies His own, as being God, and certainly then as being the Lord of glory; and yet the Lord of glory was 
crucified, because even God is rightly said to have been crucified, not after the power of the divinity, but after 
the weakness of the flesh:(3) just as we say, that He judges as God, that is, by divine power, not by human; 
and yet the man Himself will judge, just as the Lord of glory was crucified: for so He expressly says, "When 
the Son of man shall come in His glory, and all the holy angels with Him, and before Him shall be gathered 
all nations;"(4) and the rest that is foretold of the future judgment in that place even to the last sentence. And 
the Jews, inasmuch as they will be punished in that judgment for persisting in their wickedness, as it is 
elsewhere written, "shall look upon Him whom they have pierced. "(5) For whereas both good and bad shall 
see the Judge of the quick and dead, without doubt the bad will not be able to see Him, except after the form 
in which He is the Son of man; but yet in the glory wherein He will judge, not in the lowliness wherein He was 
judged. But the ungodly without doubt will not see that form of God in which He is equal to the Father. For 
they are not pure in heart; and "Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. "(6) And that sight is 
face to face, (7) the very sight that is promised as the highest reward to the just, and which will then take 
place when He "shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father;" and in this "kingdom" He 
means the sight of His own form also to be understood, the whole creature being made subject to God, 
including that wherein the Son of God was made the Son of man. Because, according to this creature, "The 
Son also Himself shall be subject unto Him, that put all things under Him, that God may be all in all. "(8) 
Otherwise if the Son of God, judging in the form in which He is equal to the Father, shall appear when He 
judges to the ungodly also; what becomes of that which He promises, as some great thing, to him who loves 
Him, saying, "And I will love him, and will manifest myself to him?"(9) Wherefore He will judge as the Son of 
man, yet not by human power, but by that whereby He is the Son of God; and on the other hand, He will 
judge as the Son of God, yet not appearing in that [unincarnate] form in which He is God equal to the Father, 
but in that [incarnate form] in which He is the Son of man. (10) 

29. Therefore both ways of speaking may be used; the Son of man will judge, and, the Son of man will not 
judge: since the Son of man will judge, that the text may be true which says, "When the Son of man shall 
come, then before Him shall be gathered all nations;" and the Son of man will not judge, that the text may be 
true which says, "I will not judge him;""(1 1) and, "I seek not mine own glory: there is One that seeketh and 
judgeth."(12) For in respect to this, that in the judgment, not the form of God, but the form of the Son of man will 
appear, the Father Himself will not judge; for according to this it is said, "For the Father judgeth no man, but 
hath committed all judgment unto the Son." Whether this is said after that mode of speech which we have 
mentioned above, where it is said, "So hath He given to the Son to have life in Himself,"(1) that it should 
signify that so He begat the Son; or, whether after that of which the apostle speaks, saying, "Wherefore God 
also hath highly exalted Him, and given Him a name which is above every name:"-(Forthis is said of the 
Son of man, in respect to whom the Son of God was raised from the dead; since He, being in the form of 
God equal to the Father, wherefrom He "emptied" Himself by taking the form of a servant, both acts and 
suffers, and receives, in that same form of a servant, what the apostle goes on to mention: "He humbled 
Himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross; wherefore God also hath highly 
exalted Him, and given Him a name which is above every name; that at the name of Jesus every knee 
should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; and that every tongue 
should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, in the Glory of God the Father:"(2)-whether then the words, "He hath 
committed all judgment unto the Son," are said according to this or that mode of speech; it sufficiently 
appears from this place, that if they were said according to that sense in which it is said, "He hath given to 
the Son to have life in Himself," it certainly would not be said, "The Father judgeth no man." For in respect to 
this, that the Father hath begotten the Son equal to Himself, He judges with Him. Therefore it is in respect to 
this that it is said, that in the judgment, not the form of God, but the form of the Son of man will appear. Not that 
He will not judge, who hath committed all judgment unto the Son, since the Son saith of Him, "There is One 
that seeketh and judgeth:" but it is so said, "The Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment 
unto the Son;" as if it were said, No one will seethe Father in the judgment of the quick and the dead, but all 
will see the Son: because He is also the Son of man, so that He can be seen even by the ungodly, since 
they too shall see Him whom they have pierced. 

30. Lest, however, we may seem to conjecture this rather than to prove it clearly, let us produce a certain 
and plain sentence of the Lord Himself, by which we may show that this was the cause why He said, "The 
Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son," viz. because He will appear as 
Judge in the form of the Son of man, which is not the form of the Father, hut of the Son; nor yet that form of the 
Son in which He is equal to the Father, but that in which He is less than the Father; in order that, in the 
judgment, He may be visible both to the good and to the bad. For a little while after He says, "Verily, verily, I 
say unto you, He that heareth my word, and believeth on Him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not 
come into condemnation; but shall pass(3) from death unto life." Now this life eternal is that sight which does 
not belong to the bad. Then follows, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when the 
dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live. "(4) And this is proper to the godly, 
who so hear of His incarnation, as to believe that He is the Son of God, that is, who so receive Him, as made 
for their sakes less than the Father, in the form of a servant, that they believe Him equal to the Father, in the 
form of God. And thereupon He continues, enforcing this very point, "For as the Father hath life in Himself, so 
hath He given to the Son to have life in Himself." And then He comes to the sight of His own glory, in which 
He shall come to judgment; which sight will be common to the ungodly and to the just. For He goes on to 
say, "And hath given Him authority to execute judgment also, because He is the Son of man. "(5) I think 
nothing can be more clear. For inasmuch as the Son of God is equal to the Father, He does not receive this 
power of executing judgment, but He has it with the Father in secret; but He receives it, so that the good and 
the bad may see Him judging, inasmuch as He is the Son of man. Since the sight of the Son of man will be 
shown to the bad also: for the sight of the form of God will not be shown except to the pure in heart, for they 
shall see God; that is, to the godly only, to whose love He promises this very thing, that He will show Himself 
to them. And see, accordingly, what follows: "Marvel not at this," He says. Why does He forbid us to marvel, 
unless it be that, in truth, every one marvels who does not understand, that therefore He said the Father 
gave Him power also to execute judgment, because He is the Son of man; whereas, it might rather have 
been anticipated that He would say, since He is the Son of God? But because the wicked are not able to 
see the Son of God as He is in the form of God equal to the Father, but yet it is necessary that both the just 
and the wicked should seethe Judge of the quick and dead, when they will be judged in His presence; 
"Marvel not at this," He says, "for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear His 
voice, and shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done 
evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. "(1) For this purpose, then, it was necessary that He should therefore 
receive that power, because He is the Son of man, in order that all in rising again might see Him in the form 
in which He can be seen by all, but by some to damnation, by others to life eternal. And what is life eternal, 
unless that sight which is not granted to the ungodly? "That they might know Thee," He says, "the One true 

God, and Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast sent."(2) And how are they to know Jesus Christ Himself also, 
unless as the One true God, who will show Himself to them; not as He will show Himself, in the form of the 
Son of man, to those also that shall be punished?(3) 

31 . He is "good," according to that sight, according to which God appears to the pure in heart; for "truly God 
is good unto Israel even to such as are of a clean heart."(4) But when the wicked shall see the Judge, He will 
not seem good to them; because they will not rejoice in their heart to see Him, but all "kindreds of the earth 
shall then wail because of Him, "(5) namely, as being reckoned in the number of all the wicked and 
unbelievers. On this account also He replied to him, who had called Him Good Master, when seeking 
advice of Him how he might attain eternal life, "Why askest thou me about good?(6) there is none good but 
One, that is, God. "(7) And yet the Lord Himself, in another place, calls man good: "A good man," He says, 
"out of the good treasure of his heart, bringeth forth good things: and an evil man, out of the evil treasure of 
his heart, bringeth forth evil things. "(8) But because that man was seeking eternal life, and eternal life 
consists in that contemplation in which God is seen, not for punishment, but for everlasting joy; and because 
he did not understand with whom he was speaking, and thought Him to be only the Son of man:(9) Why, He 
says, askest thou me about good? that is, with respect to that form which thou seest, why askest thou about 
good, and callest me, according to what thou seest, Good Master? This is the form of the Son of man, the 
form which has been taken, the form that will appear in judgment, not only to the righteous, but also to the 
ungodly; and the sight of this form will not be for good to those who are wicked. But there is a sight of that 
form of mine, in which when I was, I thought it not robbery to be equal with God: but in order to take this form I 
emptied myself.(10) That one God, therefore, the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, who will not 
appear, except for joy which cannot be taken away from the just; for which future joy he sighs, who says, 
"One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after; that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the 
days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord:"(1 1) that one God, therefore, Himself, I say, is alone good, 
for this reason, that no one sees Him for sorrow and wailing, but only for salvation and true joy. If you 
understand me after this latter form, then I am good; but if according to that former only, then why askest thou 
me about good? If thou art among those who "shall look upon Him whom they have pierced, "(12) that very 
sight itself will be evil to them, because it will be penal. That after this meaning, then, the Lord said, "Why 
askest thou me about good? there is none good but One, that is, God," is probable upon those proofs which 
I have alleged, because that sight of God, whereby we shall contemplate the substance of God 
unchangeable and invisible to human eyes (which is promised to the saints alone; which the Apostle Paul 
speaks of, as "face to face;"(13) and of which the Apostle John says, "We shall be like Him, for we shall see 
Him as He is;"(14) and of which it is said, "One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I may behold the beauty 
of the Lord," and of which the Lord Himself says, "I will both love him, and will manifest myself to him;"(15) 
and on account of which alone we cleanse our hearts by faith, that we may be those "pure in heart who are 
blessed for they shall see God:"(16) and whatever else is spoken of that sight: which whosoever turns the 
eye of love to seek it, may find most copiously scattered through all the Scriptures), -that sight alone, I say, 
is our chief good, for the attaining of which we are directed to do whatever we do aright. But that sight of the 
Son of man which is foretold, when all nations shall be gathered before Him, and shall say to Him, "Lord, 
when saw we Thee an hungered, or thirsty, etc.?" will neither be a good to the ungodly, who shall be sent 
into everlasting fire, nor the chief good to the righteous. For He still goes on to call these to the kingdom 
which has been prepared for them from the foundation of the world. For, as He will say to those, "Depart into 
everlasting fire;" so to these," Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you." And as 
those will go into everlasting burning; so the righteous will go into life eternal. But what is life eternal, except 
"that they may know Thee," He says, "the One true God, and Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast sent?"(1) but 
know Him now in that glory of which He says to the Father, " Which I had with Thee before the world was. "(2) 
For then He will deliver up the kingdom to God, even the Father,(3) that the good servant may enter into the 
joy of his Lord, (4) and that He may hide those whom God keeps in the hiding of His countenance from the 
confusion of men, namely, of those men who shall then be confounded by hearing this sentence; of which 
evil hearing "the righteous man shall not be afraid"(5) if only he be kept in "the tabernacle," that is, in the true 
faith of the Catholic Church, from "the strife of tongues, "(6) that is, from the sophistries of heretics. But if there 
is any other explanation of the words of the Lord, where He says, "Why asketh thou me about good? there is 
none good, but One, that is, God;" provided only that the substance of the Father be not therefore believed 
to be of greater goodness than that of the Son, according to which He is the Word by whom all things were 
made; and if there is nothing in it abhorrent from sound doctrine; let us securely use it, and not one 
explanation only, but as many as we are able to find. For so much the more powerfully are the heretics 
proved wrong, the more outlets are open for avoiding their snares. But let us now start afresh, and address 
ourselves to the consideration of that which still remains. 

THE FIFTEEN BOOKS OF AURELIUS AUGUSTINUS, 
BISHOP OF HIPPO, ON THE TRINITY: BOOK II 

BOOK II. 

AUGUSTIN PURSUES HIS DEFENSE OF THE EQUALITY OF THE TRINITY; AND IN 
TREATING OF THE SENDING OF THE SON AND OF THE HOLY SPIRIT, AND OF THE 
VARIOUS APPEARANCES OF GOD, DEMONSTRATES THAT HE WHO IS SENT IS NOT 
THEREFORE LESS THAN HE WHO SENDS, BECAUSE THE ONE HAS SENT, THE OTHER 
HAS BEEN SENT; BUT THAT THE TRINITY, BEING IN ALL THINGS EQUAL, AND ALIKE IN 
ITS OWN NATURE UNCHANGEABLE AND INVISIBLE AND OMNIPRESENT, WORKS 
INDIVISIBLY IN EACH SENDING OR APPEARANCE. 

PREFACE. 

WHEN men seek to know God, and bend their minds according to the capacity of human weakness to the 
understanding of the Trinity; learning, as they must, by experience, the wearisome difficulties of the task, 
whether from the sight itself of the mind striving to gaze upon light unapproachable, or, indeed, from the 
manifold and various modes of-speech employed in the sacred writings (wherein, as it seems to me, the 
mind is nothing else but roughly exercised, in order that it may find sweetness when glorified by the grace of 
Christ);-such men, I say, when they have dispelled every ambiguity, and arrived at something certain, ought 
of all others most easily to make allowance for those who err in the investigation of so deep a secret. But 
there are two things most hard to bear with, in the case of those who are in error: hasty assumption before 
the truth is made plain; and, when it has been made-plain, defence of the falsehood thus hastily assumed. 
From which two faults, inimical as they are to the finding out of the truth, and to the handling of the divine and 
sacred books, should God, as I pray and hope, defend and protect me with the shield of His good will,(1) 
and with the grace of His mercy, I will not be slow to search out the substance of God, whether through His 
Scripture or through the creature. For both of these are set forth for our contemplation to this end, that He 
may Himself be sought, and Himself be loved, who inspired the one, and created the other. Nor shall I be 
afraid of giving my opinion, in which I shall more desire to be examined by the upright, than fear to be 
carped at by the perverse. For charity, most excellent and unassuming, gratefully accepts the dovelike eye; 
but for the dog's tooth nothing remains, save either to shun it by the most cautious humility, or to blunt it by the 
most solid truth; and far rather would I be censured by any one whatsoever, than be praised by either the 
erring or the flatterer. For the lover of truth need fear no one's censure. For he that censures, must needs be 
either enemy or friend. And if an enemy reviles, he must be borne with: but a friend, if he errs, must be taught; 
if he teaches, listened to. But if one who errs praises you, he confirms your error; if one who flatters, he 
seduces you into error. "Let the righteous," therefore, "smite me, it shall be a kindness; and let him reprove 
me; but the oil of the sinner shall not anoint my head. "(2) 

CHAP. 1. -THERE IS A DOUBLE RULE FOR UNDERSTANDING THE SCRIPTURAL MODES 
OF SPEECH CONCERNING THE SON OF GOD. THESE MODES OF SPEECH ARE OF A 
THREEFOLD KIND. 

2. Wherefore, although we hold most firmly, concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, what may be called the 
canonical rule, as it is both disseminated through the Scriptures, and has been demonstrated by learned 
and Catholic handlers of the same Scriptures, namely, that the Son of God is both understood to be equal to 
the Father according to the form of God in which He is, and less than the Father according to the form of a 
servant which He took;(1) in which form He was found to be not only less than the Father, but also less than 
the Holy Spirit; and not only so, but less even than Himself,-not than Himself who was, but than Himself who 
is; because, by taking the form of a servant, He did not lose the form of God, as the testimonies of the 
Scriptures taught us, to which we have referred in the former book: yet there are some things in the sacred 
text so put as to leave it ambiguous to which rule they are rather to be referred; whether to that by which we 
understand the Son as less, in that He has taken upon Him the creature, or to that by which we understand 
that the Son is not indeed less than, but equal to the Father, but yet that He is from Him, God of God, Light of 
light. For we call the Son God of God; but the Father, God only; not of God. Whence it is plain that the Son 

has another of whom He is, and to whom He is Son; but that the Father has not a Son of whom He is, but only 
to whom He is father. For every son is what he is, of his father, and is son to his father; but no father is what he 
is, of his son, but is father to his son. (2) 

3. Some things, then, are so put in the Scriptures concerning the Father and the Son, as to intimate the unity 
and equality of their substance; as, for instance, "I and the Father are one;"(3) and, "Who, being in the form of 
God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God;"(4) and whatever ether texts there are of the kind. And 
some, again, are so put that they show the Son as less on account of the form of a servant, that is, of His 
having taken upon Him the creature of a changeable and human substance; as, for instance, that which 
says, "For my Father is greater than l;"(5) and, "The Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment 
unto the Son." For a little after he goes on to say, "And hath given Him authority to execute judgment also, 
because He is the Son of man." And further, some are so put, as to show Him at that time neither as less nor 
as equal, but only to intimate that He is of the Father; as, for instance, that which says, "For as the Father hath 
life in Himself, so hath He given to the Son to have life in Himself;" and that other: "The Son can do nothing of 
Himself, but what He seeth the Father do. "(6) For if we shall take this to be therefore so said, because the 
Son is less in the form taken from the creature, it will follow that the Father must have walked on the water, or 
opened the eyes with clay and spittle of some other one born blind, and have done the other things which 
the Son appearing in the flesh did among men, before the Son did them;(7) in order that He might be able to 
do those things, who said that the Son was not able to do anything of Himself, except what He hath seen the 
Father do. Yet who, even though he were mad, would think this? It remains, therefore, that these texts are so 
expressed, because the life of the Son is unchangeable as that of the Father is, and yet He is of the Father; 
and the working of the Father and of the Son is indivisible, and yet so to work is given to the Son from Him of 
whom He Himself is, that is, from the Father; and the Son so sees the Father, as that He is the Son in the very 
seeing Him. For to be of the Father, that is, to be born of the Father, is to Him nothing else than to see the 
Father; and to see Him working, is nothing else than to work with Him: but therefore not from Himself, 
because He is not from Himself. And, therefore, those things which "He sees the Father do, these also 
doeth the Son likewise," because He is of the Father. For He neither does other things in like manner, as a 
painter paints other pictures, in the same way aS he sees others to have been painted by another man; nor 
the same things in a different manner, as the body expresses the same letters, which the mind has thought; 
but "whatsoever things," saith He, "the Father doeth, these same things also doeth the Son likewise. "(8) He 
has said both these same things," and "likewise;" and hence the working of both the Father and the Son is 
indivisible and equal, but it is from the Father to the Son. Therefore the Son cannot do anything of Himself, 
except what He seeth the Father do. From this rule, then, whereby the Scriptures so speak as to mean, not to 
set forth one as less than another, but only to show which is of which, some have drawn this meaning, as if 
the Son were said to be less. And some among ourselves who are more unlearned and least instructed in 
these things, endeavoring to take these texts according to the form of a servant, and so mis-interpreting 
them, are troubled. And to prevent this, the rule in question is to be observed whereby the Son is not less, 
but it is simply intimated that He is of the Father, in which words not His inequality but His birth is declared. 

CHAP. 2. -THAT SOME WAYS OF SPEAKING CONCERNING THE SON ARE TO BE 
UNDERSTOOD ACCORDING TO EITHER RULE. 

4. There are, then, some things in the sacred books, as I began by saying, so put, that it is doubtful to which 
they are to be referred: whether to that rule whereby the Son is less on account of His having taken the 
creature; or whether to that whereby it is intimated that although equal, yet He is of the Father. And in my 
opinion, if this is in such way doubtful, that which it really is can neither be explained nor discerned, then such 
passages may without danger be understood according to either rule, as that, for instance, "My doctrine is 
not mine, but His that sent me."(1) For this may both be taken according to the form of a servant, as we have 
already treated it in the former book;(2) or according to the form of God, in which He is in such way equal to 
the Father, that He is yet of the Father. For according to the form of God, as the Son is not one and His life 
another, but the life itself is the Son; so the Son is not one and His doctrine another, but the doctrine itself is 
the Son. And hence, as the text, "He hath given life to the Son," is no otherwise to be understood than, He 
hath begotten the Son, who is life; so also when it is said, He hath given doctrine to the Son, it may be rightly 
understood to mean, He hath begotten the Son, who is doctrine so that, when it is said, "My doctrine is not 
mine, but His who sent me," it is so to be understood as if it were, I am not from myself, but from Him who sent 
me. 

CHAP. 3. --SOME THINGS CONCERNING THE HOLY SPIRIT ARE TO BE UNDERSTOOD 
ACCORDING TO THE ONE RULE ONLY. 

5. For even of the Holy Spirit, of whom it is not said, "He emptied Himself, and took upon Him the form of a 

servant;" yet the Lord Himself says, "Howbeit, when He the Spirit of Truth is come, He will guide you into all 
truth. For He shall not speak of Himself, but whatsoever He shall hear that shall He speak; and He will show 
you things to come. He shall glorify me; for He shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you." And except 
He had immediately gone on to say after this, "All things that the Father hath are mine; therefore said I, that 
He shall take of mine, and shall show it unto you;"(3) it might, perhaps, have been believed that the Holy 
Spirit was so born of Christ, as Christ is of the Father. Since He had said of Himself, "My doctrine is not mine, 
but His that sent me;" but of the Holy Spirit," For He shall not speak of Himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, 
that shall He speak;" and, "For He shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you." But because He has 
rendered the reason why He said, "He shall receive of mine" (for He says, "All things that the Father hath 
are mine; therefore said I, that He shall take of mine "); it remains that the Holy Spirit be understood to have 
of that which is the Father's, as the Son also hath. And how can this be, unless according to that which we 
have said above, "But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the 
Spirit of truth which proceedeth from the Father, He shall testify of me"?(4) He is said, therefore, not to speak 
of Himself, in that He proceedeth from the Father; and as it does not follow that the Son is less because He 
said, "The Son can do nothing of Himself, but what He seeth the Father do" (for He has not said this 
according to the form of a servant, but according to the form of God, as we have already shown, and these 
words do not set Him forth as less than, but as of the Father), so it is not brought to pass that the Holy Spirit is 
less, because it is said of Him, "For He shall not speak of Himself, but whatsoever He shall hear, that shall 
He speak;" for the words belong to Him as proceeding from the Father. But whereas both the Son is of the 
Father, and the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father, why both are not called sons, and both not said to be 
begotten, but the former is called the one only-begotten Son, and the latter, viz. the Holy Spirit, neither son 
nor begotten, because if begotten, then certainly a son, we will discuss in another place, if God shall grant, 
and so far as He shall grant.(5) 

CHAP. 4.--THE GLORIFICATION OF THE SON BY THE FATHER DOES NOT PROVE 
INEQUALITY. 

6. But here also let them wake up if they can, who have thought this, too, to be a testimony on their side, to 
show that the Father is greater than the Son, because the Son hath said, "Father, glorify me." Why, the Holy 
Spirit also glorifies Him. Pray, is the Spirit, too, greater than He? Moreover, if on that account the Holy Spirit 
glorifies the Son, because He shall receive of that which is the Son's, and shall therefore receive of that 
which is the Son's because all things that the Father has are the Son's also; it is evident that when the Holy 
Spirit glorifies the Son, the Father glorifies the Son. Whence it may be perceived that all things that the 
Father hath are not only of the Son, but also of the Holy Spirit, because the Holy Spirit is able to glorify the 
Son, whom the Father glorifies. But if he who glorifies is greater than he whom he glorifies, let them allow that 
those are equal who mutually glorify each other. But it is written, also, that the Son glorifies the Father; for He 
says, "I have glorified Thee on the earth. "(1) Truly let them beware test the Holy Spirit be thought greater 
than both, because He glorifies the Son whom the Father glorifies, while it is not written that He Himself is 
glorified either by the Father or by the Son. 

CHAP. 5.--THE SON AND HOLY SPIRIT ARE NOT THEREFORE LESS BECAUSE SENT. 
THE SON IS SENT ALSO BY HIMSELF. OF THE SENDING OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 

7. But being proved wrong so far, men betake themselves to saying, that he who sends is greater than he 
who is sent: therefore the Father is greater than the Son, because the Son continually speaks of Himself as 
being sent by the Father; and the Father is also greater than the Holy Spirit, because Jesus has said of the 
Spirit, "Whom the Father will send in my name;"(2) and the Holy Spirit is less than both, because both the 
Father sends Him, as we have said, and the Son, when He says, "But if I depart, I will send Him unto you." I 
first ask, then, in this inquiry, whence and whither the Son was sent. "I," He says, "came forth from the Father, 
and am come into the world. "(3) Therefore, to be sent, is to come forth forth from the Father, and to come into 
the world. What, then, is that which the same evangelist says concerning Him, "He was in the world, and the 
world was made by Him, and the world knew Him not;" and then he adds, "He came unto His own?"(4) 
Certainly He was sent thither, whither He came; but if He was sent into the world, because He came forth 
from the Father, then He both came into the world and was in the world. He was sent therefore thither, where 
He already was. For consider that, too, which is written in the prophet, that God said, "Do not I fill heaven . 
and earth?"(5) If this is said of the Son (for some will have it understood that the Son Himself spoke either by 
the prophets or in the prophets), whither was He sent except to the place where He already was? For He 
who says, "I fill heaven and earth," was everywhere. But if it is said of the Father, where could He be without 
His own word and without His own wisdom, which "reacheth from one end to another mightily, and sweetly 
ordereth all things?"(6) But He cannot be anywhere without His own Spirit. Therefore, if God is everywhere, 

His Spirit also is everywhere. Therefore, the Holy Spirit, too, was sent thither, where He already was. For he, 
too, who finds no place to which he might go from the presence of God, and who says, "If I ascend up into 
heaven, Thou art there; if I shall go down into hell, behold, Thou art there;" wishing it to be understood that 
God is present everywhere, named in the previous verse His Spirit; for He says," Whither shall I go from Thy 
Spirit? or whither shall I flee from Thy presence?"(7) 

8. For this reason, then, if both the Son and the Holy Spirit are sent thither where they were, we must inquire, 
how that sending, whether of the Son or of the Holy Spirit, is to be understood; for of the Father alone, we 
nowhere read that He is sent. Now, of the Son, the apostle writes thus: "But when the fullness of the time was 
come, God sent forth His Son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were under the 
law. "(8) "He sent," he says, "His Son, made of a woman." And by this term, woman, (9) what Catholic does 
not know that he did not wish to signify the privation of virginity; but, according to a Hebraism, the difference 
of sex? When, therefore, he says, "God sent His Son, made of a woman," he sufficiently shows that the Son 
was "sent" in this very way, in that He was "made of a woman." Therefore, in that He was born of God, He 
was in the world; but in that He was born of Mary, He was sent and came into the world. Moreover, He could 
not be sent by the Father without the Holy Spirit, not only because the Father, when He sent Him, that is, 
when He made Him of a woman, is certainly understood not to have so made Him without His own Spirit; but 
also because it is most plainly and expressly said in the Gospel in answer to the Virgin Mary, when she 
asked of the angel, "How shall this be?" "The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the 
Highest shall overshadow thee."(1) And Matthew says, "She was found with child of the Holy Ghost. "(2) 
Although, too, in the prophet Isaiah, Christ Himself is understood to say of His own future advent, "And now 
the Lord God and His Spirit hath sent me. "(3) 

9. Perhaps some one may wish to drive us to say, that the Son is sent also by Himself, because the 
conception and childbirth of Mary is the working of the Trinity, by whose act of creating all things are created. 
And how, he will go on to say, has the Father sent Him, if He sent Himself? To whom I answer first, by asking 
him to tell me, if he can, in what manner the Father hath sanctified Him, if He hath sanctified Himself? For the 
same Lord says both; "Say ye of Him," He says, "whom the Father hath sanctified and sent into the world, 
Thou blasphemest, because I said, I am the Son of God;"(4) while in another place He says, "And for their 
sake I sanctify myself."(6) I ask, also, in what manner the Father delivered Him, if He delivered Himself? For 
the Apostle Paul says both: "Who," he says, "spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all;"(6) 
while elsewhere he says of the Saviour Himself, "Who loved me, and delivered Himself for me. "(7) He will 
reply, I suppose, if he has a right sense in these things, Because the will of the Father and the Son is one, 
and their working indivisible. In like manner, then, let him understand the incarnation and nativity of the Virgin, 
wherein the Son is understood as sent, to have been wrought by one and the same operation of the Father 
and of the Son indivisibly; the Holy Spirit certainly not being thence excluded, of whom it is expressly said, 
"She was found with child by the Holy Ghost." For perhaps our meaning will be more plainly unfolded, if we 
ask in what manner God sent His Son. He commanded that He should come, and He, complying with the 
commandment, came. Did He then request, or did He only suggest? But whichever of these it was, certainly 
it was done by a word, and the Word of God is the Son of God Himself. Wherefore, since the Father sent 
Him by a word, His being sent was the work of both the Father and His Word; therefore the same Son was 
sent by the Father and the Son, because the Son Himself is the Word of the Father. For who would embrace 
so impious an opinion as to think the Father to have uttered a word in time, in order that the eternal Son might 
thereby be sent and might appear in the flesh in the fullness of time? But assuredly it was in that Word of 
God itself which was in the beginning with God and was God, namely, in the wisdom itself of God, apart from 
time, at what time that wisdom must needs appear in the flesh. Therefore, since without any commencement 
of time, the Word was in the beginning, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, it was in the 
Word itself without any time, at what time the Word was to be made flesh and dwell among us. (8) And when 
this fullness of time had come, "God sent His Son, made of a woman, "(9) that is, made in time, that the 
Incarnate Word might appear to men; while it was in that Word Himself, apart from time, at what time this was 
to be done; for the order of times is in the eternal wisdom of God without time. Since, then, that the Son 
should appear in the flesh was wrought by both the Father and the Son, it is fitly said that He who appeared 
in that flesh was sent, and that He who did not appear in it, sent Him; because those things which are 
transacted outwardly before the bodily eyes have their existence from the inward structure (apparatu) of the 
spiritual nature, and on that account are filly said to be sent. Further, that form of man which He took is the 
person of the Son, not also of the Father; on which account the invisible Father, together with the Son, who 
with the Father is invisible, is said to have sent the same Son by making Him visible. But if He became 
visible in such way as to cease to be invisible with the Father, that is, if the substance of the invisible Word 
were turned by a change and transition into a visible creature, then the Son would be so understood to be 
sent by the Father, that He would be found to be only sent; not also, with the Father, sending. But since He so 
took the form of a servant, as that the unchangeable form of God remained, it is clear that that which became 
apparent in the Son was done by the Father and the Son not being apparent; that is, that by the invisible 

Father, with the invisible Son, the same Son Himself was sent so as to be visible. Why, therefore, does He 
say, "Neither came I of myself?" This, we may now say, is said according to the form of a servant, in the 
same way as it is said, "I judge no man. "(10) 

10. If, therefore, He is said to be sent, in so far as He appeared outwardly in the bodily creature, who 
inwardly in His spiritual nature is always hidden from the eyes of mortals, it is now easy to understand also 
of the Holy Spirit why He too is said to be sent. For in due time a certain outward appearance of the creature 
was wrought, wherein the Holy Spirit might be visibly shown; whether when He descended upon the Lord 
Himself in a bodily shape as a dove,(1) or when, ten days having past since His ascension, on the day of 
Pentecost a sound came suddenly from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and cloven tongues like as of 
fire were seen upon them, and it sat upon each of them. (2) This operation, visibly exhibited, and presented 
to mortal eyes, is called the sending of the Holy Spirit; not that His very substance appeared, in which He 
himself also is invisible and unchangeable, like the Father and the Son, but that the hearts of men, touched 
by things seen outwardly, might be turned from the manifestation in time of Him as coming to His hidden 
eternity as ever present. 

CHAP. 6. -THE CREATURE IS NOT SO TAKEN BY THE HOLY SPIRIT AS FLESH IS BY THE 
WORD. 

1 1 . It is, then, for this reason nowhere written, that the Father is greater than the Holy Spirit, or that the Holy 
Spirit is less than God the Father, because the creature in which the Holy Spirit was to appear was not taken 
in the same way as the Son of man was taken, as the form in which the person of the Word of God Himself 
should be set forth not that He might possess the word of God, as other holy and wise men have possessed 
it, but "above His fellows;" a not certainly that He possessed the word more than they, so as to be of more 
surpassing wisdom than the rest were, but that He was the very Word Himself. For the word in the flesh is 
one thing, and the Word made flesh is another; i.e. the word in man is one thing, the Word that is man is 
another. For flesh is put for man, where it is said, "The Word was made flesh;"(4) and again, "And all flesh 
shall see the salvation of God." For it does not mean flesh without soul and without mind; but "all flesh," is the 
same as if it were said, every man. The creature, then, in which the Holy Spirit should appear, was not so 
taken, as that flesh and human form were taken, of the Virgin Mary. For the Spirit did not beatify the dove, or 
the wind, or the fire, and join them for ever to Himself and to His person in unity and "fashion. "(6) Nor, again, 
is the nature of the Holy Spirit mutable and changeable; so that these things were not made of the creature, 
but He himself was turned and changed first into one and then into another, as water is changed into ice. But 
these things appeared at the seasons at which they ought to have appeared, the creature serving the 
Creator, and being changed and converted at the command of Him who remains immutably in Himself, in 
order to signify and manifest Him in such way as it was fit He should be signified and manifested to mortal 
men. Accordingly, although that dove is called the Spirit;(7) and in speaking of that fire, "There appeared 
unto them," he says, "cloven tongues, like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them; and they began to speak 
with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance;(8) in order to show that the Spirit was manifested by 
that fire, as by the dove; yet we cannot call the Holy Spirit both God and a dove, or both God and fire, in the 
same way as we call the Son both God and man; nor as we call the Son the Lamb of God; which not only 
John the Baptist says, "Behold the Lamb of God, "(9) but also John the Evangelist sees the Lamb slain in the 
Apocalypse. (1 0) For that prophetic vision was not shown to bodily eyes through bodily forms, but in the spirit 
through spiritual images of bodily things. But whosoever saw that dove and that fire, saw them with their 
eyes. Although it may perhaps be disputed concerning the fire, whether it was seen by the eyes or in the 
spirit, on account of the form of the sentence. For the text does not say, They saw cloven tongues like fire, 
but, "There appeared to them." But we are not wont to say with the same meaning, It appeared to me; as we 
say, I saw. And in those spiritual visions of corporeal images the usual expressions are, both, It appeared to 
me; and, I saw: but in those things which are shown to the eyes through express corporeal forms, the 
common expression is not, It appeared to me; but, I saw. There may, therefore, be a question raised 
respecting that fire, how it was seen; whether within in the spirit as it were outwardly, or really outwardly 
before the eyes of the flesh. But of that dove, which is said to have descended in a bodily form, no one ever 
doubted that it was seen by the eyes. Nor, again, as we call the Son a Rock (for it is written, "And that Rock 
was Christ"(1 1)), can we so call the Spirits dove or fire. For that rock was a thing already created, and after 
the mode of its action was called by the name of Christ, whom it signified; like the stone placed under 
Jacob's head, and also anointed, which he took in order to signify the Lord;(1) or as Isaac was Christ, when 
he carried the wood for the sacrifice of himself.(2) A particular significative action was added to those 
already existing things; they did not, as that dove and fire, suddenly come into being in order simply so to 
signify. The dove and the fire, indeed, seem to me more like that flame which appeared to Moses in the 
bush, (3) or that pillar which the people followed in the wilderness, (4) or the thunders and lightnings which 
came when the Law was given in the mount.(5) For the corporeal form of these things came into being for the 

very purpose, that it might signify something, and then pass away. (6) 
CHAP. 7. -A DOUBT RAISED ABOUT DIVINE APPEARANCES. 

12. The Holy Spirit, then, is also said to be sent, on account of these corporeal forms which came into 
existence in time, in order to signify and manifest Him, as He must needs be manifested, to human senses; 
yet He is not said to be less than the Father, as the Son, because He was in the form of a servant, is said to 
be; because that form of a servant inhered in the unity of the person of the Son, but those corporeal forms 
appeared for a time, in order to show what was necessary to be shown, and then ceased to be. Why, then, 
is not the Father also said to be sent, through those corporeal forms, the fire of the bush, and the pillar of 
cloud or of fire, and the lightnings in the mount, and whatever other things of the kind appeared at that time, 
when (as we have learned from Scripture testimony) He spake face to face with the fathers, if He Himself 
was manifested by those modes and forms of the creature, as exhibited ant presented corporeally to 
human sight? But if the Son was manifested by them, why is He said to be sent so long after, when He was 
made of a woman, as the apostle says, "But when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth His Son, 
made of a woman, "(7) seeing that He was sent also before, when He appeared to the fathers by those 
changeable forms of the creature? Or if He cannot rightly be said to be sent, unless when the Word was 
made flesh, why is the Holy Spirit said to be sent, of whom no such incarnation was ever wrought? But if by 
those visible things, which are put before us in the Law and in the prophets, neither the Father nor the Son but 
the Holy Spirit was manifested, why also is He said to be sent now, when He was sent also before after 
these modes? 

13. In the perplexity of this inquiry, the Lord helping us, we must ask, first, whether the Father, or the Son, or 
the Holy Spirit; or whether, sometimes the Father, sometimes the Son, sometimes the Holy Spirit; or whether 
it was without any distinction of persons, in such way as the one and only God is Spoken of, that is, that the 
Trinity itself appeared to the Fathers by those forms of the creature. Next, whichever of these alternatives 
shall have been found or thought true, whether for this purpose only the creature was fashioned, wherein 
God, as He judged it suitable at that time, should be shown to human sight; or whether angels, who already 
existed, were so sent, as to speak in the person of God, taking a corporeal form from the corporeal creature, 
for the purpose of their ministry, as each had need; or else, according to the power the Creator has given 
them, changing and converting their own body itself, to which they are not subject, but govern it as subject to 
themselves, into whatever appearances they would that were suited and apt to their several actions. Lastly, 
we shall discern that which it was our purpose to ask, viz. whether the Son and the Holy Spirit were also sent 
before; and, if they were so sent, what difference there is between that sending, and the one which we read 
of in the Gospel; or whether in truth neither of them were sent, except when either the Son was made of the 
Virgin Mary, or the Holy Spirit appeared in a visible form, whether in the dove or in tongues of fire. 

CHAP. 8. -THE ENTIRE TRINITY INVISIBLE. 

14. Let us therefore say nothing of those who, with an over carnal mind, have thought the nature of the Word 
of God, and the Wsdom, which, "remaining in herself, maketh all things new,"(8) whom we call the only Son 
of God, not only to be changeable, but also to be visible. For these, with more audacity than religion, bring a 
very dull heart to the inquiry into divine things. For whereas the soul is a spiritual substance, and whereas 
itself also was made, vet could not be made by any other than by Him by whom all things were made, and 
without whom nothing is made,(1) it, although changeable, is yet not visible; and this they have believed to 
be the case with the Word Himself and with the Wisdom of God itself, by which the soul was made; whereas 
this Wisdom is not only invisible, as the soul also is, but likewise unchangeable, which the soul is not. It is in 
truth the same unchangeableness in it, which is referred to when it was said, "Remaining in herself she 
maketh all things new." Yet these people, endeavoring, as it were, to prop up their error in its fall by 
testimonies of the divine Scriptures, adduce the words of the Apostle Paul; and take that, which is said of the 
one only God, in whom the Trinity itself is understood, to be said only of the Father, and neither of the Son 
nor of the Holy Spirit: "Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor and glory 
for ever and ever;"(2) and that other passage, "The blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord 
of lords; who only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto; whom no man hath 
seen, nor can see. "(3) How these passages are to be understood, I think we have already discoursed 
sufficiently. (4) 

CHAP. 9. -AGAINST THOSE WHO BELIEVED THE FATHER ONLY TO BE IMMORTAL AND 
INVISIBLE. THE TRUTH TO BE SOUGHT BY PEACEFUL STUDY. 

15. But they who will have these texts understood only of the Father, and not of the Son or the Holy Spirit, 

declare the Son to be visible, not by having taken flesh of the Virgin, but aforetime also in Himself. For He 
Himself, they say, appeared to the eyes of the Fathers. And if you say to them, In whatever manner, then, the 
Son is visible in Himself, in that manner also He is mortal in Himself; so that it plainly follows that you would 
have this saying also understood only of the Father, viz., "Who only hath immortality;" for if the Son is mortal 
from having taken upon Him our flesh, then allow that it is on account of this flesh that He is also visible: they 
reply, that it is not on account of this flesh that they say that the Son is mortal; but that, just as He was also 
before visible, so He was also before mortal. For if they say the Son is mortal from having taken our flesh, 
then it is not the Father alone without the Son who hath immortality; because His Word also has immortality, 
by which all things were made. For He did not therefore lose His immortality, because He took mortal flesh; 
seeing that it could not happen even to the human soul, that it should die with the body, when the Lord 
Himself says, "Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul. "(5) Or, forsooth, also the 
Holy Spirit took flesh: concerning whom certainly they will, without doubt, be troubled to say-if the Son is 
mortal on account of taking our flesh-in what manner they understand that the Father only has immortality 
without the Son and the Holy Spirit, since, indeed, the Holy Spirit did not take our flesh; and if He has not 
immortality, then the Son is not mortal on account of taking our flesh; but if the Holy Spirit has immortality, 
then it is not said only of the Father, "Who only hath immortality." And therefore they think they are able to 
prove that the Son in Himself was mortal also before the incarnation, because changeableness itself is not 
unfitly called mortality, according to which the soul also is said to die; not because it is changed and turned 
into body, or into some substance other than itself, but because, whatever in its own selfsame substance is 
now after another mode than it once was, is discovered to be mortal, in so far as it has ceased to be what it 
was. Because then, say they, before the Son of God was born of the Virgin Mary, He Himself appeared to 
our fathers, not in one and the same form only, but in many forms; first in one form, then in another; He is both 
visible in Himself, because His substance was visible to mortal eyes, when He had not yet taken our flesh, 
and mortal, inasmuch as He is changeable. And so also the Holy Spirit, who appeared at one time as a 
dove, and another time as fire. Whence, they say, the following texts do not belong to the Trinity, but 
singularly and properly to the Father only: "Now unto the King eternal, immortal, and invisible, the only wise 
God;" and, "Who only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto; whom no man 
hath seen, nor can see." 

16. Passing by, then, these reasoners, who are unable to know the substance even of the soul, which is 
invisible, and therefore are very far indeed from knowing that the substance of the one and only God, that is, 
the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, remains ever not only invisible, but also unchangeable, and that 
hence it possesses true and real immortality; let us, who deny that God, whether the Father, or the Son, or 
the Holy Spirit, ever appeared to bodily eyes, unless through the corporeal creature made subject to His 
own power; let us, I say-ready to be corrected, if we are reproved in a fraternal and upright spirit, ready to 
be so, even if carped at by an enemy, so that he speak the truth— in catholic peace and with peaceful study 
inquire, whether God indiscriminately appeared to our fathers before Christ came in the flesh, or whether it 
was any one person of the Trinity, or whether severally, as it were by turns. 

CHAP. 10-WHETHER GOD THE TRINITY INDISCRIMINATELY APPEARED TO THE 
FATHERS, OR ANY ONE PERSON OF THE TRINITY. THE APPEARING OF GOD TO ADAM. 
OF THE SAME APPEARANCE. THE VISION TO ABRAHAM. 

17. And first, in that which is written in Genesis, viz., that God spake with man whom He had formed out of the 
dust; if we set apart the figurative meaning, and treat it so as to place faith in the narrative even in the letter, it 
should appear that God then spake with man in the appearance of a man. This is not indeed expressly laid 
down in the book, but the general tenor of its reading sounds in this sense, especially in that which is written, 
that Adam heard the voice of the Lord God, walking in the garden in the cool of the evening, and hid himself 
among the trees of the garden; and when God said, "Adam, where artthou?"(1) replied, "I heard Thy voice, 
and I was afraid because I was naked, and I hid myself from Thy face." For I do not see how such a walking 
and conversation of God can be understood literally, except He appeared as a man. For it can neither be 
said that a voice only of God was framed, when God is said to have walked, or that He who was walking in a 
place was not visible; while Adam, too, says that he hid himself from the face of God. Who then was He? 
Whether the Father, or the Son, or the Holy Spirit? Whether altogether indiscriminately did God the Trinity 
Himself speak to man in the form of man? The context, indeed, itself of the Scripture nowhere, it should 
seem, indicates a change from person to person; but He seems still to speak to the first man, who said, "Let 
there be light," and, "Let there be a firmament," and so on through each of those days; whom we usually take 
to be God the Father, making by a word whatever He willed to make. For He made all things by His word, 
which Word we know, by the right rule of faith, to be His only Son. If, therefore, God the Father spake to the 
first man, and Himself was walking in the garden in the cool of the evening, and if it was from His face that the 
sinner hid himself amongst the trees of the garden, why are we not to go on to understand that it was He also 

who appeared to Abraham and to Moses, and to whom He would, and how He would, through the 
changeable and visible creature, subjected to Himself, while He Himself remains in Himself and in His own 
substance, in which He is unchangeable and invisible? But, possibly, it might be that the Scripture passed 
over in a hidden way from person to person, and while it had related that the Father said "Let there be light," 
and the rest which it mentioned Him to have done by the Word, went on to indicate the Son as speaking to 
the first man; not unfolding this openly, but intimating it to be understood by those who could understand it. 

18. Let him, then, who has the strength whereby he can penetrate this secret with his mind's eye, so that to 
him it appears clearly, either that the Father also is able, or that only the Son and Holy Spirit are able, to 
appear to human eyes through a visible creature; let him, I say, proceed to examine these things if he can, 
or even to express and handle them in words; but the thing itself, so far as concerns this testimony of 
Scripture, where God spake with man, is, in my judgment, not discoverable, because it does not evidently 
appear even whether Adam usually saw God with the eyes of his body; especially as it is a great question 
what manner of eyes it was that were opened when they tasted the forbidden fruit;(2) for before they had 
tasted, these eyes were closed. Yet I would not rashly assert, even if that scripture implies Paradise to have 
been a material place, that God could not have walked there in any way except in some bodily form. For it 
might be said, that only words were framed for the man to hear, without seeing any form. Neither, because it 
is written, "Adam hid himself from the face of God," does it follow forthwith that he usually saw His face. For 
what if he himself indeed could not see, but feared to be himself seen by Him whose voice he had heard, 
and had felt His presence as he walked? For Cain, too, said to God, "From Thy face I will hide myself;"(3) 
yet we are not therefore compelled to admit that he was wont to behold the face of God with his bodily eyes 
in any visible form, although he had heard the voice of God questioning and speaking with him of his sin. But 
what manner of speech it was that God then uttered to the outward ears of men, especially in speaking to the 
first man, it is both difficult to discover, and we have not undertaken to say in this discourse. But if words 
alone and sounds were wrought, by which to bring about some sensible presence of God to those first men, 

I do not know why I should not there understand the person of God the Father, seeing that His person is 
manifested also in that voice, when Jesus appeared in glory on the mount before the three disciples;(1) and 
in that when the dove descended upon Him at His baptism;(2) and in that where He cried to the Father 
concerning His own glorification and it was answered Him, "I have both glorified, and will glorify again. "(3) 
Not that the voice could be wrought without the work of the Son and of the Holy Spirit (since the Trinity works 
indivisibly), but that such a voice was wrought as to manifest the person of the Father only; just as the Trinity 
wrought that human form from the Virgin Mary, yet it is the person of the Son alone; for the invisible Trinity 
wrought the visible person of the Son alone. Neither does anything forbid us, not only to understand those 
words spoken to Adam as spoken by the Trinity, but also to take them as manifesting the person of that 
Trinity. For we are compelled to understand of the Father only, that which is said, "This is my beloved 
Son. "(4) For Jesus can neither be believed nor understood to be the Son of the Holy Spirit, or even His own 
Son. And where the voice uttered, "I have both glorified, and will glorify again," we confess it was only the 
person of the Father; since it is the answer to that word of the Lord, in which He had said, "Father, glorify thy 
Son," which He could not say except to God the Father only, and not also to the Holy Spirit, whose Son He 
was not. But here, where it is written, "And the Lord God said to Adam," no reason can be given why the 
Trinity itself should not be understood. 

19. Likewise, also, in that which is written, "Now the Lord had said unto Abraham, Get thee out of thy country, 
and from thy kindred, and thy father's house," it is not clear whether a voice alone came to the ears of 
Abraham, or whether anything also appeared to his eyes. But a little while after, it is somewhat more clearly 
said, "And the Lord appeared unto Abraham, and said, Unto thy seed will I give this land. "(5) But neither 
there is it expressly said in what form God appeared to him, or whether the Father, or the Son, or the Holy 
Spirit appeared to him. Unless, perhaps, they think that it was the Son who appeared to Abraham, because 
it is not written, God appeared to him, but "the Lord appeared to him." For the Son seems to be called the 
Lord as though the name was appropriated to Him; as e.g. the apostle says, "For though there be that are 
called gods, whether in heaven or in earth, (as there be gods many and lords many,) but to us there is but 
one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in Him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all 
things, and we by Him. "(6) But since it is found that God the Father also is called Lord in many places, -for 
instance, "The Lord hath said unto me, Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten Thee;"(7) and again, "The 
Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou at my right hand; "a since also the Holy Spirit is found to be called Lord, as 
where the apostle says, "Now the Lord is that Spirit;" and then, lest any one should think the Son to be 
signified, and to be called the Spirit on account of His incorporeal substance, has gone on to say, "And 
where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty ;(9) and no one ever doubted the Spirit of the Lord to be the Holy 
Spirit: therefore, neither here does it appear plainly whether it was any person of the Trinity that appeared to 
Abraham, or God Himself the Trinity, of which one God it is said, "Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and Him 
only shall thou serve. "(1 0) But under the oak at Mature he saw three men, whom he invited, and hospitably 
received, and ministered to them as they feasted. Yet Scripture at the beginning of that narrative does not 

say, three men appeared to him, but, "The Lord appeared to him." And then, setting forth in due order after 
what manner the Lord appeared to him, it has added the account of the three men, whom Abraham invites to 
his hospitality in the plural number, and afterwards speaks to them in the singular number as one; and as 
one He promises him a son by Sara, viz. the one whom the Scripture calls Lord, as in the beginning of the 
same narrative, "The Lord," it says, "appeared to Abraham." He invites them then, and washes their feet, 
and leads them forth at their departure, as though they were men; but he speaks as with the Lord God, 
whether when a son is promised to him, or when the destruction is shown to him that was impending over 
Sodom. (11) 

CHAP. 11. -OF THE SAME APPEARANCE. 

20. That place of Scripture demands neither a slight nor a passing consideration. For if one man had 
appeared, what else would those at once cry out, who say that the Son was visible also in His own 
substance before He was born of the Virgin, but that it was Himself? since it is said, they say, of the Father, 
"To the only invisible God."(1) And yet, I could still go on to demand, in what manner "He was found in 
fashion as a man," before He had taken our flesh, seeing that his feet were washed, and that He fed upon 
earthly food? How could that be, when He was still "in the form of God, and thought it not robbery to be equal 
with God?"(2) For, pray, had He already "emptied Himself, taking upon Him the form of a servant, and made 
in the likeness of men, and found in fashion as a man?" when we know when it was that He did this through 
His birth of the Virgin. How, then, before He had done this, did He appear as one man to Abraham? or, was 
not that form a reality? I could put these questions, if it had been one man that appeared to Abraham, and if 
that one were believed to be the Son of God. But since three men appeared, and no one of them is said to 
be greater than the rest either in form, or age, or power, why should we not here understand, as visibly 
intimated by the visible creature, the equality of the Trinity, and one and the same substance in three 
persons?(3) 

21 . For, lest any one should think that one among the three is in this way intimated to have been the greater, 
and that this one is to be understood to have been the Lord, the Son of God, while the other two were His 
angels; because, whereas three appeared, Abraham there speaks to one as the Lord: Holy Scripture has 
not forgotten to anticipate, by a contradiction, such future cogitations and opinions, when a little while after it 
says that two angels came to Lot, among whom that just man also, who deserved to be freed from the 
burning of Sodom, speaks to one as to the Lord. For so Scripture goes on to say, "And the Lord went His 
way, as soon as He left communing with Abraham; and Abraham returned to his place. "(4) 

CHAP. 12. -THE APPEARANCE TO LOT IS EXAMINED. 

"But there came two angels to Sodom at even." Here, what I have begun to set forth must be considered 
more attentively. Certainly Abraham was speaking with three, and called that one, in the singular number, 
the Lord. Perhaps, some one may say, he recognized one of the three to be the Lord, but the other two His 
angels. What, then, does that mean which Scripture goes on to say, "And the Lord went His way, as soon as 
He had left communing with Abraham; and Abraham returned to his place: and there came two angels to 
Sodom at even?" Are we to suppose that the one who, among the three, was recognized as the Lord, had 
departed, and had sent the two angels that were with Him to destroy Sodom? Let us see, then, what follows. 
"There came," it is said, "two angels to Sodom at even; and Lot sat in the gate of Sodom: and Lot seeing 
them, rose up to meet them; and he bowed himself with his face toward the ground; and he said, Behold 
now, my lords, turn in, I pray you, into your servant's house." Here it is clear, both that there were two angels, 
and that in the plural number they were invited to partake of hospitality, and that they were honorably 
designated lords, when they perchance were thought to be men. 

22. Yet, again, it is objected that except they were known to be angels of God, Lot would not have bowed 
himself with his face to the ground. Why, then, is both hospitality and food offered to them, as though they 
wanted such human succor? But whatever may here lie hid, let us now pursue that which we have 
undertaken. Two appear; both are called angels; they are invited plurally; he speaks as with two plurally, 
until the departure from Sodom. And then Scripture goes on to say, "And it came to pass, when they had 
brought them forth abroad, that they said, Escape for thy life; look not behind thee, neither stay thou in all the 
plain; escape to the mountain, and there thou shalt be saved, (5) lest thou be consumed. And Lot said unto 
them, Oh! not so, my lord: behold now, thy servant hath found grace in thy sight,"(6) etc. What is meant by his 
saying to them, "Oh! not so, my lord," if He who was the Lord had already departed, and had sent the 
angels? Why is it said, "Oh! not so, nay lord," and not, "Oh! not so, my lords?" Or if he wished to speak to one 
of them, why does Scripture say, "But Lot said to them. Oh! not so, my lord: behold now, thy servant hath 
found grace in thy sight," etc.? Are we here, too, to understand two persons in the plural number, but when 
the two are addressed as one, then the one Lord God of one substance? But which two persons do we here 

understand?-of the Father and of the Son, or of the Father and of the Holy Spirit, or of the Son and of the 
Holy Spirit? The last, perhaps, is the more suitable; for they said of themselves that they were sent, which is 
that which we say of the Son and of the Holy Spirit. For we find nowhere in the Scriptures that the Father was 
sent.(1) 

CHAP. 13. -THE APPEARANCE IN THE BUSH. 

23. But when Moses was sent to lead the children of Israel out of Egypt, it is written that the Lord appeared to 
him thus: "Now Moses kept the flock of Jethro his father-in-law, the priest of Midian: and he led the flock to 
the back side of the desert, and came to the mountain of God, even to Horeb. And the Angel of the Lord 
appeared unto him in a flame of fire, out of the midst of a bush; and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned 
with fire, and the bush was not consumed. And Moses said, I will now turn aside, and see this great sight, 
why the bush is not burnt. And when the Lord saw that he turned aside to see, God called unto him out of the 
midst of the bush, and said, I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of 
Jacob. "(2) He is here also first called the Angel of the Lord, and then God. Was an angel, then, the God of 
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? Therefore He may be rightly understood to be the 
Saviour Himself, of whom the apostle says, "Whose are the fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh 
Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever."(3) He, therefore, "who is over all, God blessed for ever," 
is not unreasonably here understood also to be Himself the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God 
of Jacob. But why is He previously called the Angel of the Lord, when He appeared in a flame of fire out of 
the bush? Was it because it was one of many angels, who by an economy [or arrangement] bare the 
person of his Lord? or was something of the creature assumed by Him in order to bring about a visible 
appearance for the business in hand, and that words might thence be audibly uttered, whereby the 
presence of the Lord might be shown, in such way as was fitting, to the corporeal senses of man, by means 
of the creature made subject? For if he was one of the angels, who could easily affirm whether it was the 
person of the Son which was imposed upon him to announce, or that of the Holy Spirit, or that of God the 
Father, or altogether of the Trinity itself, who is the one and only God, in order that he might say, "I am the 
God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?" For we cannot say that the Son of God is 
the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, and that the Father is not; nor will any one 
dare to deny that either the Holy Spirit, or the Trinity itself, whom we believe and understand to be the one 
God, is the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. For he who is not God, is not the 
God of those fathers. Furthermore, if not only the Father is God, as all, even heretics, admit; but also the Son, 
which, whether they will or not, they are compelled to acknowledge, since the apostle says, "Who is over all, 
God blessed for ever;" and the Holy Spirit, since the same apostle says, "Therefore glorify God in your 
body;" when he had said above, "Know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in 
you, which ye have of God?"(4) and these three are one God, as catholic soundness believes: it is not 
sufficiently apparent which person of the Trinity that angel bare, if he was one of the rest of the angels, and 
whether any person, and not rather that of the Trinity itself. But if the creature was assumed for the purpose of 
the business in hand, whereby both to appear to human eyes, and to sound in human ears, and to be called 
the Angel of the Lord, and the Lord, and God; then cannot God here be understood to be the Father, but 
either the Son or the Holy Spirit. Although I cannot call to mind that the Holy Spirit is anywhere else called an 
angel, which yet may be understood from His work; for it is said of Him, "And He will show you s things to 
come;"(6) and "angel" in Greek is certainly equivalent to "messenger"(7) in Latin: but we read most 
evidently of the Lord Jesus Christ in the prophet, that He is called "the Angel of Great Counsel, "(1) while both 
the Holy Spirit and the Son of God is God and Lord of the angels. 

CHAP. 14. -OF THE APPEARANCE IN THE PILLAR OF CLOUD AND OF FIRE. 

24. Also in the going forth of the children of Israel from Egypt it is written, "And the Lord went before them, by 
day in a pillar of cloud to lead them the way, and by night in a pillar of fire. He took not away the pillar of the 
cloud by day, nor the pillar of fire by night, from before the people. "(2) Who here, too, would doubt that God 
appeared to the eyes of mortal men by the corporeal creature made subject to Him, and not by His own 
substance? But it is not similarly apparent whether the Father, or the Son, or the Holy Spirit, or the Trinity 
itself, the one God. Nor is this distinguished there either, in my judgment, where it is written, "The glory of the 
Lord appeared in the cloud, and the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, I have heard the murmurings of the 
children of Israel, "(3) etc. 

CHAP. 15. -OF THE APPEARANCE ON SINAI. WHETHER THE TRINITY SPAKE IN THAT 
APPEARANCE OR SOME ONE PERSON SPECIALLY. 

25. But now of the clouds, and voices, and lightnings, and the trumpet, and the smoke on Mount Sinai, when it 
was said, "And Mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord descended upon it in fire, and the 
smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace; and all the people that was in the camp trembled; and 
when the voice of the trumpet sounded long and waxed louder and louder, Moses spake, and God 
answered him by a voice. "(4) And a little after, when the Law had been given in the ten commandments, it 
follows in the text, "And all the people saw the thunderings, and the lightnings, and the noise of the trumpet, 
and the mountain smoking." And a little after, "And [when the people saw it,] they removed and stood afar 
off, and Moses drew near unto the thick darkness(5) where God was, and the Lord said unto Moses, "(6) etc. 
What shall I say about this, save that no one can be so insane as to believe the smoke, and the fire, and the 
cloud, and the darkness, and whatever there was of the kind, to be the substance of the word and wisdom of 
God which is Christ, or of the Holy Spirit? For not even the Arians ever dared to say that they were the 
substance of God the Father. All these things, then, were wrought through the creature serving the Creator, 
and were presented in a suitable economy (dispensatio) to human senses; unless, perhaps, because it is 
said, "And Moses drew near to the cloud where God was," carnal thoughts must needs suppose that the 
cloud was indeed seen by the people, but that within the cloud Moses with the eyes of the flesh saw the Son 
of God, whom doting heretics will have to be seen in His own substance. Forsooth, Moses may have seen 
Him with the eyes of the flesh, if not only the wisdom of God which is Christ, but even that of any man you 
please and howsoever wise, can be seen with the eyes of the flesh; or if, because it is written of the elders of 
Israel, that "they saw the place where the God of Israel had stood," and that "there was under His feet as it 
were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as it were the body of heaven in his clearness, "(7) therefore we 
are to believe that the word and wisdom of God in His own substance stood within the space of an earthly 
place, who indeed "reacheth firmly from end to end, and sweetly ordereth all things;"(8) and that the Word of 
God, by whom all things were made, (9) is in such wise changeable, as now to contract, now to expand 
Himself; (may the Lord cleanse the hearts of His faithful ones from such thoughts !) But indeed all these 
visible and sensible things are, as we have often said, exhibited through the creature made subject in order 
to signify the invisible and intelligible God, not only the Father, but also the Son and the Holy Spirit," of whom 
are all things, and through whom are all things, and in whom are all things;"(10) although "the invisible things 
of God, from the creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even 
His eternal power and Godhead. "(1 1) 

26. But as far as concerns our present undertaking, neither on Mount Sinai do I see how it appears, by all 
those things which were fearfully displayed to the senses of mortal men, whether God the Trinity spake, or 
the Father, or the Son, or the Holy Spirit severally. But if it is allowable, without rash assertion, to venture 
upon a modest and hesitating conjecture from this passage, if it is possible to understand it of one person of 
the Trinity, why do we not rather understand the Holy Spirit to be spoken of, since the Law itself also, which 
was given there, is said to have been written upon tables of stone with the finger of God,(1) by which name 
we know the Holy Spirit to be signified in the Gospel. (2) And fifty days are numbered from the slaying of the 
lamb and the celebration of the Passover until the day in which these things began to be done in Mount 
Sinai; just as after the passion of our Lord fifty days are numbered from His resurrection, and then came the 
Holy Spirit which the Son of God had promised. And in that very coming of His, which we read of in the Acts 
of the Apostles, there appeared cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them:(3) which agrees 
with Exodus, where it is written, "And Mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord descended 
upon it in fire;" and a little after, "And the sight of the glory of the Lord," he says, "was like devouring fire on 
the top of the mount in the eyes of the children of Israel. "(4) Or if these things were therefore wrought 
because neither the Father nor the Son could be there presented in that mode without the Holy Spirit, by 
whom the Law itself must needs be written; then we know doubtless that God appeared there, not by His 
own substance, which remains invisible and unchangeable, but by the appearance above mentioned of the 
creature; but that some special person of the Trinity appeared, distinguished by a proper mark, as far as my 
capacity of understanding reaches, we do not see. 

CHAP. 16. -IN WHAT MANNER MOSES SAW GOD. 

26. There is yet another difficulty which troubles most people, viz. that it is written, "And the Lord spake unto 
Moses face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend;" whereas a little after, the same Moses says, "Now 
therefore, I pray Thee, if I have found grace in Thy sight, show me now Thyself plainly, that I may see Thee, 
that I may find grace in Thy sight, and that I may consider that this nation is Thy people;" and a little after 
Moses again said to the Lord, "Show me Thy glory." What means this then, that in everything which was 
done, as above said. God was thought to have appeared by His own substance; whence the Son of God 
has been believed by these miserable people to be visible not by the creature, but by Himself; and that 
Moses, entering into the cloud, appeared to have had this very object in entering, that a cloudy darkness 
indeed might be shown to the eyes of the people, but that Moses within might hear the words of God, as 

though he beheld His face; and, as it is said, "And the Lord spake unto Moses face to face, as a man 
speaketh unto his friend;" and yet, behold, the same Moses says, "If I have found grace in Thy sight, show 
me Thyself plainly?" Assuredly he knew that he saw corporeally, and he sought the true sight of God 
spiritually. And that mode of speech accordingly which was wrought in words, was so modified, as if it were 
of a friend speaking to a friend. Yet who sees God the Father with the eyes of the body? And that Word, 
which was in the beginning, the Word which was with God, the Word which was God, by which all things were 
made,(5)-who sees Him with the eyes of the body? And the spirit of wisdom, again, who sees with the eyes 
of the body? Yet what is, "Show me now Thyself plainly, that I, may see Thee," unless, Show me Thy 
substance? But if Moses had not said this, we must indeed have borne with those foolish people as we 
could, who think that the substance of God was made visible to his eyes through those things which, as 
above mentioned, were said or done. But when it is here demonstrated most evidently that this was not 
granted to him, even though he desired it; who will dare to say, that by the like forms which had appeared 
visibly to him also, not the creature serving God, but that itself which is God, appeared to the eyes of a 
mortal man? 

28. Add, too, that which the Lord afterward said to Moses, "Thou canst not see my face: for there shall no 
man see my face, and live. And the Lord said, Behold, there is a place by me, and thou shall stand upon a 
rock: and it shall come to pass, while my glory passeth by, that I will put thee into a watch-tower(6) of the 
rock, and will cover thee with my hand while I pass by: and I will take away my hand, and thou shalt see my 
back parts; but my face shall not be seen. "(7) 

CHAP. 17. -HOW THE BACK PARTS OF GOD WERE SEEN. THE FAITH OF THE 
RESURRECTION OF CHRIST. THE CATHOLIC CHURCH ONLY IS THE PLACE FROM 
WHENCE THE BACK PARTS OF GOD ARE SEEN. THE BACK PARTS OF GOD WERE 
SEEN BY THE ISRAELITES. IT IS A RASH OPINION TO THINKTHAT GOD THE FATHER 
ONLY WAS NEVER SEEN BY THE FATHERS. 

Not unfitly is it commonly understood to be prefigured from the person of our Lord Jesus Christ, that His 
"back parts" are to be taken to be His flesh, in which He was born of the Virgin, and died, and rose again; 
whether they are called back parts(1) on account of the posteriority of mortality, or because it was almost in 
the end of the world, that is, at a late period, (2) that He deigned to take it: but that His "face" was that form of 
God, in which He "thought it not robbery to be equal with God, "(3) which no one certainly can see and live; 
whether because after this life, in which we are absent from the Lord, (4) and where the corruptible body 
presseth down the soul, (5) we shall see "face to facet,"(6) as the apostle says-(for it is said in the Psalms, of 
this life, "Verily every man living is altogether vanity;"(7) and again, "For in Thy sight shall no man living be 
justified ;"(8) and in this life also, according to John, "It doth not yet appear what we shall be, but we know," he 
says, "that when He shall appear, we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is, "(9) which he certainly 
intended to be understood as after this life, when we shall have paid the debt of death, and shall have 
received the promise of the resurrection);-or whether that even now, in whatever degree we spiritually 
understand the wisdom of God, by which all things were made, in that same degree we die to carnal 
affections, so that, considering this world dead to us, we also ourselves die to this world, and say what the 
apostle says, "The world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world. "(10) For it was of this death that he also 
says, "Wherefore, if ye be dead with Christ, why as though living in the world are ye subject to 
ordinances?"(1 1) Not therefore without cause will no one be able to see the "face," that is, the manifestation 
itself of the wisdom of God, and live. For it is this very appearance, for the contemplation of which every one 
sighs who strives to love God with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his mind; to the 
contemplation of which, he who Loves his neighbor, too, as himself builds up his neighbor also as far as he 
may; on which two commandments hang all the law and the prophets. (12) And this is signified also in Moses 
himself. For when he had said, on account of the love of God with which he was specially inflamed, "If I have 
found grace in thy sight, show me now Thyself plainly, that I may find grace in Thy sight;" he immediately 
subjoined, on account of the love also of his neighbor, "And that I may know that this nation is Thy people." It 
is therefore that "appearance" which hurries away every rational soul with the desire of it, and the more 
ardently the more pure that soul is; and it is the more pure the more it rises to spiritual things; and it rises the 
more to spiritual things the more it dies to carnal things. But whilst we are absent from the Lord, and walk by 
faith, not by sight,(1 3) we ought to see the "back parts" of Christ, that is His flesh, by that very faith, that is, 
standing on the solid foundation of faith, which the rock signifies, (14) and beholding it from such a safe 
watch-tower, namely in the Catholic Church, of which it is said, "And upon this rock I will build my Church. "(15) 
For so much the more certainly we love that face of Christ, which we earnestly desire to see, as we 
recognize in His back parts how much first Christ loved us. 

29. But in the flesh itself, the faith in His resurrection saves and justifies us. For, "If thou shalt believe," he 
says, "in thine heart, that God hath raised Him from the dead, thou shalt be saved;"(16) and again, "Who 

was delivered," he says, "for our offenses, and was raised again for our justification. "(17) So that the reward 
of our faith is the resurrection of the body of our Lord.(1 8) For even His enemies believe that that flesh died 
on the cross of His passion, but they do not believe it to have risen again. Which we believing most firmly, 
gaze upon it as from the solidity of a rock: whence we wait with certain hope for the adoption, to wit, the 
redemption of our body;(19) because we hope for that in the members of Christ, that is, in ourselves, which 
by a sound faith we acknowledge to be perfect in Him as in our Head. Thence it is that He would not have 
His back parts seen, unless as He passed by, that His resurrection may be believed. For that which is 
Pascha in Hebrew, is translated Passover.(20) Whence John the Evangelist also says, "Before the feast of 
the Passover, when Jesus knew that His hour was come, that He should pass out of this world unto the 
Father."(21) 

30. But they who believe this, but believe it not in the Catholic Church, but in some schism or in heresy, do not 
see the back parts of the Lord from "the place that is by Him." For what does that mean which the Lord says, 
"Behold, there is a place by me, and thou shalt stand upon a rock?" What earthly place is "by" the Lord, 
unless that is "by Him" which touches Him spiritually? For what place is not "by" the Lord, who "reacheth 
from one end to another mightily, and sweetly doth order all things, "(1) and of whom it is said, "Heaven is His 
throne, and earth is His footstool;" and who said, "Where is the house that ye build unto me, and where is the 
place of my rest? For has not my hand made all those things?"(2) But manifestly the Catholic Church itself is 
understood to be "the place by Him," wherein one stands upon a rock, where he healthfully sees the 
"Pascha Domini," that is, the "Passing by"(3) of the Lord, and His back parts, that is, His body, who believes 
in His resurrection. "And thou shalt stand," He says, "upon a rock while my glory passeth by." For in reality, 
immediately after the majesty of the Lord had passed by in the glorification of the Lord, in which He rose 
again and ascended to the Father, we stood firm upon the rock. And Peter himself then stood firm, so that he 
preached Him with confidence, whom, before he stood firm, he had thrice from fear denied;(4) although, 
indeed, already before placed in predestination upon the watch-tower of the rock, but with the hand of the 
Lord still held over him that he might not see. For he was to see His back parts, and the Lord had not yet 
"passed by," namely, from death to life; He had not yet been glorified by the resurrection. 

31 . For as to that, too, which follows in Exodus, "I will cover thee with mine hand while I pass by, and I will take 
away my hand and thou shalt see my back parts;" many Israelites, of whom Moses was then a figure, 
believed in the Lord after His resurrection, as if His hand had been taken off from their eyes, and they now 
saw His back parts. And hence the evangelist also mentions that prophesy of Isaiah, "Make the heart of this 
people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes. "(5) Lastly, in the Psalm, that is not unreasonably 
understood to be said in their person, "For day and night Thy hand was heavy upon me." "By day," 
perhaps, when He performed manifest miracles, yet was not acknowledged by them; but "by night," when 
He died in suffering, when they thought still more certainly that, like any one among men, He was cut off and 
brought to an end. But since, when He had already passed by, so that His back parts were seen, upon the 
preaching to them by the Apostle Peter that it behoved Christ to suffer and rise again, they were pricked in 
their hearts with the grief of repentance, (6) that that might come to pass among the baptized which is said in 
the beginning of that Psalm, "Blessed are they whose transgressions are forgiven, and whose sins are 
covered;" therefore, after it had been said, "Thy hand is heavy upon me," the Lord, as it were, passing by, 
so that now He removed His hand, and His back parts were seen, there follows the voice of one who 
grieves and confesses and receives remission of sins by faith in the resurrection of the Lord: "My moisture," 
he says, "is turned into the drought of summer. I acknowledged my sin unto Thee, and mine iniquity have I 
not hid. I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and Thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. "(7) 
For we ought not to be so wrapped up in the darkness of the flesh, as to think the face indeed of God to be 
invisible, but His back visible, since both appeared visibly in the form of a servant; but far be it from us to 
think anything of the kind in the form of God; far be it from us to think that the Word of God and the Wisdom of 
God has a face on one side, and on the other a back, as a human body has, or is at all changed either in 
place or time by any appearance or motion. (8) 

35. Wherefore, if in those words which were spoken in Exodus, and in all those corporeal appearances, the 
Lord Jesus Christ was manifested; or if in some cases Christ was manifested, as the consideration of this 
passage persuades us, in others the Holy Spirit, as that which we have said above admonishes us; at any 
rate no such result follows, as that God the Father never appeared in any such form to the Fathers. For many 
such appearances happened in those times, without either the Father, or the Son, or the Holy Spirit being 
expressly named and designated in them; but yet with some intimations given through certain very probable 
interpretations, so that it would be too rash to say that God the Father never appeared by any visible forms 
to the fathers or the prophets. For they gave birth to this opinion who were not able to understand in respect 
to the unity of the Trinity such texts as, "Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God;"(9) 
and, "Whom no man hath seen, nor can see."(1) Which texts are understood by a sound faith in that 
substance itself, the highest, and in the highest degree divine and unchangeable, whereby both the Father 
and the Son and the Holy Spirit is the one and only God. But those visions were wrought through the 

changeable creature, made subject to the unchangeable God, and did not manifest God properly as He is, 
but by intimations such as suited the causes and times of the several circumstances. 

CHAP. 18. -THE VISION OF DANIEL. 

33. (2)l do not know in what manner these men understand that the Ancient of Days appeared to Daniel, from 
whom the Son of man, which He deigned to be for our sakes, is understood to have received the kingdom; 
namely, from Him who says to Him in the Psalms, "Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten Thee; ask of 
me, and I shall give Thee the heathen for Thine inheritance; and who has "put all things under His feet."(4) If, 
however, both the Father giving the kingdom, and the Son receiving it, appeared to Daniel in bodily form, 
how can those men say that the Father never appeared to the prophets, and, therefore, that He only ought to 
be understood to be invisible whom no man has seen, nor can see? For Daniel has told us thus: "I beheld," 
he says, "till the thrones were set,(5) and the Ancient of Days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and 
the hair of His head like the pure wool: His throne was like the fiery flame, and His wheels as burning fire; a 
fiery stream issued and came forth from before Him: thousand thousands ministered unto Him, and ten 
thousand times ten thousand stood before Him: the judgment was set, and the books were opened," etc. 
And a little after, "I saw," he says, "in the night visions, and behold, one like the Son of man came with the 
clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of Days, and they brought Him near before Him. And there was 
given Him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all peoples, nations, and languages should serve Him: 
His dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and His kingdom that which shall not 
be destroyed. "(6) Behold the Father giving, and the Son receiving, an eternal kingdom; and both are in the 
sight of him who prophesies, in a visible form. It is not, therefore, unsuitably believed that God the Father 
also was wont to appear in that manner to mortals. 

34. Unless, perhaps, some one shall say, that the Father is therefore not visible, because He appeared 
within the sight of one who was dreaming; but that therefore the Son and the Holy Spirit are visible, because 
Moses saw all those things being awake; as if, forsooth, Moses saw the Word and the Wisdom of God with 
fleshly eyes, or that even the human spirit which quickens that flesh can be seen, or even that corporeal 
thing which is called wind;-how much less can that Spirit of God be seen, who transcends the minds of all 
men, and of angels, by the ineffable excellence of the divine substance? Or can any one fall headlong into 
such an error as to dare to say, that the Son and the Holy Spirit are visible also to men who are awake, but 
that the Father is not visible except to those who dream? How, then, do they understand that of the Father 
alone, "Whom no man hath seen, nor can see."? When men sleep, are they then not men? Or cannot He, 
who can fashion the likeness of a body to signify Himself through the visions of dreamers, also fashion that 
same bodily creature to signify Himself to the eyes of those who are awake? Whereas His own very 
substance, whereby He Himself is that which He is, cannot be shown by any bodily likeness to one who 
sleeps, or by any bodily appearance to one who is awake; but this not of the Father only, but also of the Son 
and of the Holy Spirit. And certainly, as to those who are moved by the visions of waking men to believe that 
not the Father, but only the Son, or the Holy Spirit, appeared to the corporeal sight of men,-to omit the great 
extent of the sacred pages, and their manifold interpretation, such that no one of sound reason ought to 
affirm that the person of the Father was nowhere shown to the eyes of waking men by any corporeal 
appearance;-but, as I said, to omit this, what do they say of our father Abraham, who was certainly awake 
and ministering, when, after Scripture had premised, "The Lord appeared unto Abraham," not one, or two, 
but three men appeared to him; no one of whom is said to have stood prominently above the others, no one 
more than the others to have shone with greater glory, or to have acted more authoritatively?(7) 

35. Wherefore, since in that our threefold division we determined to inquire, (8) first, whether the Father, or the 
Son, or the Holy Spirit; or whether sometimes the Father, sometimes the Son, sometimes the Holy Spirit; or 
whether, without any distinction of persons, as it is said, the one and only God, that is, the Trinity itself, 
appeared to the fathers through those forms of the creature: now that we have examined, so far as 
appeared to be sufficient what places of the Holy Scriptures we could, a modest and cautious consideration 
of divine mysteries leads, as far as I can judge, to no other conclusion, unless that we may not rashly affirm 
which person of the Trinity appeared to this or that of the fathers or the prophets in some body or likeness of 
body, unless when the context attaches to the narrative some probable intimations on the subject. For the 
nature itself, or substance, or essence, or by whatever other name that very thing, which is God, whatever it 
be, is to be called, cannot be seen corporeally: but we must believe that by means of the creature made 
subject to Him, not only the Son, or the Holy Spirit, but also the Father, may have given intimations of Himself 
to mortal senses by a corporeal form or likeness. And since the case stands thus, that this second book 
may not extend to an immoderate length, let us consider what remains in those which follow. 

THE FIFTEEN BOOKS OF AURELIUS AUGUSTINUS, 
BISHOP OF HIPPO, ON THE TRINITY: BOOK III 

BOOK III. 

THE QUESTION IS DISCUSSED WITH RESPECT TO THE APPEARANCES OF GOD 
SPOKEN OF IN THE PREVIOUS BOOK, WHICH WERE MADE UNDER BODILY FORMS, 
WHETHER ONLY A CREATURE WAS FORMED, FOR THE PURPOSE OF MANIFESTING 
GOD TO HUMAN SIGHT IN SUCH WAY AS HE AT EACH TIME JUDGED FITTING; OR 
WHETHER ANGELS, ALREADY EXISTING, WERE SO SENT AS TO SPEAK IN THE 
PERSON OF GOD; AND THIS, EITHER BY ASSUMING A BODILY APPEARANCE FROM 
THE BODILY CREATURE, OR BY CHANGING THEIR OWN BODIES INTO WHATEVER 
FORMS THEY WOULD, SUITABLE TO THE PARTICULAR ACTION, ACCORDING TO THE 
POWER GIVEN TO THEM BY THE CREATOR; WHILE THE ESSENCE ITSELF OF GOD 
WAS NEVER SEEN IN ITSELF. 

PREFACE. --WHY AUGUSTIN WRITES OF THE TRINITY. WHAT HE CLAIMS FROM 
READERS, WHAT HAS BEEN SAID IN THE PREVIOUS BOOK. 

1 . I WOULD have them believe, who are willing to do so, that I had rather bestow labor in reading, than in 
dictating what others may read. But let those who will not believe this, but are both able and willing to make 
the trial, grant me whatever answers may be gathered from reading, either to my own inquiries, or to those 
interrogations of others, which for the character I bear in the service of Christ, and for the zeal with which I 
burn that our faith may be fortified against the error of carnal and natural men,(1) I must needs bear with; and 
then let them see how easily I would refrain from this labor, and with how much even of joy I would give my 
pen a holiday. But if what we have read upon these subjects is either not sufficiently set forth, or is not to be 
found at all, or at any rate cannot easily be found by us, in the Latin tongue, while we are not so familiar with 
the Greek tongue as to be found in any way competent to read and understand therein the books that treat 
of such topics, in which class of writings, to judge by the little which has been translated for us, I do not doubt 
that everything is contained that we can profitably seek;(2) while yet I cannot resist my brethren when they 
exact of me, by that law by which I am made their servant, that I should minister above all to their 
praiseworthy studies in Christ by my tongue and by my pen, of which two yoked together in me, Love is the 
charioteer; and while I myself confess that I have by writing learned many things which I did not know: if this 
be so, then this my labor ought not to seem superfluous to any idle, or to any very learned reader; while it is 
needful in no small part, to many who are busy, and to many who are unlearned, and among these last to 
myself. Supported, then, very greatly, and aided by the writings we have already read of others on this 
subject, I have undertaken to inquire into and to discuss, whatever it seems to my judgment can be 
reverently inquired into and discussed, concerning the Trinity, the one supreme and supremely good God; 
He himself exhorting me to the inquiry, and helping me in the discussion of it; in order that, if there are no 
other writings of the kind, there may be something for those to have and read who are willing and capable; 
but if any exist already, then it may be so much the easier to find some such writings, the more there are of 
the kind in existence. 

2. Assuredly, as in all my writings I desire not only a pious reader, but also a free corrector, so I especially 
desire this in the present inquiry, which is so important that I would there were as many inquirers as there are 
objectors. But as I do not wish my reader to be bound down to me, so I do not wish my corrector to be bound 
down to himself. Let not the former love me more than the catholic faith, let not the latter love himself more 
than the catholic verity. As I say to the former, Do not be willing to yield to my writings as to the canonical 
Scriptures; but in these, when thou hast discovered even what thou didst not previously believe, believe it 
unhesitatingly; while in those, unless thou hast understood with certainty what thou didst not before hold as 
certain, be unwilling to hold it fast: so I say to the latter, Do not be willing to amend my writings by thine own 
opinion or disputation, but from the divine text, or by unanswerable reason. If thou apprehendest anything of 
truth in them, its being there does not make it mine, but by understanding and loving it, let it be both thine and 
mine; but if thou convictest anything of falsehood, though it have once been mine, in that I was guilty of the 
error, yet now by avoiding it let it be neither thine nor mine. 

3. Let this third book, then, take its beginning at the point to which the second had reached. For after we had 

arrived at this, I that we desired to show that the Son was not I therefore less than the Father, because the 
Father sent and the Son was sent; nor the Holy Spirit therefore less than both, because we read in the 
Gospel that He was sent both by the one and by the other; we undertook then to inquire, since the Son was 
sent thither, where He already was, for He came into the world, and "was in the world;"(1) since also the Holy 
Spirit was sent thither, where He already was, for "the Spirit of the Lord filleth the world, and that which 
containeth all things hath knowledge of the voice;"(2) whether the Lord was therefore "sent" because He 
was born in the flesh so as to be no longer hidden, and, as it were, came forth from the bosom of the Father, 
and appeared to the eyes of men in the form of a servant; and the Holy Spirit also was therefore "sent," 
because He too was seen as a dove in a corporeal form, (3) and in cloven tongues, like as of fi re ; (4) so that, 
to be sent, when spoken of them, means to go forth to the sight of mortals in some corporeal form from a 
spiritual hiding-place; which, because the Father did not, He is said only to have sent, not also to be sent. 
Our next inquiry was, Why the Father also is not sometimes said to be sent, if He Himself was manifested 
through those corporeal forms which appeared to the eyes of the ancients. But if the Son was manifested at 
these times, why should He be said to be "sent" so long after, when the fullness of time was come that He 
should be born of a woman;(5) since, indeed, He was sent before also, viz., when He appeared corporeally 
in those forms? Or if He were not rightly said to be "sent," except when the Word was made flesh;(6) why 
should the Holy Spirit be read of as "sent," of whom such an incarnation never took place? But if neither the 
Father, nor the Son, but the Holy Spirit was manifested through these ancient appearances; why should He 
too be said to be "sent" now, when He was also sent before in these various manners? Next we subdivided 
the subject, that it might be handled most carefully, and we made the question threefold, of which one part 
was explained in the second book, and two remain, which I shall next proceed to discuss. For we have 
already inquired and determined, that not only the Father, nor only the Son, nor only the Holy Spirit 
appeared in those ancient corporeal forms and visions, but either indifferently the Lord God, who is 
understood to be the Trinity itself, or some one person of the Trinity, whichever the text of the narrative might 
signify, through intimations supplied by the context. 

CHAP. 1.-WHAT IS TO BE SAID THEREUPON. 

4. Let us, then, continue our inquiry now in order. For under the second head in that division the question 
occurred, whether the creature was formed for that work only, wherein God, in such way as He then judged it 
to be fitting, might be manifested to human sight; or whether angels, who already existed, were so sent as to 
speak in the person of God, assuming a corporeal appearance from the corporeal creature for the purpose 
of their ministry; or else changing and turning their own body itself, to which they are not subject, but govern it 
as subject to themselves, into whatever forms they would, that were appropriate and fit for their actions, 
according to the power given to them by the Creator. And when this part of the question shall have been 
investigated, so far as God permit, then, lastly, we shall have to see to that question with which we started, 
viz., whether the Son and the Holy Spirit were also "sent" before; and if it be so, then what difference there is 
between that sending and the one of which we read in the Gospel; or whether neither of them were sent, 
except when either the Son was made of the Virgin Mary, or when the Holy Spirit appeared in a visible form, 
whether as a dove or in tongues of fire. (1) 

5. I confess, however, that it reaches further than my purpose can carry me to inquire whether the angels, 
secretly working by the spiritual quality of their body abiding still in them, assume somewhat from the inferior 
and more bodily elements, which, being fitted to themselves, they may change and turn like a garment into 
any corporeal appearances they will, and those appearances themselves also real, as real water was 
changed by our Lord into real wine;(2) or whether they transform their own bodies themselves into that which 
they would, suitably to the particular act. But it does not signify to the present question which of these it is. 
And although I be not able to understand these things by actual experience, seeing that I am a man, as the 
angels do who do these things, and know them better than I know them, viz., how far my body is changeable 
by the operation of my will; whether it be by my own experience of myself, or by that which I have gathered 
from others; yet it is not necessary here to say which of these alternatives I am to believe upon the authority 
of the divine Scriptures, lest I be compelled to prove it, and so my discourse become too long upon a 
subject which does not concern the present question. 

6. Our present inquiry then is, whether the angels were then the agents both in showing those bodily 
appearances to the eyes of men and in sounding those words in their ears when the sensible creature itself, 
serving the Creator at His beck, was turned for the time into whatever was needful; as it is written in the book 
of Wisdom, "For the creature serveth Thee, who art the Maker, increaseth his strength against the 
unrighteous for their punishment, and abateth his strength for the benefit of such as put their trust in Thee. 
Therefore, even then was it altered into all fashions, and was obedient to Thy grace, that nourisheth all 
things according to the of them that longed for Thee. "(3) For the power of the will of God reaches through the 
spiritual creature even to visible and sensible effects of the corporeal creature. For where does not the 

wisdom of the omnipotent God work that which He wills, which "reacheth from one end to another mightily, 
and sweetly doth order all things"?(4) 

CHAP. 2. -THE WILL OF GOD IS THE HIGHER CAUSE OF ALL CORPOREAL CHANGE. THIS 
IS SHOWN BY AN EXAMPLE. 

7. But there is one kind of natural order in the conversion and changeableness of bodies, which, although 
itself also serves the bidding of God, yet by reason of its unbroken continuity has ceased to cause wonder; 
as is the case, for instance, with those things which are changed either in very short, or at any rate not long, 
intervals of time, in heaven, or earth, or sea; whether it be in rising, or in setting, or in change of appearance 
from time to time; while there are other things, which, although arising from that same order, yet are less 
familiar on account of longer intervals of time. And these things, although the many stupidly wonder at them, 
yet are understood by those who inquire into this present world, and in the progress of generations become 
so much the less wonderful, as they are the more often repeated and known by more people. Such are the 
eclipses of the sun and moon, and some kinds of stars, appearing seldom, and earthquakes, and unnatural 
births of living creatures, and other similar things; of which not one takes place without the will of God; yet, 
that it is so, is to most people not apparent. And so the vanity of philosophers has found license to assign 
these things also to other causes, true causes perhaps, but proximate ones, while they are not able to see 
at all the cause that is higher than all others, that is, the will of God; or again to false causes, and to such as 
are not even put forward out of any diligent investigation of corporeal things and motions, but from their own 
guess and error. 

8. 1 will bring forward an example, if I can, that this may be plainer. There is, we know, in the human body, a 
certain bulk of flesh and an outward form, and an arrangement and distraction of limbs, and a temperament 
of health; and a soul breathed into it governs this body, and that soul a rational one; which, therefore, 
although changeable, yet can be partaker of that unchangeable wisdom, so that "it may partake of that 
which is in and of itself;"(5) as it is written in the Psalm concerning all saints, of whom as of living stones is 
built that Jerusalem which is the mother of us all, eternal in the heavens. For so it is sung, "Jerusalem is 
builded as a city, that is partaker of that which is in and of itself."(1) For "in and of itself," in that place, is 
understood of that chiefest and unchangeable good, which is God, and of His own wisdom and will. To 
whom is sung in another place, "Thou shalt change them, and they shall be changed; but Thou art the 
same."(2) 

CHAP. 3. --OF THE SAME ARGUMENT. 

Let us take, then, the case of a wise man, such that his rational soul is already partaker of the unchangeable 
and eternal truth, so that he consults it about all his actions, nor does anything at all, which he does not by it 
know ought to be done, in order that by being subject to it and obeying it he may do rightly. Suppose now 
that this man, upon counsel with the highest reason of the divine righteousness, which he hears with the ear 
of his heart in secret, and by its bidding, should weary his body by toil in some office of mercy, and should 
contract an illness; and upon consulting the physicians, were to be told by one that the cause of the disease 
was overmuch dryness of the body, but by another that it was overmuch moisture; one of the two no doubt 
would allege the true cause and the other would err, but both would pronounce concerning proximate 
causes only, that is, corporeal ones. But if the cause of that dryness were to be inquired into, and found to be 
the self-imposed toil, then we should have come to a yet higher cause, which proceeds from the soul so as 
to affect the body which the soul governs. Yet neither would this be the first cause, for that doubtless was a 
higher cause still, and lay in the unchangeable wisdom itself, by serving which in love, and by obeying its 
ineffable commands, the soul of the wise man had undertaken that self-imposed toil; and so nothing else but 
the will of God would be found most truly to be the first cause of that illness. But suppose now in that office of 
pious toil this wise man had employed the help of others to co-operate in the good work, who did not serve 
God with the same will as himself, but either desired to attain the reward of their own carnal desires, or 
shunned merely carnal unpleasantnesses;-suppose, too, he had employed beasts of burden, if the 
completion of the work required such a provision, which beasts of burden would be certainly irrational 
animals, and would not therefore move their limbs under their burdens because they at all thought of that 
good work, but from the natural appetite of their own liking, and for the avoiding of annoyance;-suppose, 
lastly, he had employed bodily things themselves that lack all sense, but were necessary for that work, as 
e.g. corn, and wine, and oils, clothes, or money, or a book, or anything of the kind;-certainly, in all these 
bodily things thus employed in this work, whether animate or inanimate, whatever took place of movement, 
of wear and tear, of reparation, of destruction, of renewal or of change in one way or another, as places and 
times affected them; pray, could there be, I say, any other cause of all these visible and changeable facts, 
except the invisible and unchangeable will of God, using all these, both bad and irrational souls, and lastly 

bodies, whether such as were inspired and animated by those souls, or such as lacked all sense, by 
means of that upright soul as the seat of His wisdom, since primarily that good and holy soul itself employed 
them, which His wisdom had subjected to itself in a pious and religious obedience? 

CHAP. 4. --GOD USES ALL CREATURES AS HE WILL, AND MAKES VISIBLE THINGS FOR 
THE MANIFESTATION OF HIMSELF 

9. What, then, we have alleged by way of example of a single wise man, although of one still bearing a 
mortal body and still seeing only in part, may be allowably extended also to a family, where there is a 
society of such men, or to a city, or even to the whole world, if the chief rule and government of human affairs 
were in the hands of the wise, and of those who were piously and perfectly subject to God; but because this 
is not the case as yet (for it behoves us first to be exercised in this our pilgrimage after mortal fashion, and to 
be taught with stripes by force of gentleness and patience), let us turn our thoughts to that country itself that is 
above and heavenly, from which we here are pilgrims. For there the will of God, "who maketh His angels 
spirits, and His ministers a flaming fire, "(3) presiding among spirits which are joined in perfect peace and 
friendship, and combined in one will by a kind of spiritual fire of charity, as it were in an elevated and holy 
and secret seat, as in its own house and in its own temple, thence diffuses itself through all things by certain 
most perfectly ordered movements of the creature first spiritual, then corporeal; and uses all according to 
the unchangeable pleasure of its own purpose, whether incorporeal things or things corporeal, whether 
rational or irrational spirits, whether good by His grace or evil through their own will. But as the mort gross 
and inferior bodies are governed in due order by the more subtle and powerful ones, so all bodies are 
governed by the living spirit; and the living spirit devoid of reason, by the reasonable living spirit; and the 
reasonable living spirit that makes default and sins, by the living and reasonable spirit that is pious and just; 
and that by God Himself, and so the universal creature by its Creator, from whom and through whom and in 
whom it is also created and established. (1) And so it comes to pass that the will of God is the first and the 
highest cause of all corporeal appearances and motions. For nothing is done visibly or sensibly, unless 
either by command or permission from the interior palace, invisible and intelligible, of the supreme 
Governor, according to the unspeakable justice of rewards and punishments, of favor and retribution, in that 
far-reaching and boundless commonwealth of the whole creature. 

10. If, therefore, the Apostle Paul, although he still bare the burden of the body, which is subject to corruption 
and presseth down the soul, (2) and although he still saw only in part and in an enigma, (3) wishing to depart 
and be with Christ,(4) and groaning within himself, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of his 
body, (5) yet was able to preach the Lord Jesus Christ significantly, in one way by his tongue, in another by 
epistle, in another by the sacrament of His body and blood (since, certainly, we do not call either the tongue 
of the apostle, or the parchments, or the ink, or the significant sounds which his tongue uttered, or the 
alphabetical signs written on skins, the body and blood of Christ; but that only which we take of the fruits of 
the earth and consecrate by mystic prayer, and then receive duly to our spiritual health in memory of the 
passion of our Lord for us: and this, although it is brought by the hands of men to that visible form, yet is not 
sanctified to become so great a sacrament, except by the spirit of God working invisibly; since God works 
everything that is done in that work through corporeal movements, by setting in motion primarily the invisible 
things of His servants, whether the souls of men, or the services of hidden spirits subject to Himself): what 
wonder if also in the creature of heaven and earth, of sea and air, God works the sensible and visible things 
which He wills, in order to signify and manifest Himself in them, as He Himself knows it to be fitting, without 
any appearing of His very substance itself, whereby He is, which is altogether unchangeable, and more 
inwardly and secretly exalted than all spirits whom He has created? 

CHAP. 5.--WHY MIRACLES ARE NOT USUAL WORKS. 

11. For since the divine power administers the whole spiritual and corporeal creature, the waters of the sea 
are summoned and poured out upon the face of the earth on certain days of every year. But when this was 
done at the prayer of the holy Elijah; because so continued and long a course of fair weather had gone 
before, that men were famished; and because at that very hour, in which the servant of God prayed, the air 
itself had not, by any moist aspect, put forth signs of the coming rain; the divine power was apparent in the 
great and rapid showers that followed, and by which that miracle was granted and dispensed. (6) In like 
manner, God works ordinarily through thunders and lightnings: but because these were wrought in an 
unusual manner on Mount Sinai, and those sounds were not uttered with a confused noise, but so that it 
appeared by most sure proofs that certain intimations were given by them, they were miracles. (7) Who 
draws up the sap through the root of the vine to the bunch of grapes, and makes the wine, except God; who, 
while man plants and waters, Himself giveth the increase?(8) But when, at the command of the Lord, the 
water was turned into wine with an extraordinary quickness, the divine power was made manifest, by the 

confession even of the foolish. (9) Who ordinarily clothes the trees with leaves and flowers except God? Yet, 
when the rod of Aaron the priest blossomed, the Godhead in some way conversed with doubting 
humanity. (10) Again, the earthy matter certainly serves in common to the production and formation both of all 
kinds of wood and of the flesh of all animals: and who makes these things, but He who said, Let the earth 
bring them forth;(1 1) and who governs and guides by the same word of His, those things which He has 
created? Yet, when He changed the same matter out of the rod of Moses into the flesh of a serpent, 
immediately and quickly, that change, which was unusual, although of a thing which was changeable, was a 
miracle. (1) But who is it that gives life to every living thing at its birth, unless He who gave life to that serpent 
also for the moment, as there was need. (2) 

CHAP. 6. -DIVERSITY ALONE MAKES A MIRACLE. 

And who is it that restored to the corpses their proper souls when the dead rose again, (3) unless He who 
gives life to the flesh in the mother's womb, in order that they may come into being who yet are to die? But 
when such things happen in a continuous kind of river of ever-flowing succession, passing from the hidden 
to the visible, and from the visible to the hidden, by a regular and beaten track, then they are called natural; 
when, for the admonition of men, they are thrust in by an unusual changeableness, then they are called 
miracles. 

CHAP. 7. -GREAT MIRACLES WROUGHT BY MAGIC ARTS. 

12. I see here what may occur to a weak judgment, namely, why such miracles are wrought also by magic 
arts; for the wise men of Pharaoh likewise made serpents, and did other like things. Yet it is still more a 
matter of wonder, how it was that the power of those magicians, which was able to make serpents, when it 
came to very small flies, failed altogether. For the lice, by which third plague the proud people of Egypt were 
smitten, are very short-lived little flies; yet. there certainly the magicians failed, saying, "This is the finger of 
God. "(4) And hence it is given us to understand that not even those angels and powers of the air that 
transgressed, who have been thrust down into that lowest darkness, as into a peculiar prison, from their 
habitation in that lofty ethereal purity, through whom magic arts have whatever power they have, can do 
anything except by power given from above. Now that power is given either to deceive the deceitful, as it 
was given against the Egyptians, and against the magicians also themselves, in order that in the seducing 
of those spirits they might seem admirable by whom they were wrought, but to be condemned by the truth of 
God; or for the admonishing of the faithful, lest they should desire to do anything of the kind as though it were 
a great thing, for which reason they have been handed down to us also by the authority of Scripture; or lastly, 
for the exercising, proving, and manifesting of the patience of the righteous. For it was not by any small 
power of visible miracles that Job lost all that he had, and both his children and his bodily health itself.(5) 

CHAP. 8. -GOD ALONE CREATES THOSE THINGS WHICH ARE CHANGED BY MAGIC 
ART. 

13. Yet it is not on this account to be thought that the matter of visible things is subservient to the bidding of 
those wicked angels; but rather to that of God, by whom this power is given, just so far as He, who is 
unchangeable, determines in His lofty and spiritual abode to give it. For water and fire and earth are 
subservient even to wicked men, who are condemned to the mines, in order that they may do therewith what 
they will, but only so far as is permitted. Nor, in truth, are those evil angels to be called creators, because by 
their means the magicians, withstanding the servant of God, made frogs and serpents; for it was not they 
who created them. But, in truth, some hidden seeds of all things that are born corporeally and visibly, are 
concealed in the corporeal elements of this world. For those seeds that are visible now to our eyes from 
fruits and living things, are quite distinct from the hidden seeds of those former seeds; from which, at the 
bidding of the Creator, the water produced the first swimming creatures and fowl, and the earth the first buds 
after their kind, and the first living creatures after their kind. (6) For neither at that time were those seeds so 
drawn forth into products of their several kinds, as that the power of production was exhausted in those 
products; but oftentimes, suitable combinations of circumstances are wanting, whereby they may be 
enabled to burst forth and complete their species. For, consider, the very least shoot is a seed; for, if fitly 
consigned to the earth, it produces a tree. But of this shoot there is a yet more subtle seed in some grain of 
the same species, and this is visible even to us. But of this grain also there is further still a seed, which, 
although we are unable to see it with our eyes, yet we can conjecture its existence from our reason; 
because, except there were some such power in those elements, there would not so frequently be 
produced from the earth things which had not been sown there; nor yet so many animals, without any 
previous commixture of male and female; whether on the land, or in the water, which yet grow, and by 

commingling bring forth others, while themselves sprang up without any union of parents. And certainly bees 
do not conceive the seeds of their young by commixture, but gather them as they lie scattered over the earth 
with their mouth. (1) For the Creator of these invisible seeds is the Creator of all things Himself; since 
whatever comes forth to our sight by being born, receives the first beginnings of its course from hidden 
seeds, and takes the successive increments of its proper size and its distinctive forms from these as it were 
original rules. As therefore we do not call parents the creators of men, nor farmers the creators of 
corn,-although it is by the outward application of their actions that the power(2) of God operates within for the 
creating these things;-so it is not right to think not only the bad but even the good angels to be creators, if, 
through the subtilty of their perception and body, they know the seeds of things which to us are more hidden, 
and scatter them secretly through fit temperings of the elements, and so furnish opportunities of producing 
things, and of accelerating their increase. But neither do the good angels do these things, except as far as 
God commands, nor do the evil ones do them wrongfully, except as far as He righteously permits. For the 
malignity of the wicked one makes his own will wrongful; but the power to do so, he receives rightfully, 
whether for his own punishment, or, in the case of others, for the punishment of the wicked, or for the praise of 
the good. 

14. Accordingly, the Apostle Paul, distinguishing God's creating and forming within, from the operations of 
the creature which are applied from without, and drawing a similitude from agriculture, says, "I planted, 
Apollos watered; but God gave the increase. "(3) As, therefore, in the case of spiritual life itself, no one 
except God can work righteousness in our minds, yet men also are able to preach the gospel as an 
outward means, not only the good in sincerity, but also the evil in pretence;(4) so in the creation of visible 
things it is God that works from within; but the exterior operations, whether of good or bad, of angels or men, 
or even of any kind of animal, according to His own absolute power, and to the distribution of faculties, and 
the several appetites for things pleasant, which He Himself has imparted, are applied by Him to that nature 
of things wherein He creates all things, in like manner as agriculture is to the soil. Wherefore I can no more 
call the bad angels, evoked by magic arts, the creators of the frogs and serpents, than I can say that bad 
men were creators of the corn crop, which I see to have sprung up through their labor. 

1 5. Just as Jacob, again, was not the creator of the colors in the flocks, because he placed the various 
colored rods for the several mothers, as they drank, to look at in conceiving. (5) Yet neither were the cattle 
themselves creators of the variety of their own offspring, because the variegated image, impressed through 
their eyes by the sight of the varied rods, clave to their soul, but could affect the body that was animated by 
the spirit thus affected only through sympathy with this commingling, so far as to stain with color the tender 
beginnings of their offspring. For that they are so affected from themselves, whether the soul from the body, 
or the body from the soul, arises in truth from suitable reasons, which immutably exist in that highest wisdom 
of God Himself, which no extent of place contains; and which, while it is itself unchangeable, yet quits not one 
even of those things which are changeable, because there is not one of them that is not created by itself. For 
it was the unchangeable and invisible reason of the wisdom of God, by which all things are created, which 
caused not rods, but cattle, to be born from cattle; but that the color of the cattle conceived should be in any 
degree influenced by the variety of the rods, came to pass through the soul of the pregnant cattle being 
affected through their eyes from without, and so according to its own measure drawing inwardly within itself 
the rule of formation, which it received from the innermost power of its own Creator. How great, however, may 
be the power of the soul in affecting and changing corporeal substance (although certainly it cannot be 
called the creator of the body, because every cause of changeable and sensible substance, and all its 
measure and number and weight, by which are brought to pass both its being at all and its being of such 
and such a nature, arise from the intelligible and unchangeable life, which is above all things, and which 
reaches even to the most distant and earthly things), is a very copious subject, and one not now necessary. 
But I thought the act of Jacob about the cattle should be noticed, for this reason, viz. in order that it might be 
perceived that, if the man who thus placed those rods cannot be called the creator of the colors in the lambs 
and kids; nor yet even the souls themselves of the mothers, which colored the seeds conceived in the flesh 
by the image of variegated color, conceived through the eyes of the body, so far as nature permitted it; 
much less can it be said that the creators of the frogs and serpents were the bad angel, through whom the 
magicians of Pharaoh then made them. 

CHAP. 9. -THE ORIGINAL CAUSE OF ALL THINGS IS FROM GOD. 

16. For it is one thing to make and administer the creature from the innermost and highest turning-point of 
causation, which He alone does who is God the Creator; but quite another thing to apply some operation 
from without in proportion to the strength and faculties assigned to each by Him, so that what is created may 
come forth into being at this time or at that, and in this or that way. For all these things in the way of original 
and beginning have already been created in a kind of texture of the elements, but they come forth when they 
get the opportunity. (1) For as mothers are pregnant with young, so the world itself is pregnant with the 

causes of things that are born; which are not created in it, except from that highest essence, where nothing 
either springs up or dies, either begins to be or ceases. But the applying from without of adventitious 
causes,which, although they are not natural, yet are to be applied according to nature, in order that those 
things which are contained and hidden in the secret bosom of nature may break forth and be outwardly 
created in some way by the unfolding of the proper measures and numbers and weights which they have 
received in secret from Him "who has ordered all things in measure and number and weight:"(2) this is not 
only in the power of bad angels, but also of bad men, as I have shown above by the example of agriculture. 

1 7. But lest the somewhat different condition of animals should trouble any one, in that they have the breath 
of life with the sense of desiring those things that are according to nature, and of avoiding those things that 
are contrary to it; we must consider also, how many men there are who know from what herbs or flesh, or 
from what juices or liquids you please, of whatever sort, whether so placed or so buried, or so bruised or so 
mixed, this or that animal is commonly born; yet who can be so foolish as to dare to call himself the creator 
of these animals? Is it, therefore, to be wondered at, if just as any, the most worthless of men, can know 
whence such or such worms and flies are produced; so the evil angels in proportion to the subtlety of their 
perceptions discern in the more hidden seeds of the elements whence frogs and serpents are produced, 
and so through certain and known opportune combinations applying these seeds by secret movements, 
cause them to be created, but do not create them? Only men do not marvel at those things that are usually 
done by men. But if any one chance to wonder at the quickness of those growths, in that those living beings 
were so quickly made, let him consider how even this may be brought about by men in proportion to the 
measure of human capability. For whence is it that the same bodies generate worms more quickly in 
summer than in winter, or in hotter than in colder places? Only these things are applied by men with so much 
the more difficulty, in proportion as their earthly and sluggish members are wanting in subtlety of perception, 
and in rapidity of bodily motion. And hence it arises that in the case of any kind of angels, in proportion as it 
is easier for them to draw out the proximate causes from the elements, so much the more marvellous is their 
rapidity in works of this kind. 

1 8. But He only is the creator who is the chief former of these things. Neither can any one be this, unless He 
with whom primarily rests the measure, number, and weight of all things existing; and He is God the one 
Creator, by whose unspeakable power it comes to pass, also, that what these angels were able to do if they 
were permitted, they are therefore not able to do because they are not permitted. For there is no other 
reason why they who made frogs and serpents were not able to make the most minute flies, unless 
because the greater power of God was present prohibiting them, through the Holy Spirit; which even the 
magicians themselves confessed, saying, "This is the finger of God. "(1) But what they are able to do by 
nature, yet cannot do, because they are prohibited; and what the very condition of their nature itself does not 
suffer them to do; it is difficult, nay, impossible, for man to search out, unless through that gift of God which the 
apostle mentions when he says, "To another the discerning of spirits. "(2) For we know that a man can walk, 
yet that he cannot do so if he is not permitted; but that he cannot fly, even if he be permitted. So those 
angels, also, are able to do certain things if they are permitted by more powerful angels, according to the 
supreme commandment of God; but cannot do certain other things, not even if they are permitted by them; 
because He does not permit from whom they have received such and such a measure of natural powers: 
who, even by His angels, does not usually permit what He has given them power to be able to do. 

19. Excepting, therefore, those corporeal things which are done in the order of nature in a perfectly usual 
series of times, as e.g., the rising and setting of the stars, the generations and deaths of animals, the 
innumerable diversities of seeds and buds, the vapors and the clouds, the snow and the rain, the lightnings 
and the thunder, the thunderbolts and the hail, the winds and the fire, cold and heat, and all like things; 
excepting also those which in the same order of nature occur rarely, such as eclipses, unusual 
appearances of stars, and monsters, and earthquakes, and such like; — all these, I say, are to be excepted, 
of which indeed the first and chief cause is only the will of God; whence also in the Psalm, when some things 
of this kind had been mentioned, "Fire and hail, snow and vapor, stormy wind," lest any one should think 
those to be brought about either by chance or only from corporeal causes, or even from such as are 
spiritual, but exist apart from the will of God, it is added immediately, "fulfilling His word. "(3) 

CHAP. 10. -IN HOW MANY WAYS THE CREATURE IS TO BE TAKEN BY WAY OF SIGN. 
THE EUCHARIST. 

Excepting, therefore, all these things as I just now said, there are some also of another kind; which, although 
from the same corporeal substance, are yet brought within reach of our senses in order to announce 
something from God, and these are properly called miracles and signs; yet is not the person of God Himself 
assumed in all things which are announced to us by the Lord God. When, however, that person is assumed, 
it is sometimes made manifest as art angel; sometimes in that form which is not an angel in his own proper 
being, although it is ordered and ministered by an angel. Again, when it is assumed in that form which is not 

an angel in his own proper being; sometimes in this case it is a body itself already existing, assumed after 
some kind of change, in order to make that message manifest; sometimes it is one that comes into being for 
the purpose, and that being accomplished, is discarded. Just as, also, when men are the messengers, 
sometimes they speak the words of God in their own person, as when it is premised, "The Lord said," or, 
"Thus saith the Lord, "(4) or any other such phrase, but sometimes without any such prefix, they take upon 
themselves the very person of God, as e.g.: "I will instruct time, and teach thee in the way wherein thou shalt 
go:"(5) so, not only in word, but also in act, the signifying of the person of God is imposed upon the prophet, 
in order that he may bear that person in the ministering of the prophecy; just as he, for instance, bore that 
person who divided his garment into twelve parts, and gave ten of them to the servant of King Solomon, to 
the future king of Israel. (6) Sometimes, also, a thing which was not a prophet in his own proper self, and 
which existed already among earthly things, was assumed in order to signify this; as Jacob, when he had 
seen the dream, upon waking up did with the stone, which when asleep he had under his head. (7) 
Sometimes a thing is made in the same kind, for the mere purpose; so as either to continue a little while in 
existence, as that brazen serpent was able to do which was lifted up in the wilderness, (8) and as written 
records are able to do likewise; or so as to pass away after having accomplished its ministry, as the bread 
made for the purpose is consumed in the receiving of the sacrament. 

20. But because these things are known to men, in that they are done by men, they may well meet with 
reverence as being holy things, but they cannot cause wonder as being miracles. And therefore those 
things which are done by angels are the more wonderful to us, in that they are more difficult and more known; 
but they are known and easy to them as being their own actions. An angel speaks in the person of God to 
man, saying, "I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob;" the Scripture having 
said just before, "The angel of the Lord appeared to him."(1) And a man also speaks in the person of God, 
saying, "Hear, O my people, and I will testify unto thee, O Israel: I am the Lord thy God. "(2) A rod was taken 
to serve as a sign, and was changed into a serpent by angelical power;(3) but although that power is 
wanting to man, yet a stone was taken also by man for a similar sign. (4) There is a wide difference between 
the deed of the angel and the deed of the man. The former is both to be wondered at and to be understood, 
the latter only to be understood. That which is understood from both, is perhaps one and the same; but 
those things from which it is understood, are different. Just as if the name of God were written both in gold 
and in ink; the former would be the more precious, the latter the more worthless; yet that which is signified in 
both is one and the same. And although the serpent that came from Moses' rod signified the same thing as 
Jacob's stone, yet Jacob's stone signified something better than did the serpents of the magicians. For as 
the anointing of the stone signified Christ in the flesh, in which He was anointed with the oil of gladness 
above His fellows;(5) so the rod of Moses, turned into a serpent, signified Christ Himself made obedient 
unto death, even the death of the cross. (6) Whence it is said, "And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the 
wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but 
have everlasting life;. "(7) just as by gazing on that serpent which was lifted up in the wilderness, they did not 
perish by the bites of the serpents. For "our old man is crucified with Him, that the body of sin might be 
destroyed. "(8) For by the serpent death is understood, which was wrought by the serpent in paradise, (9) the 
mode of speech expressing the effect by the efficient. Therefore the rod passed into the serpent, Christ into 
death; and the serpent again into the rod, whole Christ with His body into the resurrection; which body is the 
Church;(10) and this shall be in the end of time, signified by the tail, which Moses held, in order that it might 
return into a rod.(1 1) But the serpents of the magicians, like those who are dead in the world, unless by 
believing in Christ they shall have been as it were swallowed up by, (12) and have entered into, His body, 
will not be able to rise again in Him. Jacob's stone, therefore, as I said, signified something better than did 
the serpents of the magicians; yet the deed of the magicians was much more wonderful. But these things in 
this way are no hindrance to the understanding of the matter; just as if the name of a man were written in gold, 
and that of God in ink. 

21 . What man, again, knows how the angels made or took those clouds and fires in order to signify the 
message they were bearing, even if we supposed that the Lord or the Holy Spirit was manifested in those 
corporeal forms? Just as infants do not know of that which is placed upon the altar and consumed after the 
performance of the holy celebration, whence or in what manner it is made, or whence it is taken for religious 
use. And if they were never to learn from their own experience or that of others, and never to see that 
species of thing except during the celebration of the sacrament, when it is being offered and given; and if it 
were told them by the most weighty authority whose body and blood it is; they will believe nothing else, 
except that the Lord absolutely appeared in this form to the eyes of mortals, and that that liquid actually 
flowed from the piercing of a side(1 3) which resembled this. But it is certainly a useful caution to myself, that I 
should remember what my own powers are, and admonish my brethren that they also remember what theirs 
are, lest human infirmity pass on beyond what is safe. For how the angels do these things, or rather, how 
God does these things by His angels, and how far He wills them to be done even by the bad angels, 
whether by permitting, or commanding, or compelling, from the hidden seat of His own supreme power; this I 

can neither penetrate by the sight of the eyes, nor make clear by assurance of reason, nor be carried on to 
comprehend it by reach of intellect, so as to speak thereupon to all questions that may be asked respecting 
these matters, as certainly as if I were an angel, or a prophet, or an apostle. "For the thoughts of mortal men 
are miserable, and our devices are but uncertain. For the corruptible body presseth down the soul, and the 
earthly tabernacle weigheth down the mind, that museth upon many things. And hardly do we guess aright at 
things that are upon earth, and with labor do we find the things that are before us; but the things that are in 
heaven, who hath searched out?" But because it goes on to say, "And Thy counsel who hath known, except 
Thou give wisdom, and send Thy Holy Spirit from above;"(14) therefore we refrain indeed from searching 
out the things which are in heaven, under which kind are contained I both angelical bodies according to their 
proper dignity, and any corporeal action of those bodies; yet, according to the Spirit of God sent to us from 
above, and to His grace imparted to our minds, I dare to say confidently, that neither God the Father, nor His 
Word, nor His Spirit, which is the one God, is in any way changeable in regard to that which He is, and 
whereby He is that which He is; and much less is in this regard visible. Since there are no doubt some things 
changeable, yet not visible, as are our thoughts, and memories, and wills, and the whole incorporeal 
creature; but there is nothing that is visible that is not also changeable. 

CHAP. 11. -THE ESSENCE OF GOD NEVER APPEARED IN ITSELF. DIVINE 
APPEARANCES TO THE FATHERS WROUGHT BY THE MINISTRY OF ANGELS. AN 
OBJECTION DRAWN FROM THE MODE OF SPEECH REMOVED. THAT THE APPEARING 
OF GOD TO ABRAHAM HIMSELF, JUST AS THAT TO MOSES, WAS WROUGHT BY 
ANGELS. THE SAME THING IS PROVED BY THE LAW BEING GIVEN TO MOSES BY 
ANGELS. WHAT HAS BEEN SAID IN THIS BOOK, AND WHAT REMAINS TO BE SAID IN 
THE NEXT. 

Wherefore the substance, or, if it is better so to say, the essence of God,(1) wherein we understand, in 
proportion to our measure, in however small a degree, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit since it is in 
no way changeable, can in no way in its proper self be visible. 

22. It is manifest, accordingly, that all those appearances to the fathers, when God was presented to them 
according to His own dispensation, suitable to the times, were wrought through the creature. And if we 
cannot discern in what manner He wrought them by ministry of angels, yet we say that they were wrought by 
angels; but not from our own power of discernment, lest we should seem to any one to be wise beyond our 
measure, whereas we are wise so as to think soberly, as God hath dealt to us the measure of faith;(2) and 
we believe, and therefore speak.(3) For the authority is extant of the divine Scriptures, from which our reason 
ought not to turn aside; nor by leaving the solid support of the divine utterance, to fall headlong over the 
precipice of its own surmisings, in matters wherein neither the perceptions of the body rule, nor the clear 
reason of the truth shines forth. Now, certainly, it is written most clearly in the Epistle to the Hebrews, when the 
dispensation of the New Testament was to be distinguished from the dispensation of the Old, according to 
the fitness of ages and of times, that not only those visible things, but also the word itself, was wrought by 
angels. For it is said thus: "But to which of the angels said He at any time, Sit on my right hand, until I make 
thine enemies thy footstool? Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be 
heirs of salvation?"(4) Whence it appears that all those things were not only wrought by angels, but wrought 
also on our account, that is, on account of the people of God, to whom is promised the inheritance of eternal 
life. As it is written also to the Corinthians, "Now all these things happened unto them in a figure: and they are 
written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world arecome."(5) And then, demonstrating by plain 
consequence that as at that time the word was spoken by the angels, so now by tim Son; "Therefore," he 
says, "we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any time we should 
let them slip. For if the word spoken by angels was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience 
received a just recompense of reward; how shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation?" And then, as 
though you asked, What salvation?-in order to show that he is now speaking of the New Testament, that is, 
of the word which was spoken not by angels, but by the Lord, he says, "Which at the first began to be 
spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard Him; God also bearing them witness, 
both with signs and wonders, and with divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to His own 
will."(6) 

23. But some one may say, Why then is it written, "The Lord said to Moses;" and not, rather, The angel said 
to Moses? Because, when the crier proclaims the words of the judge, it is not usually written in the record, so 
and so the crier said, but so and so the judge. In like manner also, when the holy prophet speaks, although 
we say, The prophet said, we mean nothing else to be understood than that the Lord said; and if we were to 
say, The Lord said, we should not put the prophet aside, but only intimate who spake by him. And, indeed, 
these Scriptures often reveal the angel to be the Lord, of whose speaking it is from time to time I said, "the 
Lord said," as we have shown already. But on account of those who, since the Scripture in that place 

specifies an angel, will have the Son of God Himself and in Himself to be understood, because He is called 
an angel by the prophet, as announcing the will of His Father and of Himself; I have therefore thought fit to 
produce a plainer testimony from this epistle, where it is not said by an angel, but "by angels." 

24. For Stephen, too, in the Acts of the Apostles, relates these things in that manner in which they are also 
written in the Old Testament: "Men, brethren, and fathers, hearken," he says; "The God of glory appeared 
unto our father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia."(1) But lest any one, should think that the God of 
glory appeared then to the eyes of any mortal in that which He is in Himself, he goes on to say that an angel 
appeared to Moses. "Then fled Moses," he says, "at that saying, and was a stranger in the land of Midian, 
where he begat two sons. And when forty years were expired, there appeared to him in the wilderness of 
mount Sinai an angel of the Lord in a flame of fire in a bush. When Moses saw it, he wondered at the sight: 
and as he drew near to behold it, the voice of the Lord came unto him, saying, I am the God of thy fathers, the 
God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. Then Moses trembled, and durst not behold. 
Then said the Lord to him, Put off thy shoes from thy feet,"(3) etc. Here, certainly, he speaks both of angel 
and of Lord; and of the same as the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; as is 
written in Genesis. 

25. Can there be any one who will say that the Lord appeared to Moses by an angel, but to Abraham by 
Himself? Let us not answer this question from Stephen, but from the book itself, whence Stephen took his 
narrative. For, pray, because it is written, "And the Lord God said unto Abraham;"(3) and a little after, "And 
the Lord God appeared unto Abraham;"(4) were these things, for this reason, not done by angels? Whereas 
it is said in like manner in another place, "And the Lord appeared to him in the plains of Mature, as he sat in 
the tent door in the heat of the day;" and yet it is added immediately, "And he lift up his eyes and looked, 
and, lo, three men stood by him:"(5) of whom we have already spoken. For how will these people, who either 
will not rise from the words to the meaning, or easily throw themselves down from the meaning to the 
words,-how, I say, will they be able to explain that God was seen in three men, except they confess that they 
were angels, as that which follows also shows? Because it is not said an angel spoke or appeared to him, 
will they therefore venture to say that the vision and voice granted to Moses was wrought by an angel 
because it is so written, but that God appeared and spake in His own substance to Abraham because there 
is no mention made of an angel? What of the fact, that even in respect to Abraham an angel is not left 
unmentioned? For when his son was ordered to be offered up as a sacrifice, we read thus: "And it came to 
pass after these things that God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him, Abraham: and he said, Behold, here 
I am. And He said, Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of 
Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt-offering upon one of the mountains that I will tell thee of." Certainly God 
is here mentioned, not an angel. But a little afterwards Scripture hath it thus: "And Abraham stretched forth his 
hand, and took the knife to slay his son. And the angel of the Lord called unto him out of heaven, and said, 
Abraham, Abraham: and he said, Here am I And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou 
anything unto him." What can be answered to this? Will they say that God commanded that Isaac should be 
slain, and that an angel forbade it? and further, that the father himself, in opposition to the decree of God, 
who had commanded that he should be slain, obeyed the angel, who had bidden him spare him? Such an 
interpretation is to be rejected as absurd. Yet not even for it, gross and abject as it is, does Scripture leave 
any room, for it immediately adds: "For now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy 
son, thine only son, on account of me. "(6) What is "on account of me," except on account of Him who had 
commanded him to be slain? Was then the God of Abraham the same as the angel, or was it not rather God 
by an angel? Consider what follows. Here, certainly, already an angel has been most clearly spoken of; yet 
notice the context: "And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold behind him a ram caught in a 
thicket by his horns: and Abraham went and took the ram, and offered him up for a burnt-offering in the stead 
of his son. And Abraham called the name of that place, The Lord saw:(7) as it is said to this day, In the mount 
the Lord was seen. "(8) Just as that which a little before God said by an angel, "For now I know that thou 
fearest God;" not because it was to be understood that God then came to know, but that He brought it to 
pass that through God Abraham himself came to know what strength of heart he had to obey God, even to 
the sacrificing of his only son: after that mode of speech in which the effect is signified by the efficient,-as 
cold is said to be sluggish, because it makes men sluggish; so that He was therefore said to know, 
because He had made Abraham himself to know, who might well have not discerned the firmness of his 
own faith, had it not been proved by such a trial. So here, too, Abraham called the name of the place "The 
Lord saw," that is, caused Himself to be seen. For he goes on immediately to say, "As it is said to this day, 
In the mount the Lord was seen." Here you see the same angel is called Lord: wherefore, unless because 
the Lord spake by the angel? But if we pass on to that which follows, the angel altogether speaks as a 
prophet, and reveals expressly that God is speaking by the angel. "And the angel of the Lord," he says, 
"called unto Abraham out of heaven the second time, and said, By myself I have sworn, saith the Lord; for 
because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only son, on account of me,"(1) etc. 
Certainly these words, viz. that he by whom the Lord speaks should say, "Thus saith the Lord," are 

commonly used by the prophets also. Does the Son of God say of the Father, "The Lord saith," while He 
Himself is that Angel of the Father? What then? Do they not see how hard pressed they are about these 
three men who appeared to Abraham, when it had been said before, "The Lord appeared to him?" Were 
they not angels because they are called men? Let them read Daniel, saying, "Behold the man Gabriel. "(2) 

26. But why do we delay any longer to stop their mouths by another most clear and most weighty proof, 
where not an angel in the singular nor men in the plural are spoken of, but simply angels; by whom not any 
particular word was wrought, but the Law itself is most distinctly declared to be given; which certainly none of 
the faithful doubts that God gave to Moses for the control of the children of Israel, or yet, that it was given by 
angels. So Stephen speaks: "Ye stiff-necked," he says, "and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do 
always resist the Holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do ye. Which of the prophets have not your fathers 
persecuted? and they have slain them which showed before of the coming of the Just One; of whom ye have 
been now the betrayers and murderers: who have received the Law by the disposition of angels, (3) and 
have not kept it."(4) What is more evident than this? What more strong than such an authority? The Law, 
indeed, was given to that people by the disposition of angels; but the advent of our Lord Jesus Christ was 
by it prepared and pre-announced; and He Himself, as the Word of God, was in some wonderful and 
unspeakable manner in the angels, by whose disposition the Law itself was given. And hence He said in the 
Gospel, "For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me; for he wrote of me. "(5) Therefore then 
the Lord was speaking by the angels; and the son of God, who was to be the Mediator of God and men, 
from the seed of Abraham, was preparing His own advent by the angels, that He might find some by whom 
He would be received, confessing themselves guilty, whom the Law unfulfilled had made transgressors. 
And hence the apostle also says to the Galatians, "Wherefore then serveth the Law? It was added because 
of transgressions, till the seed should come to whom the promise was made, which [seed] was ordered(6) 
through angels in the hand of a mediator;"(7) that is, ordered through angels in His own hand. For He was 
not born in limitation, but in power. But you learn in another place that he does not mean any one of the 
angels as a mediator, but the Lord Jesus Christ Himself, in so far as He deigned to be made man: "For 
there is one God," he says, "and one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. "(8) Hence that 
passover in the killing of the lamb:(9) hence all those things which are figuratively spoken in the Law, of 
Christ to come in the flesh, and to suffer, but also to rise again, which Law was given by the disposition of 
angels; in which angels, were certainly the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit; and in which, sometimes 
the Father, sometimes the Son, sometimes the Holy Spirit, and sometimes God, without any distinction of 
person, was figuratively signified by them, although appearing in visible and sensible forms, yet by His own 
creature, not by His substance, in order to the seeing of which, hearts are cleansed through all those things 
which are seen by the eyes and heard by the ears. 

27. But now, as I think, that which we had undertaken to show in this book has been sufficiently discussed 
and demonstrated, according to our capacity; and it has been established, both by probable reason, so far 
as a man, or rather, so far as I am able, and by strength of authority, so far as the divine declarations from 
the Holy Scriptures have been made clear, that those words and bodily appearances which were given to 
these ancient fathers of ours before the incarnation of the Saviour, when God was said to appear, were 
wrought by angels: whether themselves speaking or doing something in the person of God, as we have 
shown that the prophets also were wont to do, or assuming from the creature that which they themselves 
were not, wherein God might be shown in a figure to men; which manner of showing also, Scripture teaches 
by many examples, that the prophets, too, did not omit. It remains, therefore, now for us to consider-since 
both in the Lord as born of a virgin, and in the Holy Spirit descending in a corporeal form like a dove.(1) and 
in the tongues like as of fire, which appeared with a sound from heaven on the day of Pentecost, after the 
ascension of the Lord, (2) it was not the Word of God Himself by His own substance, in which He is equal 
and eternal with the Father, nor the Spirit of the Father and of the Son by His own substance, in which He 
Himself also is equal and co-eternal with both, but assuredly a creature, such as could be formed and exist 
in these fashions, which appeared to corporeal and mortal senses,-it remains, I say, to consider what 
difference there is between these manifestations and those which were proper to the Son of God and to the 
Holy Spirit, although wrought by the visible creature;(3) which subject we shall more conveniently begin in 
another book. 

THE FIFTEEN BOOKS OF AURELIUS AUGUSTINUS, 
BISHOP OF HIPPO, ON THE TRINITY: BOOK IV 

BOOK IV. 

EXPLAINS FOR WHAT THE SON OF GOD WAS SENT, VIZ, THAT BY CHRIST'S DYING 
FOR SINNERS, WE WERE TO BE CONVINCED HOW GREAT IS GOD'S LOVE FOR US, 
AND ALSO WHAT MANNER OF MEN WE ARE WHOM HE LOVED. THAT THE WORD CAME 
IN THE FLESH, TO THE PURPOSE ALSO OF ENABLING US TO BE SO CLEANSED AS TO 
CONTEMPLATE AND CLEAVE TO GOD. THAT OUR DOUBLE DEATH WAS ABOLISHED BY 
HIS DEATH, BEING ONE AND SINGLE. AND HEREUPON IS DISCUSSED, HOW THE 
SINGLE OF OUR SAVIOUR HARMONIZES TO SALVATION WITH OUR DOUBLE; AND THE 
PERFECTION IS TREATED AT LENGTH OF THE SENARY NUMBER, TO WHICH THE 
RATIO ITSELF OF SINGLE TO DOUBLE IS REDUCIBLE. THAT ALL ARE GATHERED 
TOGETHER FROM MANY INTO ONE BY THE ONE MEDIATOR OF LIFE, VIZ. CHRIST, 
THROUGH WHOM ALONE IS WROUGHT THE TRUE CLEANSING OF THE SOUL. 
FURTHER IT IS DEMONSTRATED THAT THE SON OF GOD, ALTHOUGH MADE LESS BY 
BEING SENT, ON ACCOUNT OF THE FORM OF A SERVANT WHICH HE TOOK, IS NOT 
THEREFORE LESS THAN THE FATHER ACCORDING TO THE FORM OF GOD, BECAUSE 
HE WAS SENT BY HIMSELF: AND THAT THE SAME ACCOUNT IS TO BE GIVEN OF THE 
SENDING OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 

PREFACE. --THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD IS TO BE SOUGHT FROM GOD. 

1 . The knowledge of things terrestrial and celestial is commonly thought much of by men. Yet those 
doubtless judge better who prefer to that knowledge, the knowledge of themselves; and that mind is more 
praiseworthy which knows even its own weakness, than that which, without regard to this, searches out, and 
even comes to know, the ways of the stars, or which holds fast such knowledge already acquired, while 
ignorant of the way by which itself to enter into its own proper health and strength. But if any one has already 
become awake towards God, kindled by the warmth of the Holy Spirit, and in the love of God has become 
vile in his own eyes; and through wishing, yet not having strength to come in unto Him, and through the light 
He gives, has given heed to himself, and has found himself, and has learned that his own filthiness cannot 
mingle with His purity; and feels it sweet to weep and to entreat Him, that again and again He will have 
compassion, until he have put off all his wretchedness; and to pray confidently, as having already received 
of free gift the pledge of salvation through his only Saviour and Enlightener of man:-such an one, so acting, 
and so lamenting, knowledge does not puff up, because charity edifieth;(1) for he has preferred knowledge 
to knowledge, he has preferred to know his own weakness, rather than to know the walls of the world, the 
foundations of the earth, and the pinnacles of heaven. And by obtaining this knowledge, he has obtained 
also sorrow;(2) but sorrow for straying away from the desire of reaching his own proper country, and the 
Creator of it, his own blessed God. And if among men such as these, in the family of Thy Christ, O Lord my 
God, I groan among Thy poor, give me out of Thy bread to answer men who do not hunger and thirst after 
righteousness, but are sated and abound. (3) But it is the vain image of those things that has sated them, not 
Thy truth, which they have repelled and shrunk from, and so fall into their own vanity. I certainly know how 
many figments the human heart gives birth to. And what is my own heart but a human heart? But I pray the 
God of my heart, that I may not vomit forth (eructuem) into these writings any of these figments for solid truths, 
but that there may pass into them only what the breath of His truth has breathed into me; cast out though I am 
from the sight of His eyes,(1) and striving from afar to return by the way which the divinity of His only-begotten 
Son has made by His humanity. And this truth, changeable though I am, I so far drink in, as far as in it I see 
nothing changeable: neither in place and time, as is the case with bodies; nor in time alone, and in a certain 
sense place, as with the thoughts of our own spirits; nor in time alone, and not even in any semblance of 
place, as with some of the reasonings of our own minds. For the essence of God, whereby He is, has 
altogether nothing changeable, neither in eternity, nor in truth, nor in will; since there truth is eternal, love 
eternal; and there love is true, eternity true; and there eternity is loved, and truth is loved. 

CHAP. 1.--WE ARE MADE PERFECT BY ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF OUR OWN WEAKNESS. 

THE INCARNATE WORD DISPELS OUR DARKNESS. 

2. But since we are exiled from the unchangeable joy, yet neither cut off nor torn away from it so that we 
should not seek eternity, truth, blessedness, even in those changeable and temporal things (for we wish 
neither to die, nor to be deceived, nor to be troubled); visions have been sent to us from heaven suitable to 
our state of pilgrimage, in order to remind us that what we seek is not here, but that from this pilgrimage we 
must return thither, whence unless we originated we should not here seek these things. And first we have 
had to be persuaded how much God loved us, lest from despair we should not dare to look up to Him. And 
we needed to be shown also what manner of men we are whom He loved, test being proud, as if of our own 
merits, we should recede the more from Him, and fail the more in our own strength. And hence He so dealt 
with us, that we might the rather profit by His strength, and that so in the weakness of humility the virtue of 
charity might be perfected. And this is intimated in the Psalm, where it is said, "Thou, O God, didst send a 
spontaneous rain, whereby Thou didst make Thine inheritance perfect, when it was weary. "(2) For by 
"spontaneous rain" nothing else is meant than grace, not rendered to merit, but given freely, (3) whence also 
it is called grace; for He gave it, not because we were worthy, but because He willed. And knowing this, we 
shall not trust in ourselves; and this is to be made "weak." But He Himself makes us perfect, who says also 
to the Apostle Paul, "My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in weakness. "(4) Man, 
then, was to be persuaded how much God loved us, and what manner of men we were whom He loved; the 
former, lest we should despair; the latter, lest we should be proud. And this most necessary topic the 
apostle thus explains: "But God commendeth," he says, "His love towards us, in that, while we were yet 
sinners, Christ died for us. Much more then, being now justified by His blood, we shall be saved from wrath 
through Him. For if, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of His Son; much more, 
being reconciled, we shall be saved by His life. "(5) Also in another place: "What," he says, "shall we then 
say to these things? If God be for us, who can be against us? He that spared not His own Son, but delivered 
Him up for us all, how has He not with Him also freely given us all things?"(6) Now that which is declared to 
us as already done, was shown also to the ancient righteous as about to be done; that through the same 
faith they themselves also might be humbled, and so made weak; and might be made weak, and so 
perfected. 

3. Because therefore the Word of God is One, by which all things were made, which is the unchangeable 
truth, all things are simultaneously therein, potentially and unchangeably; not only those things which are 
now in this whole creation, but also those which have been and those which shall be. And therein they 
neither have been, nor shall be, but only are; and all things are life, and all things are one; or rather it is one 
being and one life. For all things were so made by Him, that whatsoever was made in them was not made in 
Him, but was life in Him. Since," in the beginning," the Word was not made, but "the Word was with God, and 
the Word was God, and all things were made by Him;" neither had all things been made by Him, unless He 
had Himself been before all things and not made. But in those things which were made by Him, even body, 
which is not life, would not have been made by Him, except it had been life in Him before it was made. For 
"that which was made was already life in Him;" and not life of any kind soever: for the soul also is the life of 
the body, but this too is made, for it is changeable; and by what was it made, except by the unchangeable 
Word of God? For "all things were made by Him; and without Him was not anything made that was made." 
"What, therefore, was made was already life in Him;" and not any kind of life, but "the life [which] was the light 
of men;" the light certainly of rational minds, by which men differ from beasts, and therefore are men. 
Therefore not corporeal light, which is the light of the flesh, whether it shine from heaven, or whether it be 
lighted by earthly fires; nor that of human flesh only, but also that of beasts, and down even to the minutest of 
worms. For all these things see that light: but that life was the light of men; nor is it far from any one of us, for in 
it "we live, and move, and have our being. "(1) 

CHAP. 2. -HOW WE ARE RENDERED APT FOR THE PERCEPTION OF TRUTH THROUGH 
THE INCARNATE WORD. 

4. But "the light shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not." Now the "darkness" is the 
foolish minds of men, made blind by vicious desires and unbelief. And that the Word, by whom all things 
were made, might care for these and heal them, "The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us." For our 
enlightening is the partaking of the Word, namely, of that life which is the tight of men. But for this partaking 
we were utterly unfit, and fell short of it, on account of the uncleanness of sins. Therefore we were to be 
cleansed. And further, the one cleansing of the unrighteous and of the proud is the blood of the Righteous 
One, and the humbling of God Himself;(2) that we might be cleansed through Him, made as He was what we 
are by nature, and what we are not by sin, that we might contemplate God, which by nature we are not. For 
by nature we are not God: by nature we are men, by sin we are not righteous. Wherefore God, made a 
righteous man, interceded with God for man the sinner. For the sinner is not congruous to the righteous, but 

man is congruous to man. By joining therefore to us the likeness of His humanity, He took away the 
unlikeness of our unrighteousness; and by being made partaker of our mortality, He made us partakers of 
His divinity. For the death of the sinner springing from the necessity of comdemnation is deservedly 
abolished by the death of the Righteous One springing from the free choice of His compassion, while His 
single [death and resurrection] answers to our double [death and resurrection]. (3) For this congruity, or 
suitableness, or concord, or consonance, or whatever more appropriate word there may be, whereby one 
is [united] to two, is of great weight in all compacting, or better, perhaps, co-adaptation, of the creature. For 
(as it just occurs to me) what I mean is precisely that co-adaptation which the Greeks call 
<greek>armonia</greek>. However this is not the place to set forth the power of that consonance of single 
to double which is found especially in us, and which is naturally so implanted in us (and by whom, except by 
Him who created us?), that not even the ignorant can fail to perceive it, whether when singing themselves or 
hearing others. For by this it is that treble and bass voices are in harmony, so that any one who in his note 
departs from it, offends extremely, not only trained skill, of which the most part of men are devoid, but the 
very sense of hearing. To demonstrate this, needs no doubt a long discourse; but any one who knows it, 
may make it plain to the very ear in a rightly ordered monochord. 

CHAP. 3. -THE ONE DEATH AND RESURRECTION OF THE, BODY OF CHRIST 
HARMONIZES WITH OUR DOUBLE DEATH AND RESURRECTION OF BODY AND SOUL, 
TO THE EFFECT OF SALVATIONS IN WHAT WAY THE SINGLE DEATH OF CHRIST IS 
BESTOWED UPON OUR DOUBLE DEATH. 

5. But for our present need we must discuss, so far as God gives us power, in what manner the single of our 
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ answers to, and is, so to say, in harmony with our double to the effect of 
salvation. We certainly, as no Christian doubts, are dead both in soul and body: in soul, because of sin; in 
body, because of the punishment of sin, and through this also in body because of sin. And to both these 
parts of ourselves, that is, both to soul and to body, there was need both of a medicine and of resurrection, 
that what had been changed for the worse might be renewed for the better. Now the death of the soul is 
ungodliness, and the death of the body is corruptibility, through which comes also a departure of the soul 
from the body. For as the soul dies when God leaves it, so the body dies when the soul leaves it; whereby 
the former becomes foolish, the latter lifeless. For the soul is raised up again by repentance, and the 
renewing of life is begun in the body still mortal by faith, by which men believe on Him who justifies the 
ungodly ;(1) and it is increased and strengthened by good habits from day to day, as the inner man is 
renewed more and more. (2) But the body, being as it were the outward man, the longer this life lasts is so 
much the more corrupted, either by age or by disease, or by various afflictions, until it come to that last 
affliction which all call death. And its resurrection is delayed until the end; when also our justification itself 
shall be perfected ineffably. For then we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is. (3) But now, so long 
as the corruptible body presseth down the soul, (4) and human life upon earth is all temptation, (5) in His sight 
shall no man living be justified, (6) in comparison of the righteousness in which we shall be made equal with 
the angels, and of the glory which shall be revealed in us. But why mention more proofs respecting the 
difference between the death of the soul and the death of the body, when the Lord in one sentence of the 
Gospel has made either death easily distinguishable by any one from the other, where He says, "Let the 
dead bury their dead"?(7) For burial was the fitting disposal of a dead body. But by those who were to bury it 
He meant those who were dead in soul by the impiety of unbelief, such, namely, as are awakened when it is 
said, "Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. "(8) And there is a 
death which the apostle denounces, saying of the widow, "But she that liveth in pleasure is dead while she 
liveth."(9) Therefore the soul, which was before ungodly and is now godly, is said to have come alive again 
from the dead and to live, on account of the righteousness of faith. But the body is not only said to be about 
to die, on account of that departure of the soul which will be; but on account of the great infirmity of flesh and 
blood it is even said to be now dead, in a certain place in the Scriptures, namely, where the apostle says, 
that "the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is life because of righteousness. "(10) Now this life is 
wrought by faith, "since the just shall live by faith, "(11) But what follows? "But if the spirit of Him that raised up 
Jesus from the dead dwell in you, He that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal 
bodies by His Spirit which dwelleth in you. "(12) 

6. Therefore on this double death of ours our Saviour bestowed His own single death; and to cause both our 
resurrections, He appointed beforehand and set forth in mystery and type His own one resurrection. For He 
was not a sinner or ungodly, that, as though dead in spirit, He should need to be renewed in the inner man, 
and to be recalled as it were to the life of righteousness by repentance; but being clothed in mortal flesh, 
and in that alone dying, in that alone rising again, in that alone did He answer to both for us; since in it was 
wrought a mystery as regards the inner man, and a type as regards the outer. For it was in a mystery as 
regards our inner man, so as to signify the death of our soul, that those words were uttered, not only in the 

Psalm, but also on the cross: "My God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken me?"(13) To which words the 
apostle agrees, saying, "Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with Him, that the body of sin might be 
destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin;" since by the crucifixion of the tuner man are understood 
the pains of repentance, and a certain wholesome agony of self-control, by which death the death of 
ungodliness is destroyed, and in which death God has left us. And so the body of sin is destroyed through 
such a cross, that now we should not yield our members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin. (14) 
Because, if even the inner man certainly is renewed day by day, (15) yet undoubtedly it is old before it is 
renewed. For that is done inwardly of which the same apostle speaks: "Put off the old man, and put on the 
new;" which he goes on to explain by saying, "Wherefore, putting away lying, speak every man truth. "(16) 
But where is lying put away, unless inwardly, that he who speaketh the truth from his heart may inhabit the 
holy hill of God?(1 7) But the resurrection of the body of the Lord is shown to belong to the mystery of our own 
inner resurrection, where, after He had risen, He says to the woman, "Touch me not, for I am not yet 
ascended to my Father;"(18) with which mystery the apostle's words agree, where he says, "If ye then be 
risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God; set your 
thoughts(1 9) on things above. "(20) For not to touch Christ, unless when He had ascended to the Father, 
means not to havethoughts(21) of Christ altera fleshly manner. Again, the death of the flesh of our Lord 
contains a type of the death of our outer man, since it is by such suffering most of all that He exhorts His 
servants that they should not fear those who kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul.(1) Wherefore the 
apostle says, "That I may fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh. "(2) And the 
resurrection of the body of the Lord is found to contain a type of the resurrection of our outward man, 
because He says to His disciples, "Handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me 
have. "(3) And one of the disciples also, handling His scars, exclaimed, "My Lord and my God!"(4) And 
whereas the entire integrity of that flesh was apparent, this was shown in that which He had said when 
exhorting His disciples: "There shall not a hair of your head perish. "(5) For how comes it that first is said, 
"Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father;"(6) and how comes it that before He ascends to the 
Father, He actually is touched by the disciples: unless because in the former the mystery of the inner man 
was intimated, in the latter a type was given of the outer man? Or can any one possibly be so without 
understanding, and so turned away from the truth, as to dare to say that He was touched by men before He 
ascended, but by women when He had ascended? It was on account of this type, which went before in the 
Lord, of our future resurrection in the body, that the apostle says, "Christ the first-fruits; afterward they that are 
Christ's. "(7) For it was the resurrection of the body to which this place refers, on account of which he also 
says, "Who has changed our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto His glorious body. "(8) The one 
death therefore of our Saviour brought salvation to our double death, and His one resurrection wrought for 
us two resurrections; since His body in both cases, that is, both in His death and in His resurrection, was 
ministered to us by a kind of healing suitableness, both as a mystery of the inner man, and as a type of the 
outer. 

CHAP. 4.--THE RATIO OF THE SINGLE TO THE DOUBLE COMES FROM THE 
PERFECTION OF THE SENARY NUMBER. THE PERFECTION OF THESENARY NUMBER 
IS COMMENDED IN THE SCRIPTURES. THE YEAR ABOUNDS IN THESENARY NUMBER. 

7. Now this ratio of the single to the double arises, no doubt, from the ternary number, since one added to 
two makes three; but the whole which these make reaches to the senary, for one and two and three make 
six. And this number is on that account called perfect, because it is completed in its own parts: for it has 
these three, sixth, third, and half; nor is there any other part found in it, which we can call an aliquot part. The 
sixth part of it, then, is one; the third part, two; the half, three. But one and two and three complete the same 
six. And Holy Scripture commends to us the perfection of this number, especially in this, that God finished 
His works in six days, and on the sixth day man was made in the image of God. (9) And the Son of God came 
and was made the Son of man, that He might re-create us after the image of God, in the sixth age of the 
human race. For that is now the present age, whether a thousand years apiece are assigned to each age, 
or whether we trace out memorable and remarkable epochs or turning-points of time in the divine Scriptures, 
so that the first age is to be found from Adam until Noah, and the second thence onwards to Abraham, and 
then next, after the division of Matthew the evangelist, from Abraham to David, from David to the carrying 
away to Babylon, and from thence to the travail of the Virgin, (10) which three ages joined to those other two 
make five. Accordingly, the nativity of the Lord began the sixth, which is now going onwards until the hidden 
end of time. We recognize also in this senary number a kind of figure of time, in that threefold mode of 
division, by which we compute one portion of time before the Law; a second, under the Law; a third, under 
grace. In which last time we have received the sacrament of renewal, that we may be renewed also in the 
end of time, in every part, by the resurrection of the flesh, and so may be made whole from our entire 
infirmity, not only of soul, but also of body. And thence that woman is understood to be a type of the church, 

who was made whole and upright by the Lord, after she had been bowed by infirmity through the binding of 
Satan. For those words of the Psalm lament such hidden enemies: "They bowed down my soul."(1 1) And 
this woman had her infirmity eighteen years, which is thrice six. And the months of eighteen years are found 
in number to be the cube of six, viz. six times six times six. Nearly, too, in the same place in the Gospel is that 
fig tree, which was convicted also by the third year of its miserable barrenness. But intercession was made 
for it, that it might be let alone that year, that year, that if it bore fruit, well; if otherwise, it should be cut 
clown. (12) For both three years belong to the same threefold division, and the months of three years make 
the square of six, which is six times six. 

8. A single year also, if the whole twelve months are taken into account, which are made up of thirty days 
each (for the month that has been kept from of old is that which the revolution of the moon determines), 
abounds in the number six. For that which six is, in the first order of numbers, which consists of units up to ten, 
that sixty is in the second order, which consists of tens up to a hundred. Sixty days, then, are a sixth part of 
the year. Further, if that which stands as the sixth of the second order is multiplied by the sixth of the first 
order, then we make six times sixty, i.e. three hundred and sixty days, which are the whole twelve months. 
But since, as the revolution of the moon determines the month for men, so the year is marked by the 
revolution of the sun; and five days and a quarter of a day remain, that the sun may fulfill its course and end 
the year; for four quarters make one day, which must be intercalated in every fourth year, which they call 
bissextile, that the order of time may not be disturbed: if we consider, also, these five days and a quarter 
themselves, the number six prevails in them. First, because, as it is usual to compute the whole from a part, 
we must not call it five days, but rather six, taking the quarter days for one day. Next, because five days 
themselves are the sixth part of a month; while the quarter of a day contains six hours. For the entire day, i.e. 
including its night, is twenty-four hours, of which the fourth part, which is a quarter of a day, is found to he six 
hours. So much in the course of the year does the sixth number prevail. 

CHAP. 5.--THE NUMBER SIX IS ALSO COMMENDED IN THE BUILDING UP OF THE BODY 
OF CHRIST AND OF THE TEMPLE AT JERUSALEM. 

9. And not without reason is the number six understood to be put for a year in the building up of the body of 
the Lord, as a figure of which He said that He would raise up in three days the temple destroyed by the 
Jews. For they said, "Forty and six years was this temple in building. "(1) And six times forty-six makes two 
hundred and seventy-six. And this number of days completes nine months and six days, which are 
reckoned, as it were, ten months for the travail of women; not because all come to the sixth day after the ninth 
month, but because the perfection itself of the body of the Lord is found to have been brought in so many 
days to the birth, as the authority of the church maintains upon the tradition of the elders. For He is believed 
to have been conceived on the 25th of March, upon which day also He suffered; so the womb of the Virgin, 
in which He was conceived, where no one of mortals was begotten, corresponds to the new grave in which 
He was buried, wherein was never man laid, (2) neither before nor since. But He was born, according to 
tradition, upon December the 25th. If, then you reckon from that day to this you find two hundred and 
seventy-six days which is forty-six times six. And in this number of years the temple was built, because in that 
number of sixes the body of the Lord was perfected; which being destroyed by the suffering of death, He 
raised again on the third day. For "He spake this of the temple of His body, "(3) as is declared by the most 
clear and solid testimony of the Gospel; where He said, "For as Jonas was three days and three nights in 
the whale's belly, so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth. "(4) 

CHAP. 6. -THE THREE DAYS OF THE RESURRECTION, IN WHICH ALSO THE RATIO OF 
SINGLE, TO DOUBLE IS APPARENT. 

1 0. Scripture again witnesses that the space of those three days themselves was not whole and entire, but 
the first day is counted as a whole from its last part, and the third day is itself also counted as a whole from 
its first part; but the intervening day, i.e. the second day, was absolutely a whole with its twenty-four hours, 
twelve of the day and twelve of the night. For He was crucified first by the voices of the Jews in the third hour, 
when it was the sixth day of the week. Then He hung on the cross itself at the sixth hour, and yielded up His 
spirit at the ninth hour.(5) But He was buried, "now when the even was come," as the words of the evangelist 
express it;(6) which means, at the end of the day. Wheresoever then you begin, -even if some other 
explanation can be given, so as not to contradict the Gospel of John, (7) but to understand that He was 
suspended on the cross at the third hour,— still you cannot make the first day an entire day. It will be 
reckoned then an entire day from its last part, as the third from its first part. For the night up to the dawn, when 
the resurrection of the Lord was made known, belongs to the third day; because God (who commanded the 
light to shine out of darkness, (1) that through the grace of the New Testament and the partaking of the 
resurrection of Christ the words might be spoken to us "For ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye 

light in the Lord"(2)) intimates to us in some way that the day takes its beginning from the night. For as the first 
days of all were reckoned from light to night, on account of the future fall of man;(3) so these on account of 
the restoration of man, are reckoned from darkness to light. From the hour, then, of His death to the dawn of 
the resurrection are forty hours, counting in also the ninth hour itself. And with this number agrees also His life 
upon earth of forty days after His resurrection. And this number is most frequently used in Scripture to 
express the mystery of perfection in the fourfold world. For the number ten has a certain perfection, and that 
multiplied by four makes forty. But from the evening of the burial to the dawn of the resurrection are thirty-six 
hours which is six squared. And this is referred to that ratio of the single to the double wherein there is the 
greatest consonance of co-adaptation. For twelve added to twenty-four suits the ratio of single added to 
double and makes thirty-six: namely a whole night with a whole day and a whole night, and this not without 
the mystery which I have noticed above. For not unfitly do we liken the spirit to the day and the body to the 
night. For the body of the Lord in His death and resurrection was a figure of our spirit and a type of our body. 
In this way, then, also that ratio of the single to the double is apparent in the thirty-six hours, when twelve are 
added to twenty-four. As to the reasons, indeed, why these numbers are so put in the Holy Scriptures, other 
people may trace out other reasons, either such that those which I have given are to be preferred to them, or 
such as are equally probable with mine, or even more probable than they are; but there is no one surely so 
foolish or so absurd as to contend that they are so put in the Scriptures for no purpose at all, and that there 
are no mystical reasons why those numbers are there mentioned. But those reasons which I have here 
given, I have either gathered from the authority of the church, according to the tradition of our forefathers, or 
from the testimony of the divine Scriptures, or from the nature itself of numbers and of similitudes. No sober 
person will decide against reason, no Christian against the Scriptures, no peaceable person against the 
church. 

CHAP. 7. --IN WHAT MANNER WE ARE GATHERED FROM MANY INTO ONE THROUGH 
ONE MEDIATOR. 

1 1 . This mystery, this sacrifice, this priest, this God, before He was sent and came, being made of a 
woman-of Him, all those things which appeared to our fathers in a sacred and mystical way by angelical 
miracles, or which were done by the fathers themselves, were similitudes; in order that every creature by its 
acts might speak in some way of that One who was to be, in whom there was to be salvation in the recovery 
of all from death. For because by the wickedness of ungodliness we had recoiled and fallen away in 
discord from the one true and supreme God, and had in many things become vain, being distracted through 
many things and cleaving fast to many things; it was needful, by the decree and command of God in His 
mercy, that those same many things should join in proclaiming the One that should come, and that One 
should come so proclaimed by these many things, and that these many things should join in witnessing that 
this One had come; and that so, freed from the burden of these many things, we should come to that One, 
and dead as we were in our souls by many sins, and destined to die in the flesh on account of sin, that we 
should love that One who, without sin, died in the flesh for us; and by believing in Him now raised again, and 
by rising again with Him in the spirit through faith, that we should be justified by being made one in the one 
righteous One; and that we should not despair of our own resurrection in the flesh itself, when we consider 
that the one Head had gone before us the many members; in whom, being now cleansed through faith, and 
then renewed by sight, and through Him as mediator reconciled to God, we are to cleave to the One, to feast 
upon the One, to continue one. 

CHAP. 8. --IN WHAT MANNER CHRIST WILLS THAT ALL SHALL BE ONE IN HIMSELF. 

12. So the Son of God Himself, the Word of God, Himself also the Mediator between God and men, the Son 
of man, (4) equal to the Father through the unity of the Godhead, and partaker with us by the taking upon Him 
of humanity, interceding for us with the Father in that He was man, (5) yet not concealing that He was God, 
one with the Father, among other things speaks thus: "Neither pray I for these alone," He says, "but for them 
also which shall believe on me through their word; that they all may be one; as Thou, Father, art in me, and I 
in Thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that Thou hast sent me. And the glory 
which Thou gavest me I have given them; that they may be one, even as we are one."(1) 

CHAP. 9. -THE SAME ARGUMENT CONTINUED. 

He did not say, I and they are one thing; although, in that He is the head of the church which is His body, (3) 
He might have said, and they are, not one thing, (4) but one person, (5) because the head and the body is 
one Christ; but in order to show His own Godhead consubstantial with the Father (for which reason He says 
in another place, "I and my Father are one"(6)), in His own kind, that is, in the consubstantial parity of the 

same nature, He wills His own to be one, (7) but in Himself; since they could not be so in themselves, 
separated as they are one from another by divers pleasures and desires and uncleannesses of sin; 
whence they are cleansed through the Mediator, that they may be one(8) in Him, not only through the same 
nature in which all become from mortal men equal to the angels, but also through the same will most 
harmoniously conspiring to the same blessedness, and fused in some way by the fire of charity into one 
spirit. For to this His words come, "That they may be one, even as we are one;" namely, that as the Father 
and Son are one, not only in equality of substance, but also in will, so those also may be one, between 
whom and God the Son is mediator, not only in that they are of the same nature, but also through the same 
union of love. And then He goes on thus to intimate the truth itself, that He is the Mediator, through whom we 
are reconciled to God, by saying, "I in them, and Thou in me, that they may be made perfect ill one. "(9) 

CHAP. 10. -AS CHRIST IS THE MEDIATOR OF LIFE, SO THE DEVIL IS THE MEDIATOR OF 
DEATH. 

13. Therein is our true peace and firm bond of union with our Creator, that we should be purified and 
reconciled through the Mediator of life, as we had been polluted and alienated, and so had departed from 
Him, through the mediator of death. For as the devil through pride led man through pride to death; so Christ 
through lowliness led back man through obedience to life. Since, as the one fell through being lifted up, and 
cast down [man] also who consented to him; so the other was raised up through being abased, and lifted up 
[man] also who believed in Him. For because the devil had not himself come thither whither he had led the 
way (inasmuch as he bare indeed in his ungodliness the death of the spirit, but had not undergone the death 
of the flesh, because he had not assumed the covering of the flesh), he appeared to man to be a mighty 
chief among the legions of devils, through whom he exercises his reign of deceits; so puffing up man the 
more, who is eager for power more than righteousness, through the pride of elation, or through false 
philosophy; or else entangling him through sacrilegious rites, in which, while casting down headlong by 
deceit and illusion the minds of the more curious and prouder sort, he holds him captive also to magical 
trickery; promising too the cleansing of the soul, through those initiations which they call 
<greek>teletai</greek>, by transforming himself into an angel of light,(10) through divers machinations in 
signs and prodigies of lying. 

CHAP. 11. -MIRACLES WHICH ARE DONE BY DEMONS ARE TO BE SPURNED. 

1 4. For it is easy for the most worthless spirits to do many things by means of aerial bodies, such as to 
cause wonder to souls which are weighed down by earthly bodies, even though they be of the better 
inclined. For if earthly bodies themselves, when trained by a certain skill and practice, exhibit to men so 
great marvels in theatrical spectacles, that they who never saw such things scarcely believe them when 
told; why should it be hard for the devil and his angels to make out of corporeal elements, through their own 
aerial bodies, things at which the flesh marvels; or even by hidden inspirations to contrive fantastic 
appearances to the deluding of men's senses, whereby to deceive them, whether awake or asleep, or to 
drive them into frenzy? But just as it may happen that one who is better than they in life and character may 
gaze at the most worthless of men, either walking on a rope, or doing by various motions of the body many 
things difficult of belief, and yet he may not at all desire to do such things, nor think those men on that 
account to be preferred to himself; so the faithful and pious soul, not only if it sees, but even if on account of 
the frailty of the flesh it shudders at, the miracles of demons; yet will not for that either deplore its own want of 
power to do such things, or judge them on this account to be better than itself; especially since it is in the 
company of the holy, who, whether they are men or good angels, accomplish, through the power of God, to 
whom all things are subject, wonders which are far greater and the very reverse of deceptive. 

CHAP. 12. -THE DEVIL THE MEDIATOR OF DEATH, CHRIST OF LIFE. 

15. In no wise therefore are souls cleansed and reconciled to God by sacrilegious imitations, or curious arts 
that are impious, or magical incantations; since the false mediator does not translate them to higher things, 
but rather blocks and cuts off the way thither through the affections, malignant in proportion as they are 
proud, which he inspires into those of his own company; which are not able to nourish the wings of virtues so 
as to fly upwards, but rather to heap up the weight of vices so as to press downwards; since the soul will fall 
down the more heavily, the more it seems to itself to have been carried upwards. Accordingly, as the Magi 
did when warned of God,(1) whom the star led to adore the low estate of the Lord; so we also ought to return 
to our country, not by the way by which we came, but by another way which the lowly King has taught, and 
which the proud king, the adversary of that lowly King, cannot block up. For to us, too, that we may adore the 
lowly Christ, the "heavens have declared the glory of God, when their sound went into all the earth, and their 

words to the ends of the world. "(2) A way was made for us to death through sin in Adam. For, "By one man 
sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, in whom all have 
sinned. "(3) Of this way the devil was the mediator, the persuader to sin, and the caster down into death. For 
he, too, applied his one death to work out our double death. Since he indeed died in the spirit through 
ungodliness, but certainly did not die in the flesh: yet both persuaded us to ungodliness, and thereby 
brought it to pass that we deserved to come into the death of the flesh. We desired therefore the one through 
wicked persuasion, the other followed us by a just condemnation; and therefore it is written, "God made not 
death, "(4) since He was not Himself the cause of death; but yet death was inflicted on the sinner, through His 
most just retribution. Just as the judge inflicts punishment on the guilty; yet it is not the justice of the judge, but 
the desert of the crime, which is the cause of the punishment. Whither, then, the mediator of death caused us 
to pass, yet did not come himself, that is, to the death of the flesh, there our Lord God introduced for us the 
medicine of correction, which He deserved not, by a hidden and exceeding mysterious decree of divine 
and profound justice. In order, therefore, that as by one man came death, so by one man might come also 
the resurrection of the dead;(5) because men strove more to shun that which they could not shun, viz. the 
death of the flesh, than the death of the spirit, i.e. punishment more than the desert of punishment (for not to 
sin is a thing about which either men are not solicitous or are too little solicitous; but not to die, although it be 
not within reach of attainment, is yet eagerly sought after); the Mediator of life, making it plain that death is not 
to be feared, which by the condition of humanity cannot now be escaped, but rather ungodliness, which can 
be guarded against through faith, meets us at the end to which we have come, but not by the way by which 
we came. For we, indeed, came to death through sin; He through righteousness: and, therefore, as our 
death is the punishment of sin, so His death was made a sacrifice for sin. 

CHAP. 13. -THE DEATH OF CHRIST VOLUNTARY. HOW THE MEDIATOR OF LIFE 
SUBDUED THE MEDIATOR OF DEATH. HOW THE DEVIL LEADS HIS OWN TO DESPISE 
THE DEATH OF CHRIST. 

16. Wherefore, since the spirit is to be preferred to the body, and the death of the spirit means that God has 
left it, but the death of the body that the spirit has left it; and since herein lies the punishment in the death of 
the body, that the spirit leaves the body against its will, because it left God willingly; so that, whereas the 
spirit left God because it would, it leaves the body although it would not; nor leaves it when it would, unless it 
has offered violence to itself, whereby the body itself is slain: the spirit of the Mediator showed how it was 
through no punishment of sin that He came to the death of the flesh, because He did not leave it against His 
will, but because He willed, when He willed, as He willed. For because He is so commingled [with the flesh] 
by the Word of God as to be one, He says: "I have power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it 
again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay down my life that I might take it again. "(6) And, as the Gospel tells 
us, they who were present were most astonished at this, that after that [last] word, in which He set forth the 
figure of our sin, He immediately gave up His spirit. For they who are hung on the cross are commonly 
tortured by a prolonged death. Whence it was that the legs of the thieves were broken, in order that they 
might die directly, and be taken down from the cross before the Sabbath. And that He was found to be dead 
already, caused wonder. And it was this also, at which, as we read, Pilate marvelled, when the body of the 
Lord was asked of him for burial. (1) 

1 7. Because that deceiver then,-who was a mediator to death for man, and feignedly puts himself forward 
as to life, under the name of cleansing by sacrilegious rites and sacrifices, by which the proud are led away, 
— can neither share in our death, nor rise again from his own: he has indeed been able to apply his single 
death to our double one; but he certainly has not been able to apply a single resurrection, which should be 
at once a mystery of our renewal, and a type of that waking up which is to be in the end. He then who being 
alive in the spirit raised again His own flesh that was dead, the true Mediator of life, has cast out him, who is 
dead in the spirit and the mediator of death, from the spirits of those who believe in Himself, so that he 
should not reign within, But should assault from without, and yet not prevail. And to him, too, He offered 
Himself to be tempted, in order that He might be also a mediator to overcome his temptations, not only by 
succor, but also by example. But when the devil, from the first, although striving through every entrance to 
creep into His inward parts, was thrust out, having finished all his alluring temptation in the wilderness after 
the baptism;(2) because, being dead in the spirit, he forced no entrance into Him who was alive in the spirit, 
he betook himself, through eagerness for the death of man in any way whatsoever, to effecting that death 
which he could, and was permitted to effect it upon that mortal element which the living Mediator had 
received from us. And where he could do anything, there in every respect he was conquered; and wherein 
he received outwardly the power of slaying the Lord in the flesh, therein his inward power, by which he held 
ourselves, was slain. For it was brought to pass that the bonds of many sins in many deaths were loosed, 
through the one death of One which no sin had preceded. Which death, though not due, the Lord therefore 
rendered for us, that the death which was due might work us no hurt. For He was not stripped of the flesh by 

obligation of any authority, but He stripped Himself. For doubtless He who was able not to die, if He would 
not, did die because He would: and so He made a show of principalities and powers, openly triumphing 
over them in Himself.(3) For whereas by His death the one and most real sacrifice was offered up for us, 
whatever fault there was, whence principalities and powers held us fast as of right to pay its penalty, He 
cleansed, abolished, extinguished; and by His own resurrection He also called us whom He predestinated 
to a new life; and whom He called, them He justified; and whom He justified, them He glorified. (4) And so the 
devil, in that very death of the flesh, lost man, whom he was possessing as by an absolute right, seduced as 
he was by his own consent, and over whom he ruled, himself impeded by no corruption of flesh and blood, 
through that frailty of man's mortal body, whence he was both too poor and too weak; he who was proud in 
proportion as he was, as it were, both richer and stronger, ruling over him who was, as it were, both clothed 
in rags and full of troubles. For whither he drove the sinner to fall, himself not following, there by following he 
compelled the Redeemer to descend. And so the Son of God deigned to become our friend in the 
fellowship of death, to which because he came not, the enemy thought himself to be better and greater than 
ourselves. For our Redeemer says, "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his 
friends. "(5) Wherefore also the devil thought himself superior to the Lord Himself, inasmuch as the Lord in 
His sufferings yielded to him; for of Him, too, is understood what is read in the Psalm, "For Thou hast made 
Him a little lower than the angels:"(6) so that He, being Himself put to death, although innocent, by the unjust 
one acting against us as it were by just right, might by a most just right overcome him, and so might lead 
captive the captivity wrought through sin, (7) and free us from a captivity that was just on account of sin, by 
blotting out the handwriting, and redeeming us who were to be justified although sinners, through His own 
righteous blood unrighteously poured out. 

18. Hence also the devil mocks those who are his own until this very day, to whom he presents himself as a 
false mediator, as though they would be cleansed or rather entangled and drowned by his rites, in that he 
very easily persuades the proud to ridicule and despise the death of Christ, from which the more he himself 
is estranged, the more is he believed by them to be the holier and more divine. Yet those who have 
remained with him are very few, since the nations acknowledge and with pious humility imbibe the price 
paid for themselves, and in trust upon it abandon their enemy, and gather together to their Redeemer. For 
the devil does not know how the most excellent wisdom of God makes use of both his snares and his fury to 
bring about the salvation of His own faithful ones, beginning from the former end, which is the beginning of 
the spiritual creature, even to the latter end, which is the death of the body, and so "reaching from the one 
end to the other, mightily and sweetly ordering all things. "(1) For wisdom "passeth and goeth through all 
things by reason other pureness, and no defiled thing can fall into her."(2) And since the devil has nothing to 
do with the death of the flesh, whence comes his exceeding pride, a death of another kind is prepared in the 
eternal fire of hell, by which not only the spirits that have earthly, but also those who have aerial bodies, can 
be tormented. But proud men, by whom Christ is despised, because He died, wherein He bought us with so 
great a price, (3) both bring back the former death, and also men, to that miserable condition of nature, which 
is derived from the first sin, and will be cast down into the latter death with the devil. And they on this account 
preferred the devil to Christ, because the former cast them into that former death, whither he himself fell not 
through the difference of his nature, and whither on account of them Christ descended through His great 
mercy: and yet they do not hesitate to believe themselves better than the devils, and do not cease to assail 
and denounce them with every sort of malediction, while they know them at any rate to have nothing to do 
with the suffering of this kind of death, on account of which they despise Christ. Neither will they take into 
account that the case may possibly be, that the Word of God, remaining in Himself, and in Himself in no way 
changeable, may yet, through the taking upon Him of a lower nature, be able to suffer somewhat of a lower 
kind, which the unclean spirit cannot suffer, because he has not an earthly body. And so, whereas they 
themselves are better than the devils, yet, because they bear a body of flesh, they can so die, as the devils 
certainly cannot die, who do not bear such a body. They presume much on the deaths of their own 
sacrifices, which they do not perceive that they sacrifice to deceitful and proud spirits; or if they have come 
to perceive it. think their friendship to be of some good to themselves, treacherous and envious although 
they are, whose purpose is bent upon nothing else except to hinder our return. 

CHAP. 14. --CHRIST THE MOST PERFECT VICTIM FOR CLEANSING OUR FAULTS. IN 
EVERY SACRIFICE FOUR THINGS ARE TO BE CONSIDERED. 

19. They do not understand, that not even the proudest of spirits themselves could rejoice in the honor of 
sacrifices, unless a true sacrifice was due to the one true God, in whose stead they desire to be 
worshipped: and that this cannot be rightly offered except by a holy and righteous priest; nor unless that 
which is offered be received from those for whom it is offered; and unless also it be without fault, so that it 
may be offered for cleansing the faulty. This at least all desire who wish sacrifice to be offered for 
themselves to God. Who then is so righteous and holy a priest as the only Son of God, who had no need to 

purge His own sins by sacrifice, (4) neither original sins, nor those which are added by human life? And what 
could be so filly chosen by men to be offered for them as human flesh? And what so fit for this immolation as 
mortal flesh? And what so clean for cleansing the faults of mortal men as the flesh born in and from the womb 
of a virgin, without any infection of carnal concupiscence? And what could be so acceptably offered and 
taken, as the flesh of our sacrifice, made the body of our priest? In such wise that, whereas four things are to 
be considered in every sacrifice-to whom it is offered, by whom it is offered, what is offered, for whom it is 
offered,-the same One and true Mediator Himself, reconciling us to God by the sacrifice of peace, might 
remain one with Him to whom He offered, might make those one in Himself for whom He offered, Himself 
might be in one both the offerer and the offering. 

CHAP. 15.-THEY ARE PROUD WHO THINK THEY ARE ABLE, BY THEIR OWN 
RIGHTEOUSNESS, TO BE CLEANSED SO AS TO SEE GOD. 

20. There are, however, some who think themselves capable of being cleansed by their own righteousness, 
so as to contemplate God, and to dwell in God; whom their very pride itself stains above all others. For there 
is no sin to which the divine law is more opposed, and over which that proudest of spirits, who is a mediator 
to things below, but a barrier against things above, receives a greater right of mastery: unless either his 
secret snares be avoided by going another way, or if he rage openly by means of a sinful people (which 
Amalek, being interpreted, means), and forbid by fighting the passage to the land of promise, he be 
overcome by the cross of the Lord, which is prefigured by the holding out of the hands of Moses. (1) For 
these persons promise themselves cleansing by their own righteousness for this reason, because some of 
them have been able to penetrate with the eye of the mind beyond the whole creature, and to touch, though 
it be in ever so small a part, the light of the unchangeable truth; a thing which they deride many Christians for 
being not yet able to do, who, in the meantime, live by faith alone. But of what use is it for the proud man, who 
on that account is ashamed to embark upon the ship of wood, (2) to behold from afar his country beyond the 
sea? Or how can it hurt the humble man not to behold it from so great a distance, when he is actually coming 
to it by that wood upon which the other disdains to be borne? 

CHAP. 16. -THE OLD PHILOSOPHERS ARE NOT TO BE CONSULTED CONCERNING THE 
RESURRECTION AND CONCERNING THINGS TO COME. 

21. These people also blame us for believing the resurrection of the flesh, and rather wish us to believe 
themselves concerning these things. As though, because they have been able to understand the high and 
unchangeable substance by the things which are made, (3) for this reason they had a claim to be consulted 
concerning the revolutions of mutable things, or concerning the connected order of the ages. For pray, 
because they dispute most truly, and persuade us by most certain proofs, that all things temporal are made 
after a science that is eternal, are they therefore able to see clearly in the matter of this science itself, or to 
collect from it, how many kinds of animals there are, what are the seeds of each in their beginnings, what 
measure in their increase, what numbers run through their conceptions, births, ages, settings; what motions 
in desiring things according to their nature, and in avoiding the contrary? Have they not sought out all these 
things, not through that unchangeable wisdom, but through the actual history of places and times, or have 
trusted the written experience of others? Wherefore it is the less to be wondered at, that they have utterly 
failed in searching out the succession of more lengthened ages, and in finding any goal of that course, 
down which, as though down a river, the human race is sailing, and the transition thence of each to its own 
appropriate end. For these are subjects which historians could not describe, inasmuch as they are far in the 
future, and have been experienced and related by no one. Nor have those philosophers, who have profiled 
better than others in that high and eternal science, been able to grasp such subjects with the understanding; 
otherwise they would not be inquiring as they could into past things of the kind, such as are in the province of 
historians, but rather would foreknow also things future; and those who are able to do this are called by them 
soothsayers, but by us prophets: 

CHAP. 17. -IN HOW MANY WAYS THINGS FUTURE ARE FOREKNOWN. NEITHER 
PHILOSOPHERS, NOR THOSE WHO WERE DISTINGUISHED AMONG THE ANCIENTS, 
ARE TO BE CONSULTED CONCERNING THE RESURRECTION OF THE DEAD. 

22.-although the name of prophets, too, is not altogether foreign to their writings. But it makes the greatest 
possible difference, whether things future are conjectured by experience of things past (as physicians also 
have committed many things to writing in the way of foresight, which they themselves have noted by 
experience; or as again husbandmen, or sailors, too, foretell many things; for if such predictions are made a 
long while before, they are thought to be divinations), or whether such things have already started on their 

road to come to us, and being seen coming far off, are announced in proportion to the acuteness of the 
sense of those who see them, by doing which the aerial powers are thought to divine (just as if a person 
from the top of a mountain were to see far off some one coming, and were to announce it beforehand to 
those who dwelt close by in the plain); or whether they are either fore-announced to certain men, or are 
heard by them and again transmitted to other men, by means of holy angels, to whom God shows those 
things by His Word and His Wisdom, wherein both things future and things past consist: or whether the 
minds of certain men themselves are so far borne upwards by the Holy Spirit, as to behold, not through the 
angels, but of themselves, the immoveable causes of things future, in that very highest pinnacle of the 
universe itself. [And I say, behold,] for the aerial powers, too, hear these things, either by message through 
angels, or through men; and hear only so much as He judges to be fitting, to whom all things are subject. 
Many things, too, are foretold by a kind of instinct and inward impulse of such as know them not: as 
Caiaphas did not know what he said, but being the high priest, he prophesied. (1) 

23. Therefore, neither concerning the successions of ages, nor concerning the resurrection of the dead, 
ought we to consult those philosophers, who have understood as much as they could the eternity of the 
Creator, in whom "we live, and move, and have our being. "(2) Since, knowing God through those things 
which are made, they have not glorified Him as God, neither were thankful but professing themselves wise, 
they became fools. (3) And whereas they were not fit to fix the eye of the mind so firmly upon the eternity of 
the spiritual and unchangeable nature, as to be able to see, in the wisdom itself of the Creator and Governor 
of the universe, those revolutions of the ages, which in that wisdom were already and were always, but here 
were about to be so that as yet they were not; or, again, to see therein those changes for the better, not of the 
souls only, but also of the bodies of men, even to the perfection of their proper measure; whereas then, I 
say, they were in no way fit to see these things therein, they were not even judged worthy of receiving any 
announcement of them by the holy angels; whether externally through the senses of the body, or by interior 
revelations exhibited in the spirit; as these things actually were manifested to our fathers, who were gifted 
with true piety, and who by foretelling them, obtaining credence either by present signs, or by events close 
at hand, which turned out as they had foretold, earned authority to be believed respecting things remotely 
future, even to the end of the world. But the proud and deceitful powers of the air, even if they are found to 
have said through their soothsayers some things of the fellowship and citizenship of the saints, and of the 
true Mediator, which they heard from the holy prophets or the angels, did so with the purpose of seducing 
even the faithful ones of God, if they could, by these alien truths, to revolt to their own proper falsehoods. But 
God did this by those who knew not what they said, in order that the truth might sound abroad from all sides, 
to aid the faithful, to be a witness against the ungodly. 

CHAP. 18. -THE SON OF GOD BECAME INCARNATE IN ORDER THAT WE BEING 
CLEANSED BY FAITH MAY BE RAISED TO THE UNCHANGEABLE TRUTH. 

24. Since, then, we were not fit to take hold of things eternal, and since the foulness of sins weighed us down, 
which we had contracted by the love of temporal things, and which were implanted in us as it were naturally, 
from the root of mortality, it was needful that we should be cleansed. But cleansed we could not be, so as to 
be tempered together with things eternal, except it were through things temporal, wherewith we were already 
tempered together and held fast. For health is at the opposite extreme from disease; but the intermediate 
process of healing does not lead us to perfect health, unless it has some congruity with the disease. Things 
temporal that are useless merely deceive the sick; things temporal that are useful take up those that need 
healing, and pass them on healed, to things eternal. And the rational mind, as when cleansed it owes 
contemplation to things eternal; so, when needing cleansing, owes faith to things temporal. One even of 
those who were formerly esteemed wise men among the Greeks has said, The truth stands to faith in the 
same relation in which eternity stands to that which has a beginning. And he is no doubt right in saying so. 
For what we call temporal, he describes as having had a beginning. And we also ourselves come under 
this kind, not only in respect to the body, but also in respect to the changeableness of the soul. For that is not 
properly called eternal which undergoes any degree of change. Therefore, in so far as we are changeable, 
in so far we stand apart from eternity. But life eternal is promised to us through the truth, from the clear 
knowledge of which, again, our faith stands as far apart as mortality does from eternity. We then now put faith 
in things done in time on our account, and by that faith itself we are cleansed; in order that when we have 
come to sight, as truth follows faith, so eternity may follow upon mortality. And therefore, since our faith will 
become truth, when we have attained to that which is promised to us who believe: and that which is 
promised us is eternal life; and the Truth (not that which shall come to be according as our faith shall be, but 
that truth which is always, because in it is eternity,-the Truth then) has said, "And this is life eternal, that they 
might know Thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast sent:"(1) when our faith by seeing 
shall come to be truth, then eternity shall possess our now changed mortality. And until this shall take place, 
and in order that it may take place,-because we adapt the faith of belief to things which have a beginning, 

as in things eternal we hope for the truth of contemplation, lest the faith of mortal life should be at discord with 
the truth of eternal life,— the Truth itself, co-eternal with the Father, took a beginning from earth, (2) when the 
Son of God so came as to become the Son of man, and to take to Himself our faith, that He might thereby 
lead us on to His own truth, who so undertook our mortality, as not to lose His own eternity. For truth stands to 
faith in the relation in which eternity stands to that which has a beginning. Therefore, we must needs so be 
cleansed, that we may come to have such a beginning as remains eternal, that we may not have one. 
beginning in faith, and another in truth. Neither could we pass to things eternal from the condition of having a 
beginning, unless we were transferred, by union of the eternal to ourselves through our own beginning, to 
His own eternity. Therefore our faith has, in some measure, now followed thither, whither He in whom we 
have believed has ascended; born, (3) dead, risen again, taken up. Of these four things, we knew the first 
two in ourselves. For we know that men both have a beginning and die. But the remaining two, that is, to be 
raised, and to be taken up, we rightly hope will be in us, because we have believed them done in Him. 
Since, therefore, in Him that, too, which had a beginning has passed over to eternity, in ourselves also it will 
so pass over, when faith shall have arrived at truth. For to those who thus believe, in order that they might 
remain in the word of faith, and being thence led on to the truth, and through that to eternity, might be freed 
from death, He speaks thus: "If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed." And as though 
they would ask, With what fruit? He proceeds to say, "And ye shall know the truth." And again, as though they 
would say, Of what good is truth to mortal men? "And the truth," He says, "shall make you free. "(4) From 
what, except from death, from corruptions from changeableness? Since truth remains immortal, incorrupt, 
unchangeable. But true immortality, true incorruptibility, true unchangeableness, is eternity itself. 

CHAP. 19. -IN WHAT MANNER THE SON WAS SENT AND PROCLAIMED BEFOREHAND. 
HOW IN THE SENDING OF HIS BIRTH IN THE FLESH HE WAS MADE LESS WITHOUT 
DETRIMENT TO HIS EQUALITY WITH THE FATHER. 

25. Behold, then, why the Son of God was sent; nay, rather behold what it is for the Son of God to be sent. 
Whatever things they were which were wrought in time, with a view to produce faith, whereby we might be 
cleansed so as to contemplate truth, in things that have a beginning, which have been put forth from eternity, 
and are referred back to eternity: these were either testimonies of this mission, or they were the mission itself 
of the Son of God. But some of these testimonies announced Him beforehand as to come, some testified 
that He had come already. For that He was made a creature by whom the whole creation was made, must 
needs find a witness in the whole creation. For except one were preached by the sending of many 
[witnesses] one would not be bound to, the sending away of many. And unless there were such testimonies 
as should seem to be great to those who are lowly, it would not be believed, that He being great should 
make men great, who as lowly was sent to the lowly. For the heaven and the earth and all things in them are 
incomparably greater works of the Son of God, since all things were made by Him, than the signs and the 
portents which broke forth in testimony of Him. But yet men, in order that, being lowly, they might believe 
these great things to have been wrought by Him, trembled at those lowly things, as if they had been great. 

26. "When, therefore, the fullness of time was come, God sent forth His Son, made of a woman, made under 
the Law;"(5) to such a degree lowly, that He was "made;" in this way therefore sent, in that He was made. If, 
therefore, the greater sends the less, we too, acknowledge Him to have been made less; and in so far less, 
in so far as made; and in so far made, in so far as sent. For "He sent forth His Son made of a woman." And 
yet, because all things were made by Him, not only before He was made and sent, but before all things 
were at all, we confess the same to be equal to the sender, whom we call less, as having been sent. In what 
way, then, could He be seen by the fathers, when certain angelical visions were shown to them, before that 
fullness of time at which it was fitting He should be sent, and so before He was sent, at a time when not yet 
sent He was seen as He is equal with the Father? For how does He say to Philip, by whom He was certainly 
seen as by all the rest, and even by those by whom He was crucified in the flesh, "Have I been so long time 
with you, and yet hast thou not known me, Philip? he that hath seen me, hath seen the Father also;" unless 
because He was both seen and yet not seen? He was seen, as He had been made in being sent; He was 
not seen, as by Him all things were made. Or how does He say this too, "He that hath my commandments 
and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me; and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love 
him, and will manifest myself to him,"(1) at a time when He was manifest before the eyes of men; unless 
because He was offering that flesh, which the Word was made in the fullness of time, to be accepted by our 
faith; but was keeping back the Word itself, by whom all things were made, to be contemplated in eternity by 
the mind when cleansed by faith? 

CHAP. 20. -THE SENDER AND THE SENT EQUAL. WHY THE SON IS SAID TO BE SENT 
BY THE FATHER. OF THE MISSION OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. HOW AND BY WHOM HE WAS 
SENT. THE FATHER THE BEGINNING OF THE WHOLE GODHEAD. 

27. But if the Son is said to be sent by the Father on this account, that the one is the Father, and the other the 
Son, this does not in any manner hinder us from believing the Son to be equal, and consubstantial, and 
co-eternal with the Father, and yet to have been sent as Son by the Father. Not because the one is greater, 
the other less; but because the one is Father, the other Son; the one begetter, the other begotten; the one, 
He from whom He is who is sent; the other, He who is from Him who sends. For the Son is from the Father, 
not the Father from the Son. And according to this manner we can now understand that the Son is not only 
said to have been sent because "the Word was made flesh, "(2) but therefore sent that the Word might be 
made flesh, and that He might perform through His bodily presence those things which were written; that is, 
that not only is He understood to have been sent as man, which the Word was made but the Word, too, was 
sent that it might be made man; because He was not sent in respect to any inequality of power, or 
substance, or anything that in Him was not equal to the Father; but in respect to this, that the Son is from the 
Father, not the Father from the Son; for the Son is the Word of the Father, which is also called His wisdom. 
What wonder, therefore, if He is sent, not because He is unequal with the Father, but because He is "a pure 
emanation (manatio) issuing from the glory of the Almighty God?" For there, that which issues, and that from 
which it issues, is of one and the same substance. For it does not issue as water issues from an aperture of 
earth or of stone, but as light issues from light. For the words, "For she is the brightness of the everlasting 
light," what else are they than, she is light of everlasting light? For what is the brightness of light, except light 
itself? and so co-eternal, with the light, from which the light is. But it is preferable to say, "the brightness of 
light," rather than" the light of light;" lest that which issues should be thought to be darker than that from which 
it issues. For when one hears of the brightness of light as being light itself, it is more easy to believe that the 
former shines by means of the latter, than that the latter shines less. But because there was no need of 
warning men not to think that light to be less, which begat the other (for no heretic ever dared say this, neither 
is it to be believed that any one will dare to do so), Scripture meets that other thought, whereby that light 
which issues might seem darker than that from which it issues; and it has removed this surmise by saying, "It 
is the brightness of that light," namely, of eternal light, and so shows it to be equal. For if it were less, then it 
would be its darkness, not its brightness; but if it were greater, then it could not issue from it, for it could not 
surpass that from which it is educed. Therefore, because it issues from it, it is not greater than it is; and 
because it is not its darkness, but its brightness, it is not less than it is: therefore it is equal. Nor ought this to 
trouble us, that it is called a pure emanation issuing from the glory of the Almighty God, as if itself were not 
omnipotent, but an emanation from the Omnipotent; for soon after it is said of it, "And being but one, she can 
do all things. "(3) But who is omnipotent, unless He who can do all things? It is sent, therefore, by Him from 
whom it issues; for so she is sought after by him who loved and desired her. "Send her," he says, "out of Thy 
holy heavens, and from the throne of Thy glory, that, being present, she may labor with me;"(4) that is, may 
teach me to labor [heartily] in order that I may not labor [irksomely]. For her labors are virtues. But she is 
sent in one way that she may be with man; she has been sent in another way that she herself may be man. 
For, "entering into holy souls, she maketh them friends of God and prophets;"(1) so she also fills the holy 
angels, and works all things fitting for such ministries by them. (2) But when the fullness of time was come, she 
was sent,(3) not to fill angels, nor to be an angel, except in so far as she announced the counsel of the 
Father, which was her own also; nor, again, to be with men or in men, for this too took place before, both in 
the fathers and in the prophets; but that the Word itself should be made flesh, that is, should be made man. In 
which future mystery, when revealed, was to be the salvation of those wise and holy men also, who, before 
He was born of the Virgin, were born of women; and in which, when done and made known, is the salvation 
of all who believe, and hope, and love. For this is "the great mystery of godliness, which(4) was manifest in 
the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received 
up into glory. "(5) 

28. Therefore the Word of God is sent by Him, of whom He is the Word; He is sent by Him, from whom He 
was begotten (genitum); He sends who begot, That is sent which is begotten. And He is then sent to each 
one, when He is apprehended and perceived by each, in so far as He can be apprehended and 
perceived, in proportion to the comprehension of the rational soul, either advancing towards God, or 
already perfect in God. The Son, therefore, is not properly said to have been sent in that He is begotten of 
the Father; but either in that the Word made flesh appeared to the world, whence He says, "I came forth from 
the Father, and am come into the world;"(6) or in that from time to time, He is perceived by the mind of each, 
according to the saying, "Send her, that, being present with me, she may labor with me. "(7) What then is born 
(natum) from eternity is eternal, "for it is the brightness of the everlasting light;" but what is sent from time to 
time, is that which is apprehended by each. But when the Son of God was made manifest in the flesh, He 
was sent into this world in the fullness of time, made of a woman. "For after that, in the wisdom of God, the 
world by wisdom knew not God" (since "the light shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it 
not"), it "pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe, "(8) and that the Word 
should be made flesh, and dwell among us. (9) But when from time to time He comes forth and is perceived 

by the mind of each, He is said indeed to be sent, but not into this world; for He does not appear sensibly, 
that is, He does not present Himself to the corporeal senses. For we ourselves, too, are not in this world, in 
respect to our grasping with the mind as far as we can that which is eternal; and the spirits of all the righteous 
are not in this world, even of those who are still living in the flesh, in so far as they have discernment in things 
divine. But the Father is not said to be sent, when from time to time He is apprehended by any one, for He 
has no one of whom to be, or from whom to proceed; since Wisdom says, "I came out of the mouth of the 
Most High, "(10) and it is said of the Holy Spirit, "He proceedeth from the Father,"(11) but the Father is from no 
one. 

29. As, therefore, the Father begat, the Son is begotten; so the Father sent, the Son was sent. But in like 
manner as He who begat and He who was begotten, so both He who sent and He who was sent, are one, 
since the Father and the Son are one. (12) So also the Holy Spirit is one with them, since these three are one. 
For as to be born, in respect to the Son, means to be from the Father; so to be sent, in respect to the Son, 
means to be known to be from the Father. And as to be the gift of God in respect to the Holy Spirit, means to 
proceed from the Father; so to be sent, is to be known to proceed from the Father. Neither can we say that 
the Holy Spirit does not also proceed from the Son, for the same Spirit is not without reason said to be the 
Spirit both of the Father and of the Son. (13) Nor do I see what else He intended to signify, when He breathed 
on the face of the disciples, and said, "Receive ye the Holy Ghost."(14) For that bodily breathing, 
proceeding from the body with the feeling of bodily touching, was not the substance of the Holy Spirit, but a 
declaration by a fitting sign, that the Holy Spirit proceeds not only from the Father, but also from the Son. For 
the veriest of madmen would not say, that it was one Spirit which He gave when He breathed on them, and 
another which He sent after His ascension. (15) For the Spirit of God is one, the Spirit of the Father and of the 
Son, the Holy Spirit, who worketh all in all. (16) But that He was given twice was certainly a significant 
economy, which we will discuss in its place, as far as the Lord may grant. That then which the Lord 
says,-"Whom I will send unto you from the Father,"(1)-shows the Spirit to be both of the Father and of the 
Son; because, also, when He had said, "Whom the Father will send," He added also, "in my name. "(2) Yet 
He did not say, Whom the Father will send from me, as He said, "Whom I will send unto you from the 
Father,"-showing, namely, that the Father is the beginning (principium) of the whole divinity, or if it is better so 
expressed, deity. (3) He, therefore, who proceeds from the Father and from the Son, is referred back to Him 
from whom the Son was born (natus). And that which the evangelist says, "For the Holy Ghost was not yet 
given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified;"(4) how is this to be understood, unless because the 
special giving or sending of the Holy Spirit after the glorification of Christ was to be such as it had never 
been before? For it was not previously none at all, but it had not been such as this. For if the Holy Spirit was 
not given before, wherewith were the prophets who spoke filled? Whereas the Scripture plainly says, and 
shows in many places, that they spake by the Holy Spirit. Whereas, also, it is said of John the Baptist, "And 
he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his mother's womb." And his father Zacharias is found to 
have been filled with the Holy Ghost, so as to say such things of him. And Mary, too, was filled with the Holy 
Ghost, so as to foretell such things of the Lord, whom she was bearing in her womb. (5) And Simeon and 
Anna were filled with the Holy Spirit, so as to acknowledge the greatness of the little child Christ.(6) How, 
then, was "the Spirit not yet given, since Jesus was not yet glorified," unless because that giving, or granting, 
or mission of the Holy Spirit was to have a certain speciality of its own in its very advent, such as never was 
before? For we read nowhere that men spoke in tongues which they did not know, through the Holy Spirit 
coming upon them; as happened then, when it was needful that His coming should be made plain by visible 
signs, in order to show that the whole world, and all nations constituted with different tongues, should believe 
in Christ through the gift of the Holy Spirit, to fulfill that which is sung in the Psalm, "There is no speech nor 
language where their voice is not heard; their sound is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the 
endoftheworld."(7) 

30. Therefore man was united, and in some sense commingled, with the Word of God, so as to be One 
Person, when the fullness of time was come, and the Son of God. made of a woman, was sent into this world, 
that He might be also the Son of man for the sake of the sons of men. And this person angelic nature could 
prefigure beforehand, so as to pre-announce, but could not appropriate, so as to be that person itself. 

CHAP. 21. -OF THE SENSIBLE SHOWING OF THE HOLY SPIRIT, AND OF THE 
COETERNITY OF THE TRINITY. WHAT HAS BEEN SAID, AND WHAT REMAINS TO BE 
SAID. 

But with respect to the sensible showing of the Holy Spirit, whether by the shape of a dove, (8) or by fiery 
tongues, (9) when the subjected and subservient creature by temporal motions and forms manifested His 
substance co-eternal with the Father and the Son, and alike with them unchangeable, while it was not united 
so as to be one person with Him, as the flesh was which the Word was made;(10) I do not dare to say that 
nothing of the kind was done aforetime. But I would boldly say, that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, of one 

and the same substance, God the Creator, the Omnipotent Trinity, work indivisibly; but that this cannot be 
indivisibly manifested by the creature, which is far inferior, and least of all by the bodily creature: just as the 
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit cannot be named by our words, which certainly are bodily sounds, except in 
their own proper intervals of time, divided by a distinct separation, which intervals the proper syllables of 
each word occupy. Since in their proper substance wherein they are, the three are one, the Father, and the 
Son, and the Holy Spirit, the very same, by no temporal motion, above the whole creature, without any 
interval of time and place, and at once one and the same from eternity to eternity, as it were eternity itself, 
which is not without truth and charity. But, in my words, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are separated, and 
cannot be named at once, and occupy their own proper places separately invisible letters. And as, when I 
name my memory, and intellect, and will, each name refers to each severally, but yet each is uttered by all 
three; for there is no one of these three names that is not uttered by both my memory and my intellect and 
my will together [by the soul as a whole]; so the Trinity together wrought both the voice of the Father, and the 
flesh of the Son, and the dove of the Holy Spirit, while each of these things is referred severally to each 
person. And by this similitude it is in some degree discernible, that the Trinity, which is inseparable in itself, 
is manifested separably by the appearance of the visible creature; and that the operation of the Trinity is 
also inseparable in each severally of those things which are said to pertain properly to the manifesting of 
either the Father, or the Son, or the Holy Spirit. 

31 . If then I am asked, in what manner either words or sensible forms and appearances were wrought before 
the incarnation of the Word of God, which should prefigure it as about to come, I reply that God wrought 
those things by the angels; and this I have also shown sufficiently, as I think, by testimonies of the Holy 
Scriptures. And if I am asked how the incarnation itself was brought to pass, I reply that the Word of God 
itself was made flesh, that is, was made man, yet not turned and changed into that which was made; but so 
made, that there should be there not only the Word of God and the flesh of man, but also the rational soul of 
man, and that this whole should both be called God on account of God, and man on account of man. And if 
this is understood with difficulty, the mind must be purged by faith, by more and more abstaining from sins, 
and by doing good works, and by praying with the groaning of holy desires; that by profiling through the 
divine help, it may both understand and love. And if I am asked, how, after the incarnation of the Word, either 
a voice of the Father was produced, or a corporeal appearance by which the Holy Spirit was manifested: I 
do not doubt indeed that this was done through the creature; but whether only corporeal and sensible, or 
whether by the employment also of the spirit rational or intellectual (for this is the term by which some 
choose to call what the Greeks name <greek>noeron</greek>), not certainly so as to form one person (for 
who could possibly say that whatever creature it was by which the voice of the Father sounded, is in such 
sense God the Father; or whatever creature it was by which the Holy Spirit was manifested in the form of a 
dove, or in fiery tongues, is in such sense the Holy Spirit, as the Son of God is that man who was made of a 
virgin?), but only to the ministry of bringing about such intimations as God judged needful; or whether 
anything else is to be understood: is difficult to discover, and not expedient rashly to affirm. Yet I see not how 
those things could have been brought to pass without the rational or intellectual creature. But it is not yet the 
proper place to explain, as the Lord may give me strength, why I so think; for the arguments of heretics must 
first be discussed and refuted, which they do not produce from the divine books, but from their own reasons, 
and by which, as they think, they forcibly compel us so to understand the testimonies of the Scriptures which 
treat of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, as they themselves will. 

32. But now, as I think, it has been sufficiently shown, that the Son is not therefore less because He is sent by 
the Father, nor the Holy Spirit less because both the Father sent Him and the Son. For these things are 
perceived to be laid down in the Scriptures, either on account of the visible creature; or rather on account of 
commending to our thoughts the emanation [within the Godhead];(1) but not on account of inequality, or 
imparity, or unlikeness of substance; since, even if God the Father had willed to appear visibly through the 
subject creature, yet it would be most absurd to say that He was sent either by the Son, whom He begot, or 
by the Holy Spirit, who proceeds from Him. Let this, therefore, be the limit of the present book. Henceforth in 
the rest we shall see, the Lord helping, of what sort are those crafty arguments of the heretics, and in what 
manner they may be confuted.
