Augustine, On the Trinity, Books V-XV
Translation: Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Schaff et al. (1886-1900), Public Domain
Source: https://archive.org/details/EarlyChurchFathers38Volumes

BISHOP OF HIPPO, ON THE TRINITY: BOOK V 

BOOKV. 

PROCEEDS TO TREAT OF THE ARGUMENTS PUT FORWARD BY THE HERETICS, NOT 
FROM SCRIPTURE, BUT FROM THEIR OWN REASON. THOSE ARE REFUTED, WHO 
THINKTHE SUBSTANCE OF THE FATHER AND OF THE SON TO BE NOT THE SAME, 
BECAUSE EVERYTHING PREDICATED OF GOD IS, IN THEIR OPINION, PREDICATED OF 
HIM ACCORDING TO SUBSTANCE; AND THEREFORE IT FOLLOWS, THAT TO BEGET 
AND TO BE BEGOTTEN, OR TO BE BEGOTTEN AND UNBEGOTTEN, BEING DIVERSE, 
ARE DIVERSE SUBSTANCES; WHEREAS IT IS HERE DEMONSTRATED THAT NOT 
EVERYTHING PREDICATED OF GOD IS PREDICATED ACCORDING TO SUBSTANCE, IN 
SUCH MANNER AS HE IS CALLED GOOD AND GREAT ACCORDING TO SUBSTANCE, OR 
ANYTHING ELSE THAT IS PREDICATED OF HIM IN RESPECT TO HIMSELF; BUT THAT 
SOME THINGS ARE ALSO PREDICATED OF HIM RELATIVELY, I. E. NOT IN RESPECT TO 
HIMSELF, BUT TO SOMETHING NOT HIMSELF, AS HE IS CALLED FATHER IN RESPECT 
TO THE SON, AND LORD IN RESPECT TO THE CREATURE THAT SERVETH HIM; IN 
WHICH CASE, IF ANYTHING THUS PREDICATED RELATIVELY, I. E. IN RESPECT TO 
SOMETHING NOT HIMSELF, IS EVEN PREDICATED AS HAPPENING IN TIME, AS E. G. 
"LORD, THOU HAST BECOME OUR REFUGE," YET NOTHING HAPPENS TO GOD SO AS 
TO WORK A CHANGE IN HIM, BUT HE HIMSELF REMAINS ABSOLUTELY 
UNCHANGEABLE IN HIS OWN NATURE OR ESSENCE. 

CHAP. 1.-WHAT THE AUTHOR ENTREATS FROM GOD, WHAT FROM THE READER. IN 
GOD NOTHING IS TO BE THOUGHT CORPOREAL OR CHANGEABLE. 

1 . Beginning, as I now do henceforward, to speak of subjects which cannot altogether be spoken as they 
are thought, either by any man, or, at any rate, not by myself; although even our very thought, when we think 
of God the Trinity, falls (as we feel) very far short of Him of whom we think, nor comprehends Him as He is; 
but He is seen, as it is written, even by those who are so great as was the Apostle Paul, "through a glass 
and in an enigma:"(1) first, I pray to our Lord God Himself, of whom we ought always to think, and of whom we 
are not able to think worthily, in praise of whom blessing is at all times to be rendered, (2) and whom no 
speech is sufficient to declare, that He will grant me both help for understanding and explaining that which I 
design, and pardon if in anything I offend. For I bear in mind, not only my desire, but also my infirmity. I ask 
also of my readers to pardon me, where they may perceive me to have had the desire rather than the power 
to speak, what they either understand better themselves, or fail to understand through the obscurity of my 
language, just as I myself pardon them what they cannot understand through their own dullness. 

2. And we shall mutually pardon one another the more easily, if we know, or at any rate firmly believe and 
hold, that whatever is said of a nature, unchangeable, invisible and having life absolutely and sufficient to 
itself, must not be measured after the custom of things visible, and changeable, and mortal, or not 
self-sufficient. But although we labor, and yet fail, to grasp and know even those things which are within the 
scope of our corporeal senses, or what we are ourselves in the tuner man; yet it is with no shamelessness 
that faithful piety burns after those divine and unspeakable things which are above: piety, I say, not inflated 
by the arrogance of its own power, but inflamed by the grace of its Creator and Saviour Himself. For with 
what understanding can man apprehend God, who does not yet apprehend that very understanding itself of 
his own, by which he desires to apprehend Him? And if he does already apprehend this, let him carefully 
consider that there is nothing in his own nature better than it; and let him see whether he can there see any 
outlines of forms, or brightness of colors, or greatness of space, or distance of parts, or extension of size, or 
any movements through intervals of place, or any such thing at all. Certainly we find nothing of all this in that, 
than which we find nothing better in our own nature, that is, in our own intellect, by which we apprehend 
wisdom according to our capacity. What, therefore, we do not find in that which is our own best, we ought not 
to seek in Him who is far better than that best of ours; that so we may understand God, if we are able, and as 
much as we are able, as good without quality, great without quantity, a creator though He lack nothing, ruling 
but from no position, sustaining all things without "having" them, in His wholeness everywhere, yet without 

place, eternal without time, making things that are changeable, without change of Himself, and without 
passion. Whoso thus thinks of God, although he cannot yet find out in all ways what He is, yet piously takes 
heed, as much as he is able, to think nothing of Him that He is not. 

CHAP. 2. --GOD THE ONLY UNCHANGEABLE ESSENCE. 

3. He is, however, without doubt, a substance, or, if it be better so to call it, an essence, which the Greeks call 
<greek>onsia</greek>. For as wisdom is so called from the being wise, and knowledge from knowing; so 
from being(1) comes that which we call essence. And who is there that is, more than He who said to His 
servant Moses, "I am that I am;" and, "Thus shall thou say unto the children of Israel, He who is hath sent me 
unto you?"(2) But other things that are called essences or substances admit of accidents, whereby a 
change, whether great or small, is produced in them. But there can be no accident of this kind in respect to 
God; and therefore He who is God is the only unchangeable substance or essence, to whom certainly 
BEING itself, whence comes the name of essence, most especially and most truly belongs. For that which is 
changed does not retain its own being; and that which can be changed, although it be not actually changed, 
is able not to be that which it had been; and hence that which not only is not changed, but also cannot at all 
be changed, alone falls most truly, without difficulty or hesitation, under the category of BEING. 

CHAP. 3. -THE ARGUMENT OF THE ARIANS IS REFUTED, WHICH IS DRAWN FROM THE 
WORDS BEGOTTEN AND UNBEGOTTEN. 

4. Wherefore,-to being now to answer the adversaries of our faith, respecting those things also, which are 
neither said as they are thought, nor thought as they really are:-among the many things which the Arians are 
wont to dispute against the Catholic faith, they seem chiefly to set forth this, as their most crafty device, 
namely, that whatsoever is said or understood of God, is said not according to accident, but according to 
substance: and therefore, to be unbegotten belongs to the Father according to substance, and to be 
begotten belongs to the Son according to substance; but to be unbegotten and to be begotten are different; 
therefore the substance of the Father and that of the Son are different. To whom we reply, If whatever is 
spoken of God is spoken according to substance, then that which is said, "I and the Father are one, "(3) is 
spoken according to substance. Therefore there is one substance of the Father and the Son. Or if this is not 
said according to substance, then something is said of God not according to substance, and therefore we 
are no longer compelled to understand unbegotten and begotten according to substance, it is also said of 
the Son, "He thought it not robbery to be equal with God. "(4) We ask, equal according to what? For if He is 
not said to be equal according to substance, then they admit that something may be said of God not 
according to substance. Let them admit, then, that unbegotten and begotten are not spoken according to 
substance. And if they do not admit this, on the ground that they will have all things to be spoken of God 
according to substance, then the Son is equal to the Father according to substance. 

CHAP. 4.--THE ACCIDENTAL ALWAYS IMPLIES SOME CHANGE IN THE THING. 

5. That which is accidental commonly implies that it can be lost by some change of the thing to which it is an 
accident. For although some accidents are said to be inseparable, which in Greek are called 
<greek>akprista</greek>, as the color black is to the feather of a raven; yet the feather loses that color, not 
indeed so long as it is a feather, but because the feather is not always. Wherefore the matter itself is 
changeable; and whenever that animal or that feather ceases to be, and the whole of that body is changed 
and turned into earth, it loses certainly that color also. Although the kind of accident which is called 
separable may likewise be lost, not by separation, but by change; as, for instance, blackness is called a 
separable accident to the hair of men, because hair continuing to be hair can grow white; yet, if carefully 
considered, it is sufficiently apparent, that it is not as if anything departed by separation away from the head 
when it grows white, as though blackness departed thence and went somewhere and whiteness came in its 
place, but that the quality of color there is turned and changed. Therefore there is nothing accidental in God, 
because there is nothing changeable or that may be lost. But if you choose to call that also accidental, 
which, although it may not be lost, yet can be decreased or increased, -as, for instance, the life of the soul: 
for as long as it is a soul, so long it lives, and because the soul is always, it always lives; but because it lives 
more when it is wise, and less when it is foolish, here, too, some change comes to pass, not such that life is 
absent, as wisdom is absent to the foolish, but such that it is less;-nothing of this kind, either, happens to 
God, because He remains altogether unchangeable. 

CHAP. 5.-N0THING IS SPOKEN OF GOD ACCORDING TO ACCIDENT, BUT ACCORDING 
TO SUBSTANCE OR ACCORDING TO RELATION. 

6. Wherefore nothing in Him is said in respect to accident, since nothing is accidental to Him, and yet all that 
is said is not said according to substance. For in created and changeable things, that which is not said 
according to substance, must, by necessary alternative, be said according to accident. For all things are 
accidents to them, which can be either lost or diminished, whether magnitudes or qualities; and so also is 
that which is said in relation to something, as friendships, relationships, services, likenesses, equalities, and 
anything else of the kind; so also positions and conditions, (1) places and times, acts and passions. But in 
God nothing is said to be according to accident, because in Him nothing is changeable; and yet everything 
that is said, is not said, according to substance. For it is said in relation to something, as the Father in 
relation to the Son and the Son in relation to the Father, which is not accident; because both the one is 
always Father, and the other is always Son: yet not "always," meaning from the time when the Son was born 
[natus], so that the Father ceases not to be the Father because the Son never ceases to be the Son, but 
because the Son was always born, and never began to be the Son. But if He had begun to be at any time, 
or were at any time to cease to be, the Son, then He would be called Son according to accident. But if the 
Father, in that He is called the Father, were so called in relation to Himself, not to the Son; and the Son, in 
that He is called the Son, were so called in relation to Himself, not to the Father; then both the one would be 
called Father, and the other Son, according to substance. But because the Father is not called the Father 
except in that He has a Son, and the Son is not called Son except in that He has a Father, these things are 
not said according to substance; because each of them is not so called in relation to Himself, but the terms 
are used reciprocally and in relation each to the other; nor yet according to accident, because both the 
being called the Father, and the being called the Son, is eternal and unchangeable to them. Wherefore, 
although to be the Father and to be the Son is different, yet their substance is not different; because they are 
so called, not according to substance, but according to relation, which relation, however, is not accident, 
because it is not changeable. 

CHAP. 6. -REPLY IS MADE TO THE CAVILS OF THE HERETICS IN RESPECT TO THE 
SAME WORDS BEGOTTEN AND UNBEGOTTEN. 

7. But if they think they can answer this reasoning thus,-that the Father indeed is so called in relation to the 
Son, and the Son in relation to the Father, but that they are said to be unbegotten and begotten in relation to 
themselves, not in relation each to the other; for that it is not the same thing to call Him unbegotten as it is to 
call Him the Father, because there would be nothing to hinder our calling Him unbegotten even if He had not 
begotten the Son; and if any one beget a son, he is not therefore himself unbegotten, for men, who are 
begotten by other men, themselves also beget others; and therefore they say the Father is called Father in 
relation to the Son, and the Son is called Son in relation to the Father, but unbegotten is said in relation to 
Himself, and begotten in relation to Himself; and therefore, if whatever is said in relation to oneself is said 
according to substance, while to be unbegotten and to be begotten are different, then the substance is 
different:— if this is what they say, then they do not understand that they do indeed say something that 
requires more careful discussion in respect to the term unbegotten, because neither is any one therefore a 
father because unbegotten, nor therefore unbegotten because he is a father, and on that account he is 
supposed to be called unbegotten, not in relation to anything else, but in respect to himself; but, on the other 
hand, with a wonderful blindness, they do not perceive that no one can be said to be begotten except in 
relation to something. For he is therefore a son because begotten; and because a son, therefore certainly 
begotten. And as is the relation of son to father, so is the relation of the begotten to the begetter; and as is 
the relation of father to son, so is the relation of the begetter to the begotten. And therefore any one is 
understood to be a begetter under one notion, but understood to be unbegotten under another. For though 
both are said of God the Father, yet the former is said in relation to the begotten, that is to the Son, which, 
indeed, they do not deny; but that He is called unbegotten, they declare to be said in respect to Himself. 
They say then, If anything is said to be a father in respect to itself, which cannot be said to be a son in 
respect to itself, and whatever is said in respect to self is said according to substance; and He is said to be 
unbegotten in respect to Himself, which the Son cannot be said to be; therefore He is said to be unbegotten 
according to substance; and because the Son cannot be so said to be, therefore He is not of the same 
substance. This subtlety is to be answered by compelling them to say themselves according to what it is 
that the Son is equal to the Father; whether according to that which is said in relation to Himself, or according 
to that which is said in relation to the Father. For it is not according to that which is said in relation to the 
Father, since in relation to the Father He is said to be Son, and the Father is not Son, but Father. Since 
Father and Son are not so called in relation to each other in the same way as friends and neighbors are; for 
a friend is so called relatively to his friend, and if they love each other equally, then the same friendship is in 
both; and a neighbor is so called relatively to a neighbor, and because they are equally neighbors to each 
other (for each is neighbor to the other, in the same degree as the other is neighbor to him), there is the 

same neighborhood in both. But because the Son is not so called relatively to the Son, but to the Father, it is 
not according to that which is said in relation to the Father that the Son is equal to the Father; and it remains 
that He is equal according to that which is said in relation to Himself. But whatever is said in relation to self is 
said according to substance: it remains therefore that He is equal according to substance; therefore the 
substance of both is the same. But when the Father is said to be unbegotten, it is not said what He is, but 
what He is not; and when a relative term is denied, it is not denied according to substance, since the relative 
itself is not affirmed according to substance. 

CHAP. 7. -THE ADDITION OF A NEGATIVE DOES NOT CHANGE THE PREDICAMENT. 

8. This is to be made clear by examples. And first we must notice, that by the word begotten is signified the 
same thing as is signified by the word son. For therefore a son, because begotten, and because a son, 
therefore certainly begotten. By the word unbegotten, therefore, it is declared that he is not son. But begotten 
and unbegotten are both of them terms suitably employed; whereas in Latin we can use the word "filius," but 
the custom of the language does not allow us to speak of "infilius." It makes no difference, however, in the 
meaning if he is called "non filius;" just as it is precisely the same thing if he is called "non genitus," instead 
of "ingenitus." For so the terms of both neighbor and friend are used relatively, yet we cannot speak of 
"invicinus" as we can of "inimicus." Wherefore, in speaking of this thing or that, we must not consider what the 
usage of our own language either allows or does not allow, but what clearly appears to be the meaning of 
the things themselves. Let us not therefore any longer call it unbegotten, although it can be so called in Latin; 
but instead of this let us call it not begotten, which means the same. Is this then anything else than saying that 
he is not a son? Now the prefixing of that negative particle does not make that to be said according to 
substance, which, without it, is said relatively; but that only is denied, which, without it, was affirmed, as in the 
other predicaments. When we say he is a man, we denote substance. He therefore who says he is not a 
man, enunciates no other kind of predicament, but only denies that. As therefore I affirm according to 
substance in saying he is a man, so I deny according to substance in saying he is not a man. And when the 
question is asked how large he is? and I say he is quadrupedal, that is, four feet in measure, I affirm 
according to quantity, and he who says he is not quadrupedal, denies according to quantity. I say he is 
white, I affirm according to quality; if I say he is not white, I deny according to quality. I say he is near, I affirm 
according to relation; if I say he is not near, I deny according to relation. I affirm according to position, when I 
say he lies down; I deny according to position, when I say he does not lie down. I speak according to 
condition/when I say he is armed; I deny according to condition, when I say he is not armed; and it comes to 
the same thing as if I should say he is unarmed. I affirm according to time, when I say he is of yesterday; I 
deny according to time, when I say he is not of yesterday. And when I say he is at Rome, I affirm according 
to place; and I deny according to place, when I say he is not at Rome. I affirm according to the predicament 
of action, when I say he smites; but if I say he does not smite, I deny according to action, so as to declare 
that he does not so act. And when I say he is smitten, I affirm according to the predicament of passion; and I 
deny according to the same, when I say he is not smitten. And, in a word, there is no kind of predicament 
according to which we may please to affirm anything, without being proved to deny according to the same 
predicament, if we prefix the negative particle. And since this is so, if I were to affirm according to substance, 
in saying son, I should deny according to substance, in saying not son. But because I affirm relatively when I 
say he is a son, for I refer to the father therefore I deny relatively if I say he is not a son, for I refer the same 
negation to the father, in that I wish to declare that he has not a parent. But if to be called son is precisely 
equivalent to the being called begotten (as we said before), then to be called not begotten is precisely 
equivalent to the being called not son. But we deny relatively when we say he is not son, therefore we deny 
relatively when we say he is not begotten. Further, what is unbegotten, unless not begotten? We do not 
escape, therefore, from the relative predicament, when he is called unbegotten. For as begotten is not said 
in relation to self, but in that he is of a begetter; so when one is called unbegotten, he is not so called in 
relation to himself, but it is declared that he is not of a begetter. Both meanings, however, turn upon the same 
predicament, which is called that of relation. But that which is asserted relatively does not denote substance, 
and accordingly, although begotten and unbegotten are diverse, they do not denote a different substance; 
because, as son is referred to father, and not son to not father, so it follows inevitably that begotten must be 
referred to begetter, and not-begotten to not-begetter.(2) 

CHAP. 8. -WHATEVER IS SPOKEN OF GOD ACCORDING TO SUBSTANCE, AS SPOKEN 
OF EACH PERSON SEVERALLY, AND TOGETHER OF THE TRINITY ITSELF. ONE 
ESSENCE IN GOD, AND THREE, IN GREEK, HYPOSTASES, IN LATIN, PERSONS. 

9. Wherefore let us hold this above all, that whatsoever is said of that most eminent and divine loftiness in 
respect to itself, is said in respect to substance, but that which is said in relation to anything, is not said in 

respect to substance, but relatively; and that the effect of the same substance in Father and Son and Holy 
Spirit is, that whatsoever is said of each in respect to themselves, is to be taken of them, not in the plural in 
sum, but in the singular. For as the Father is God, and the Son is God, and the Holy Spirit is God, which no 
one doubts to be said in respect to substance, yet we do not say that the very Supreme Trinity itself is three 
Gods, but one God. So the Father is great, the Son great, and the Holy Spirit great; yet not three greats, but 
one great. For it is not written of the Father alone, as they perversely suppose, but of the Father and the Son 
and the Holy Spirit, "Thou art great: Thou art God alone. "(3) And the Father is good, the Son good, and the 
Holy Spirit good; yet not three goods, but one good, of whom it is said, "None is good, save one, that is, 
God." For the Lord Jesus, lest He should be understood as man only by him who said, "Good Master," as 
addressing a man, does not therefore say, There is none good, save the Father alone; but, "None is good, 
save one, that is, God. "(4) For the Father by Himself is declared by the name of Father; but by the name of 
God, both Himself and the Son and the Holy Spirit., because the Trinity is one God. But position, and 
condition, and places, and times, are not said to be in God properly, but metaphorically and through 
similitudes. For He is both said to dwell between the cherubims,(1) which is spoken in respect to position; 
and to be covered with the deep as with a garment,(2) which is said in respect to condition; and "Thy years 
shall have no end, "(3) which is said in respect of time; and, "If I ascend up into heaven, Thou art there, "(4) 
which is said in respect to place. And as respects action (or making), perhaps it may be said most truly of 
God alone, for God alone makes and Himself is not made. Nor is He liable to passions as far as belongs to 
that substance whereby He is God. So the Father is omnipotent, the Son omnipotent, and the Holy Spirit is 
omnipotent; yet not three omnipotents, but one omnipotent:(5) "For of Him are all things, and through Him are 
all things, and in Him are all things; to whom be glory. "(6) Whatever, therefore, is spoken of God in respect to 
Himself, is both spoken singly of each person, that is, of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit; and 
together of the Trinity itself, not plurally but in the singular. For inasmuch as to God it is not one thing to be, 
and another thing to be great, but to Him it is the same thing to be, as it is to be great; therefore, as we do not 
say three essences, so we do not say three greatnesses, but one essence and one greatness. I say 
essence, which in Greek is called <greek>ousia</greek>, and which we call more usually substance. 

10. They indeed use also the word hypostasis; but they intend to put a difference, I know not what, between 
<greek>ousia</greek> and hypostasis: so that most of ourselves who treat these things in the Greek 
language, are accustomed to say, <greek>mian</greek> <greek>ousian</greek> <greek>treis</greek> 
<greek>upostaseis</greek> or in Latin, one essence, three substances? 

CHAP. 9. -THE THREE PERSONS NOT PROPERLY SO CALLED [IN A HUMAN SENSE]. 

But because with us the usage has already obtained, that by essence we understand the same thing which 
is understood by substance; we do not dare to say one essence, three substances, but one essence or 
substance and three persons: as many writers in Latin, who treat of these things, and are of authority, have 
said, in that they could not find any other more suitable way by which to enunciate in words that which they 
understood without words. For, in truth, as the Father is not the Son, and the Son is not the Father, and that 
Holy Spirit who is also called the gift of God is neither the Father nor the Son, certainly they are three. And so 
it is said plurally, "I and my Father are one. "(8) For He has not said, "is one," as the Sabellians say; but, "are 
one." Yet, when the question is asked, What three? human language labors altogether under great poverty 
of speech. The answer, however, is given, three "persons," not that it might be [completely] spoken, but that 
it might not be left [wholly] unspoken. 

CHAP. 10. -THOSE THINGS WHICH BELONG ABSOLUTELY TO GOD AS AN ESSENCE, 
ARE SPOKEN OF THE TRINITY IN THE SINGULAR, NOT IN THE PLURAL. 

1 1 . As, therefore, we do not say three essences, so we do not say three greatnesses, or three who are 
great. For in things which are great by partaking of greatness, to which it is one thing to be, and another to be 
great, as a great house, and a great mountain, and a great mind; in these things, I say, greatness is one 
thing, and that which is great because of greatness is another, and a great house, certainly, is not absolute 
greatness itself. But that is absolute greatness by which not only a great house is great, and any great 
mountain is great, but also by which every other thing whatsoever is great, which is called great; so that 
greatness itself is one thing, and those things are another which are called great from it. And this greatness 
certainly is primarily great, and in a much more excellent way than those things which are great by partaking 
of it. But since God is not great with that greatness which is not Himself, so that God, in being great, is, as it 
were, partaker of that greatness;-otherwise that will be a greatness greater than God, whereas there is 
nothing greater than God; therefore, He is great with that greatness by which He Himself is that same 
greatness. And, therefore, as we do not say three essences, so neither do we say three greatnesses; for it 
is the same thing to God to be, and to be great. For the same reason neither do we say three greats, but one 

who is great; since God is not great by partaking of greatness, but He is great by Himself being great, 
because He Himself is His own greatness. Let the same be said also of the goodness, and of the eternity, 
and of the omnipotence of God, and, in short, of all the predicaments which can be predicated of God, as 
He is spoken of in respect to Himself, not metaphorically and by similitude, but properly, if indeed anything 
can be spoken of Him properly, by the mouth of man. 

CHAP. 11. -WHAT IS SAID RELATIVELY IN THE TRINITY. 

12. But whereas, in the same Trinity, some things severally are specially predicated, these are in no way 
said in reference to themselves in themselves, but either in mutual reference, or in respect to the creature; 
and, therefore, it is manifest that such things are spoken relatively, not in the way of substance. For the Trinity 
is called one God, great, good, eternal, omnipotent; and the same God Himself may be called His own 
deity, His own magnitude, His own goodness, His own, eternity, His own omnipotence: but the Trinity cannot 
in the same way be called the Father, except perhaps metaphorically, in respect to the creature, on account 
of the adoption of sons. For that which is written, "Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God is one Lord,"(1) ought 
certainly not to be understood as if the Son were excepted, or the Holy Spirit were excepted; which one Lord 
our God we rightly call also our Father, as regenerating us by His grace. Neither can the Trinity in any wise 
be called the Son, but it can be called, in its entirety, the Holy Spirit, according to that which is written, "God is 
a Spirit;"(2) because both the Father is a spirit and the Son is a spirit, and the Father is holy and the Son is 
holy. Therefore, since the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit are one God, and certainly God is holy, and 
God is a spirit, the Trinity can be called also the Holy Spirit. But yet that Holy Spirit, who is not the Trinity, but 
is understood as in the Trinity, is spoken of in His proper name of the Holy Spirit relatively, since He is 
referred both to the Father and to the Son, because the Holy Spirit is the Spirit both of the Father and of the 
Son. But the relation is not itself apparent in that name, but it is apparent when He is called the gift of God;(3) 
for He is the gift of the Father and of the Son, because "He proceeds from the Father,"(4) as the Lord says; 
and because that which the apostle says, "Now, if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His, "(5) 
he says certainly of the Holy Spirit Himself. When we say, therefore, the gift of the giver, and the giver of the 
gift, we speak in both cases relatively in reciprocal reference. Therefore the Holy Spirit is a certain 
unutterable communion of the Father and the Son; and on that account, perhaps, He is so called, because 
the same name is suitable to both the Father and the Son. For He Himself is called specially that which they 
are called in common; because both the Father is a spirit and the Son a spirit, both the Father is holy and the 
Son holy. (6) In order, therefore, that the communion of both may be signified from a name which is suitable to 
both, the Holy Spirit is called the gift of both. And this Trinity is one God, alone, good, great, eternal, 
omnipotent; itself its own unity, deity, greatness, goodness, eternity, omnipotence. 

CHAP. 12. -IN RELATIVE THINGS THAT ARE RECIPROCAL, NAMES ARE SOMETIMES 
WANTING. 

13. Neither ought it to influence us-since we have said that the Holy Spirit is so called relatively, not the 
Trinity itself, but He who is in the Trinity— that the designation of Him to whom He is referred, does not seem 
to answer in turn to His designation. For we cannot, as we say the servant of a master, and the master of a 
servant, the son of a father and the father of a son, so also say here-because these things are said 
relatively. For we speak of the Holy Spirit of the Father; but, on the other hand, we do not speak of the Father 
of the Holy Spirit, test the Holy Spirit should be understood to be His Son. So also we speak of the Holy 
Spirit of the Son; but we do not speak of the Son of the Holy Spirit, lest the Holy Spirit be understood to be 
His Father. For it is the case in many relatives, that no designation is to be found by which those things which 
bear relation to each other may [in name] mutually correspond to each other. For what is more clearly 
spoken relatively than the word earnest? Since it is referred to that of which it is an earnest, and an earnest is 
always an earnest of something. Can we then, as we say, the earnest of the Father and of the Son,(1) say in 
turn, the Father of the earnest or the Son of the earnest? But, on the other hand, when we say the gift of the 
Father and of the Son, we cannot indeed say the Father of the gift, or the Son of the gift; but that these may 
correspond mutually to each other, we say the gift of the giver and the giver of the gift; because here a word 
in use may be found, there it cannot. 

CHAP. 13. -HOW THE WORD BEGINNING (PRINCIPIUM) IS SPOKEN RELATIVELY IN THE 
TRINITY. 

14. The Father is called so, therefore, relatively, and He is also relatively said to be the Beginning, and 
whatever else there may be of the kind; but He is called the Father in relation to the Son, the Beginning in 
relation to all things, which are from Him. So the Son is relatively so called; He is called also relatively the 

Word and the Image. And in all these appellations He is referred to the Father, but the Father is called by 
none of them. And the Son is also called the Beginning; for when it was said to Him, "Who art Thou?" He 
replied, "Even the Beginning, who also speak to you. "(2) But is He, pray, the Beginning of the Father? For 
He intended to show Himself to be the Creator when He said that He was the Beginning, as the Father also 
is the beginning of the creature in that all things are from Him. For creator, too, is spoken relatively to 
creature, as master to servant. And so when we say, both that the Father is the Beginning, and that the Son is 
the Beginning, we do not speak of two beginnings of the creature; since both the Father and the Son 
together is one beginning in respect to the creature, as one Creator, as one God. But if whatever remains 
within itself and produces or Works anything is a beginning to that thing which it produces or works; then we 
cannot deny that the Holy Spirit also is rightly called the Beginning, since we do not separate Him from the 
appellation of Creator: and it is written of Him that He works; and assuredly, in working, He remains within 
Himself; for He Himself is not changed and turned into any of the things which He works. And see what it is 
that He works: "But the manifestation of the Spirit," he says, "is given to every man to profit withal. For to one 
is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit; to another 
faith by the same Spirit; to another the gifts of healing by the same Spirit; to another the working of miracles; 
to another prophecy; to another the discerning of spirits; to another divers kinds of tongues; to another the 
interpretation of tongues: but all these worketh that one and the self-same Spirit, dividing to every man 
severally as He will;" certainly as God-for who can work such great things but God?-but "it is the same God 
which worketh all in all. "(3) For if we are asked point by point concerning the Holy Spirit, we answer most 
truly that He is God; and with the Father and the Son together He is one God. Therefore, God is spoken of 
as one Beginning in respect to the creature, not as two or three beginnings. 

CHAP. 14.-THE FATHER AND THE SON THE ONLY BEGINNING (PRINCIPIUM) OF THE 
HOLY SPIRIT. 

15. But in their mutual relation to one another in the Trinity itself, if the begetter is a beginning in relation to that 
which he begets, the Father is a beginning in relation to the Son, because the begets Him; but whether the 
Father is also a beginning in relation to the Holy Spirit, since it is said, "He proceeds from the Father," is no 
small question. Because, if it is so, He will not only be a beginning to that thing which He begets or makes, 
but also to that which He gives. And here, too, that question comes to light, as it can, which is wont to trouble 
many, Why the Holy Spirit is not also a son, since He, too, comes forth from the Father, as it is read in the 
Gospel? For the Spirit came forth, not as born, but as given; and so He is not called a son, because He was 
neither born, as the Only-begotten, nor made, so that by the grace of God He might be born into adoption, 
as we are. For that which is born of the Father, is referred to the Father only when called Son, and so the Son 
is the Son of the Father, and not also our Son; but that which is given is referred both to Him who gave, and 
to those to whom He gave; and so the Holy Spirit is not only the Spirit of the Father and of the Son who gave 
Him, but He is also called ours, who have received Him: as "The salvation of the Lord,"(1) who gives 
salvation, is said also to be our salvation, who have received it. Therefore, the Spirit is both the Spirit of God 
who gave Him, and ours who have received Him. Not, indeed, that spirit of ours by which we are, because 
that is the spirit of a man which is in him; but this Spirit is ours in another mode, viz. that in which we also say, 
"Give us this day our bread. "(2) Although certainly we have received that spirit also, which is called the spirit 
of a man. "For what hast thou," he says, "which thou didst not receive?"(3) But that is one thing, which we 
have received that we might be; another, that which we have received that we might be holy. Whence it is 
also written of John, that he "came in the spirit and power of Elias;"(4) and by the spirit of Elias is meant the 
Holy Spirit, whom Elias received. And the same thing is to be understood of Moses, when the Lord says to 
him, "And I will take of thy spirit, and will put it upon them;"(5) that is, I will give to them of the Holy Spirit, which I 
have already given to thee. If, therefore, that also which is given has him for a beginning by whom it is given, 
since it has received from no other source that which proceeds from him; it must be admitted that the Father 
and the Son are a Beginning of the Holy Spirit, not two Beginnings; but as the Father and Son are one God, 
and one Creator, and one Lord relatively to the creature, so are they one Beginning relatively to the Holy 
Spirit. But the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit is one Beginning in respect to the creature, as also one 
Creator and one God. (6) 

CHAP. 15.-WHETHER THE HOLY SPIRIT WAS A GIFT BEFORE AS WELL AS AFTER HE 
WAS GIVEN. 

16. But it is asked further, whether, as the Son, by being born, has not only this, that He is the Son, but that He 
is absolutely; and so also the Holy Spirit, by being given, has not only this, that He is given, but that He is 
absolutely-whether therefore He was, before He was given, but was not yet a gift; or whether, for the very 
reason that God was about to give Him, He was already a gift also before He was given. But if He does not 

proceed unless when He is given, and assuredly could not proceed before there was one to whom He 
might be given; how, in that case, was He [absolutely] in His very substance, if He is not unless because He 
is given? just as the Son, by being born, not only has this, that He is a Son, which is said relatively, but His 
very substance absolutely, so that He is. Does the Holy Spirit proceed always, and proceed not in time, but 
from eternity, but because He so proceeded that He was capable of being given, was already a gift even 
before there was one to whom He might be given? For there is a difference in meaning between a gift and a 
thing that has been given. For a gift may exist even before it is given; but it cannot be called a thing that has 
been given unless it has been given. 

CHAP. 16. -WHAT IS SAID OF GOD IN TIME, IS SAID RELATIVELY, NOT ACCIDENTALLY. 

17. Nor let it trouble us that the Holy Spirit, although He is co-eternal with the Father and the Son, yet is called 
something which exists in time; as, for instance, this very thing which we have called Him, a thing that has 
been given. For the Spirit is a gift eternally, but a thing that has been given in time. For if a lord also is not so 
called unless when he begins to have a slave, that appellation likewise is relative and in time to God; for the 
creature is not from all eternity, of which He is the Lord. How then shall we make it good that relative terms 
themselves are not accidental, since nothing happens accidentally to God in time, because He is 
incapable of change, as we have argued in the beginning of this discussion? Behold! to be the Lord, is not 
eternal to God; otherwise we should be compelled to say that the creature also is from eternity, since He 
would not be a lord from all eternity unless the creature also was a servant from all eternity. But as he cannot 
be a slave who has not a lord, neither can he be a lord who has not a slave. And if there be any one who 
says that God, indeed, is alone eternal, and that times are not eternal on account of their variety and 
changeableness, but that times nevertheless did not begin to be in time (for there was no time before times 
began, and therefore it did not happen to God in time that He should be Lord, since He was Lord of the very 
times themselves, which assuredly did not begin in time): what will he reply respecting man, who was made 
in time, and of whom assuredly He was not the Lord before he was of whom He was to be Lord? Certainly to 
be the Lord of man happened to God in time. And that all dispute may seem to be taken away, certainly to 
be your Lord, or mine, who have only lately begun to be, happened to God in time. Or if this, too, seems 
uncertain on account of the obscure question respecting the soul, what is to be said of His being the Lord of 
the people of Israel? since, although the nature of the soul already existed, which that people had (a matter 
into which we do not now inquire), yet that people existed not as yet, and the time is apparent when it began 
to exist. Lastly, that He should be Lord of this or that tree, or of this or that corn crop, which only lately began 
to be, happened in time; since, although the matter itself already existed, yet it is on, thing to be Lord of the 
matter (materiae), another to be Lord of the already created nature (naturae). (1) For man, too, is lord of the 
wood at one time, and at another he is lord of the chest, although fabricated of that same wood; which he 
certainly was not at the time when he was already the lord of the wood. How then shall we make it good that 
nothing is said of God according to accident, except because nothing happens to His nature by which He 
may be changed, so that those things are relative accidents which happen in, connection with some change 
of the things of which they are spoken. As a friend is so called relatively: for he does not begin to be one, 
unless when he has begun to love; therefore some change of will takes place, in order that he may be 
called a friend. And money, when it is called a price, is spoken of relatively, and yet it was not changed 
when it began to be a price; nor, again, when it is called a pledge, or any other thing of the kind. If, therefore, 
money can so often be spoken of relatively with no change of itself, so that neither when it begins, nor when 
it ceases to be so spoken of, does any change take place in that nature or form of it, whereby it is money; 
how much more easily ought we to admit, concerning that unchangeable substance of God, that something 
may be so predicated relatively in respect to the creature, that although it begin to be so predicated in time, 
yet nothing shall be understood to have happened to the substance itself of God, but only to that creature in 
respect to which it is predicated? "Lord," it is said, "Thou hast been made our refuge. "(2) God, therefore, is 
said to be our refuge relatively, for He is referred to us, and He then becomes our refuge when we flee to 
Him; pray does anything come to pass then in His nature, which, before we fled to Him, was not? In us 
therefore some change does take place; for we were worse before we fled to Him, and we become better 
by fleeing to Him: but in Him there is no change. So also He begins to be our Father, when we are 
regenerated through His grace, since He gave us power to become the sons of God. (3) Our substance 
therefore is changed for the better, when we become His sons; and He at the same time begins to be our 
Father, but without any change of His own substance. Therefore that which begins to be spoken of God in 
time, and which was not spoken of Him before, is manifestly spoken of Him relatively; yet not according to 
any accident of God, so that anything should have happened to Him, but clearly according to some 
accident of that, in respect to which God begins to be called something relatively. When a righteous man 
begins to be a friend of God, he himself is changed; but far be it from us to say, that God loves any one in 
time with as it were a new love, which was not in Him before, with whom things gone by have not passed 

away and things future have been already done. Therefore He loved all His saints before the foundation of 
the world, as He predestinated them; but when they are converted and find them; then they are said to begin 
to be loved by Him, that what is said may be said in that way in which it can be comprehended by human 
affections. So also, when He is said to be wroth with the unrighteous, and gentle with the good, they are 
changed, not He: just as the light is troublesome to weak eyes, pleasant to those that are strong; namely, by 
their change, not its own. 

THE FIFTEEN BOOKS OF AURELIUS AUGUSTINUS, 
BISHOP OF HIPPO, ON THE TRINITY: BOOK VI 

BOOK VI. 

THE QUESTION IS PROPOSED, HOW THE APOSTLE CALLS CHRIST "THE POWER OF 
GOD, AND THE WISDOM OF GOD." AND AN ARGUMENT IS RAISED, WHETHER THE 
FATHER IS NOT WISDOM HIMSELF, BUT ONLY THE FATHER OF WISDOM; OR 
WHETHER WISDOM BEGAT WISDOM. BUT THE ANSWER TO THIS IS DEFERRED FOR A 
LITTLE, WHILE THE UNITY AND EQUALITY OF THE FATHER, AND OF THE SON, AND OF 
THE HOLY GHOST, ARE PROVED; AND THAT WE OUGHT TO BELIEVE IN A TRINITY, 
NOT IN A THREEFOLD (TRIPLICEM) GOD. LASTLY, THAT SAYING OF HILARY IS 
EXPLAINED, ETERNITY IN THE FATHER, APPEARANCE IN THE IMAGE, USE IN THE 
GIFT. 

CHAP. 1.--THE SON, ACCORDING TO THE APOSTLE, IS THE POWER AND WISDOM OF 
THE FATHER. HENCE THE REASONING OF THE CATHOLICS AGAINST THE EARLIER 
ARIANS. A DIFFICULTY IS RAISED, WHETHER THE FATHER IS NOT WISDOM HIMSELF, 
BUT ONLYTHE FATHER OF WISDOM. 

1. Some think themselves hindered from admitting the equality of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, because it 
is written, "Christ, the power of God, and the wisdom of God;" in that, on this ground, there does not appear to 
be equality; because the Father is not Himself power and wisdom, but the begetter of power and wisdom. 
And, in truth, the question is usually asked with no common earnestness, in what way God can be called the 
Father of power and wisdom. For the apostle says, "Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God."(1) 
And hence some on our side have reasoned in this way against the Arians, at least against those who at 
first set themselves up against the Catholic faith. For Arius himself is reported to have said, that if He is a 
Son, then He was born; if He was born, there was a time when the Son was not: not understanding that even 
to be born is, to God, from all eternity; so that the Son is co-eternal with the Father, as the brightness which is 
produced and is spread around by fire is co-eval with it, and would be co-eternal, if fire were eternal. And 
therefore some of the later Arians have abandoned that opinion, and have confessed that the Son of God 
did not begin to be in time. But among the arguments which those on our side used to hold against them who 
said that there was a time when the Son was not, some were wont to introduce such an argument as this: If 
the Son of God is the power and wisdom of God, and God was never without power and wisdom, then the 
Son is co-eternal with God the Father; but the apostle says, "Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of 
God;" and a man must be senseless to say that God at any time had not power or wisdom; therefore there 
was no time when the Son was not. 

2. Now this argument compels us to say that God the Father is not wise, except by having the wisdom which 
He begat, not by the Father in Himself being wisdom itself. Further, if it be so, just as the Son also Himself is 
called God of God, Light of Light, we must consider whether He can be called wisdom of wisdom, if God the 
Father is not wisdom itself, but only the begetter of wisdom. And if we hold this, why is He not the begetter 
also of His own greatness, and of His own goodness, and of His own eternity, and of His own omnipotence; 
so that He is not Himself His own greatness, and His own goodness, and His own eternity, and His own 
omnipotence; but is great with that greatness which He begat, and good with that goodness, and eternal with 
that eternity, and omnipotent with that omnipotence, which was born of Him; just as He Himself is not His own 
wisdom, but is wise with that wisdom which was born of Him? For we need not be afraid of being compelled 
to say that there are many sons of God, over and above the adoption of the creature, co-eternal with the 
Father, if He be the begetter of His own greatness, and goodness, and eternity, and omnipotence. Because 
it is easy to reply to this cavil, that it does not at all follow, because many things are named, that He should 
be the Father of many co-eternal sons; just as it does not follow that He is the Father of two sons, because 
Christ is said to be the power of God, and the wisdom of God. For that certainly is the power which is the 
wisdom, and that is the wisdom which is the power; and in like manner, therefore, of the rest also; so that that 
is the greatness which is the power, or any other of those things which either have been mentioned above, 
or may hereafter be mentioned. 

CHAP. 2 .--WHAT IS SAID OF THE FATHER AND SON TOGETHER, AND WHAT NOT. 

3. But if nothing is spoken of the Father as such, except that which is spoken of Him in relation to the Son, that 
is, that He is His father, or begetter, or beginning; and if also the begetter is by consequence a beginning to 
that which he begets of himself; but whatever else is spoken of Him is so spoken as with the Son, or rather in 
the Son; whether that He is great with that greatness which He begat, or just with that justice which He begat, 
or good with that goodness which He begat, or powerful with that force or power which He begat, or wise with 
that wisdom which He begat: yet the Father is not said to be greatness itself, but the begetter of greatness; 
but the Son, as He is called the Son as such, is not so called with the Father but in relation to the Father, so is 
not great in and by himself, but with the Father, of whom He is the greatness; and so also is called wise with 
the Father, of whom He Himself is the wisdom; just as the Father is called wise with the Son, because He is 
wise with that wisdom which He begat; therefore the one is not called without the other, whatever they are 
called in respect to themselves; that is, whatever they are called that manifests their essential nature, both 
are so called together;-if these things are so, then the Father is not God without the Son, nor the Son God 
without the Father, but both together are God. And that which is said, "In the beginning was the Word," means 
that the Word was in the Father, Or if "In the beginning" is intended to mean, Before all things; then in that 
which follows, "And the Word was with God," the Son alone is understood to be the Word, not the Father and 
Son together, as though both were one Word (for He is the Word in the same way as He is the Image, but 
the Father and Son are not both together the Image, but the Son alone is the Image of the Father: just as He 
is also the Son of the Father, for both together are not the Son). But in that which is added, "And the Word 
was with God," there is much reason to understand thus: "The Word," which is the Son alone, "was with 
God," which is not the Father alone, but God the Father and the Son together.(l) But what wonder is there, if 
this can be said in the case of some twofold things widely different from each other? For what are so different 
as soul and body? Yet we can say the soul was with a man, that is, in a man; although the soul is not the 
body, and man is both soul and body together. So that what follows in the Scripture, "And the Word was 
God, "(2) may be understood thus: The Word, which is not the Father, was God together with the Father. Are 
we then to say thus, that the Father is the begetter of His own greatness, that is, the begetter of His own 
power, or the begetter of His own wisdom; and that the Son is greatness, and power, and wisdom; but that 
the great, omnipotent, and wise God, is both together? How then God of God, Light of Light? For not both 
together are God of God, but only the Son is of God, that is to say, of the Father; nor are both together Light 
of Light, but the Son only is of Light, that is, of the Father. Unless, perhaps, it was in order to intimate and 
inculcate briefly that the Son is co-eternal with the Father, that it is said, God of God, and Light of Light, or 
anything else of the like kind: as if to say, This which is not the Son without the Father, of this which is not the 
Father without the Son; that is, this Light which is not Light without the Father, of that Light, viz. the Father, which 
is not Light without the Son; so that, when it is said, God which is not the Son without the Father, and of God 
which is not the Father without the Son, it may be perfectly understood that the Begetter did not precede that 
which He begot. And if this be so, then this alone cannot be said of them, namely, this or that of this or that, 
which they are not both together. Just as the Word cannot be said to be of the Word, because both are not 
the Word together, but only the Son; nor image of image, since they are not both together the image; nor 
Son of Son, since both together are not the Son, according to that which is said, "I and my Father are 
one."(1) For "we are one" means, what He is, that am I also; according to essence, not according to 
relation. 

CHAP. 3. -THAT THE UNITY OF THE ESSENCE OF THE FATHER AND THE SON IS TO BE 
GATHERED FROM THE WORDS, "WE ARE ONE." THE SON IS EQUALTO THE FATHER 
BOTH IN WISDOM AND IN ALL OTHER THINGS. 

4. And I know not whether the words, "They are one," are ever found in Scripture as spoken of things of 
which the nature is different. But if there are more things than one of the same nature, and they differ in 
sentiment, they are not one, and that so far as they differ in sentiment. For if the disciples were already one 
by the fact of being men, He would not say, "That they may be one, as we are one, "(2) when commending 
them to the Father. But because Paul and Apollos were both alike men, and also of like sentiments, "He that 
planteth," he says, "and he that watereth are one. "(3) When, therefore, anything is so called one, that it is not 
added in what it is one, and yet more things than one are called one, then the same essence and nature is 
signified, not differing nor disagreeing. But when it is added in what it is one, it may be meant that something 
is made one out of things more than one, though they are different in nature. As soul and body are assuredly 
not one; for, what are so different? unless there be added, or understood in what they are one, that is, one 
man, or one animal [person]. Thence the apostle says, "He who is joined to a harlot, is one body;" he does 
not say, they are one or he is one; but he has added "body," as though it were one body composed by 
being joined together of two different bodies, masculine and feminine. (4) And, "He that is joined unto the 

Lord," he says," is one spirit:" he did not say, he that is joined unto the Lord is one, or they are one; but he 
added, "spirit" For the spirit of man and the Spirit of God are different in nature; but by being joined they 
become one spirit of two different spirits, so that the Spirit of God is blessed and perfect without the human 
spirit, but the spirit of man cannot be blessed without God. Nor is it without cause, I think, that when the Lord 
said so much in the Gospel according to John, and so often, of unity itself, whether of His own with the Father, 
or of ours interchangeably with ourselves; He has nowhere said, that we are also one with Himself, but, "that 
they may be one as we also are one. "(5) Therefore the Father and the Son are one, undoubtedly according 
to unity of substance; and there is one God, and one great, and one wise, as we have argued. 

5. Whence then is the Father greater? For if greater, He is greater by greatness; but whereas the Son is His 
greatness, neither assuredly is the Son greater than He who begat Him, nor is the Father greater than that 
greatness, whereby He is great; therefore they are equal. For whence is He equal, if not in that which He is, 
to whom it is not one thing to be, and another to be great? Or if the Father is greater in eternity, the Son is not 
equal in anything whatsoever. For whence equal? If you say in greatness, that greatness is not equal which 
is less eternal, and so of all things else. Or is He perhaps equal in power, but not equal in wisdom? But how 
is that power which is less wise, equal? Or is He equal in wisdom, but not equal in power? But how is that 
wisdom equal which is less powerful? It remains, therefore, that if He is not equal in anything, He is not equal 
in all. But Scripture proclaims, that "He thought it not robbery to be equal with God. "(6) Therefore any 
adversary of the truth whatever, provided he feels bound by apostolical authority, must needs confess that 
the Son is equal with God in each one thing whatsoever. Let him choose that which he will; from it he will be 
shown, that He is equal in all things which are said of His substance. 

CHAP. 4.--THE SAME ARGUMENT CONTINUED. 

6. For in like manner the virtues which are in the human mind, although each has its own several and different 
meaning, yet are in no way mutually separable; so that, for instance, whosoever were equal in courage, are 
equal also in prudence, and temperance, and justice. For if you say that such and such men are equal in 
courage, but that one of them is greater in prudence, it follows that the courage of the other is less prudent, 
and so neither are they equal in courage, since the courage of the former is more prudent. And so you will 
find it to be the case with the other virtues, if you consider them one by one. For the question is not of the 
strength of the body, but of the courage of the mind. How much more therefore is this the case in that 
unchangeable and eternal substance, which is incomparably more simple than the human mind is? Since, 

in the human mind, to be is not the same as to be strong, or prudent, or just, or temperate; for a mind can 
exist, and yet have none of these virtues. But in God to be is the same as to be strong, or to be just, or to be 
wise, or whatever is said of that simple multiplicity, or multifold simplicity, whereby to signify His substance. 
Wherefore, whether we say God of God in such way that this name belongs to each, yet not so that both 
together are two Gods, but one God; for they are in such way united with each other, as according to the 
apostle's testimony may take place even in diverse and differing substances; for both the Lord alone is a 
Spirit, and the spirit of a man alone is assuredly a spirit; yet, if it cleave to the Lord, "it is one spirit:" how much 
more there, where there is an absolutely inseparable and eternal union, so that He may not seem absurdly 
to be called as it were the Son of both, when He is called the Son of God, if that which is called God is only 
said of both together. Or perhaps it is, that whatever is said of God so as to indicate His substance, is not 
said except of both together, nay of the Trinity itself together? Whether therefore it be this or that (which 
needs a closer inquiry), it is enough for the present to see from what has been said, that the Son is in no 
respect equal with the Father, if He is found to be unequal in anything which has to do with signifying His 
substance, as we have already shown. But the apostle has said that He is equal. Therefore the Son is 
equal with the Father in all things, and is of one and the same substance. 

CHAP. 5.--THE HOLY SPIRIT ALSO IS EQUAL TO THE FATHER AND THE SON IN ALL 
THINGS. 

7. Wherefore also the Holy Spirit consists in the same unity of substance, and in the same equality. For 
whether He is the unity of both, or the holiness, or the love, or therefore the unity because the love, and 
therefore the love because the holiness, it is manifest that He is not one of the two, through whom the two are 
joined, through whom the Begotten is loved by the Begetter, and loves Him that begat Him, and through 
whom, not by participation, but by their own essence, neither by the gift of any superior, but by their own, they 
are "keeping the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace;"(1) which we are commanded to imitate by grace, 
both towards God and towards ourselves. "On which two commandments hang all the law and the 
prophets. "(2) So those three are God, one, alone, great, wise, holy, blessed. But we are blessed from Him, 
and through Him, and in Him; because we ourselves are one by His gift, and one spirit with Him, because 
our soul cleaves to Him so as to follow Him. And it is good for us to cleave to God, since He will destroy 

every man who is estranged from Him. (3) Therefore the Holy Spirit, whatever it is, is something common 
both to the Father and Son. But that communion itself is consubstantial and co-eternal; and if it may fitly be 
called friendship, let it be so called; but it is more aptly called love. And this is also a substance, since God 
is a substance, and "God is love," as it is written. (4) But as He is a substance together with the Father and 
the Son, so that substance is together with them great, and together with them good, and together with them 
holy, and whatsoever else is said in reference to substance; since it is not one thing to God to be, and 
another to be great or to be good, and the rest, as we have shown above. For if love is less great therein 
[i.e. in God] than wisdom, then wisdom is loved in less degree than according to what it is; love is therefore 
equal, in order that wisdom may be loved according to its being; but wisdom is equal with the Father, as we 
have proved-above; therefore also the Holy Spirit is equal; and if equal, equal in all things, off account of the 
absolute simplicity which is in that substance. And therefore they are not more than three: One who loves 
Him who is from Himself, and One who loves Him from whom He is, and Love itself. And if this last is nothing, 
how is "God love"? If it is not substance, how is God substance? 

CHAP. 6. -HOW GOD IS A SUBSTANCE BOTH SIMPLE AND MANIFOLD. 

8. But if it is asked how that substance is both simple and manifold: consider, first, why the creature is 
manifold, but in no way really simple. And first, all that is body is composed .certainly of parts; so that therein 
one part is greater, another less, and the whole is greater than any part whatever or how great soever. For 
the heaven and the earth are parts of the Whole bulk of the world; and the earth alone, and the heaven 
alone, is composed of innumerable parts; and its third part is less than the remainder, and the half of it is 
less than the whole; and the whole body of the world, which is usually called by its two parts, viz. the heaven 
and the earth, is certainly greater than the heaven alone or the earth alone. And in each several body, size 
is one thing, color another shape another; for the same color and the same shape may remain with 
diminished size; and the same shape and the same size may remain with the color changed; and the same 
shape not remaining, yet the thing may be just as great, and of the same color. And whatever other things 
are predicated together of body can be changed either all together, or the larger part of them without the 
rest. And hence the nature of body is conclusively proved to be manifold, and in no respect simple. The 
spiritual creature also, that is, the soul, is indeed the more simple of the two if compared with the body; but if 
we omit the comparison with the body, it is manifold, and itself also not simple. For it is on this account more 
simple than the body, because it is not diffused in bulk through extension of place, but in each body, it is 
both whole in the whole, and whole in each several part of it; and, therefore, when anything takes place in 
any small particle whatever of the body, such as the soul can feel, although it does not take place in the 
whole body, yet the whole soul feels it, since the whole soul is not unconscious of it. But, nevertheless, since 
in the soul also it is one thing to be skillful, another to be indolent, another to be intelligent, another to be of 
retentive memory; since cupidity is one thing, fear another, joy another, sadness another; and since things 
innumerable, and in innumerable ways, are to be found in the nature of the soul, some without others, and 
some more, some less; it is manifest that its nature is not simple, but manifold. For nothing simple is 
changeable, but every creature is changeable. 

CHAP. 7. --GOD IS A TRINITY, BUT NOT TRIPLE 

But God is truly called in manifold ways, great, good, wise, blessed, true, and whatsoever other thing seems 
to be said of Him not unworthily: but His greatness is the same as His wisdom; for He is not great by bulk, 
but by power; and His goodness is the same as His wisdom and greatness, and His truth the same as all 
those things; and in Him it is not one thing to be blessed, and another to be great, or wise, or true, or good, or 
in a word to be Himself. 

9. Neither, since He is a Trinity, is He therefore to be thought triple (triplex)(1) otherwise the Father alone, or 
the Son alone, will be less than the Father and Son together. Although, indeed, it is hard to see how we can 
say, either the Father alone, or the Son alone; since both the Father is with the Son, and the Son with the 
Father, always and inseparably: not that both are the Father, or both are the Son; but because they are 
always one in relation to the other, and neither the one nor the other alone. But because we call even the 
Trinity itself God alone, although He is always with holy spirits and souls, but say that He only is God, 
because they are not also God with Him; so we call the Father the Father alone, not because He is 
separate from the Son, but because they are not both together the Father. 

CHAP. 8. -NO ADDITION CAN BE MADE TO THE NATURE OF GOD. 

Since, therefore, the Father alone, or the Son alone, or the Holy Spirit alone, is as great as is the Father and 
the Son and the Holy Spirit together,(2) in no manner is He to be called threefold. Forasmuch as bodies 

increase by union of themselves. For although he who cleaves to his wife is one body; yet it is a greater 
body than if it were that of the husband alone, or of the wife alone. But in spiritual things, when the less 
adheres to the greater, as the creature to the Creators the former becomes greater than it was, not the 
latter.(3) For in those things which are not great by bulk, to be greater is to be better. And the spirit of any 
creature becomes better, when it cleaves to the Creator, than if it did not so cleave; and therefore also 
greater because better. "He," then, that is joined unto the Lord is one spirit:"(4) but yet the Lord does not 
therefore become greater, although he who is joined to the Lord does so. In God Himself, therefore when the 
equal Son, or the Holy Spirit equal to the Father and the Son, is joined to the equal Father, God does not 
become greater than each of them severally; because that perfectness cannot increase. But whether t be 
the Father, or the Son, or the Holy Spirit He is perfect, and God the Father the Son and the Holy Spirit is 
perfect; and therefore He is a Trinity rather than triple. 

CHAP. 9. -WHETHER ONE OR THE THREE PERSONS TOGETHER ARE CALLED THE 
ONLY GOD. 

1 0. And since we are showing how we can say the Father alone, because there is no Father in the Godhead 
except Himself, we must consider also the opinion which holds that the only true God is not the Father alone, 
but the leather and the Son and the Holy Spirit. For if any one should ask whether the Father alone is God, 
how can it be replied that He is not, unless perhaps we were to say that the Father indeed is God, but that 
He is not God alone, but that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are God alone? But then what shall we do with 
that testimony of the Lord? For He was speaking to the Father, and had named the Father as Him to whom 
He was speaking, when He says, "And this is life eternal, that they may know Thee the one true God."(1) 
And this the Arians indeed usually take, as if the Son were not true God. Passing them by, however, we must 
see whether, when it is said to the Father, "That they may know Thee the one true God," we are forced to 
understand it as if He wished to intimate that the Father alone is the true God; lest we should not understand 
any to be God, except the three together, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Are we therefore, from the 
testimony of the Lord, both to call the Father the one true God, and the Son the one true God, and the Holy 
Spirit the one true God, and the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit together, that is, the Trinity itself together, 
not three true Gods but one true God? Or because He added, "And Jesus Christ whom Thou hast sent," are 
we to supply "the one true God;" so that the order of the words is this, "That they may know Thee, and Jesus 
Christ whom Thou hast sent, the one true God?" Why then did He omit to mention the Holy Spirit? Is it 
because it fellow's, that whenever we name One who cleaves to One by a harmony so great that through 
this harmony both are one, this harmony itself must be understood, although it is not mentioned? For in that 
place, too, the apostle seems as it were to pass over the Holy Spirit; and yet there, too, He is understood, 
where he says, "All are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's. "(2) And again, "The head of the 
woman is the man, the head of the man is Christ, and the head of Christ is God. "(3) But again, if God is only 
all three together, how can God be the head of Christ, that is, the Trinity the head of Christ, since Christ is in 
the Trinity in order that it may be the Trinity? Is that which is the Father with the Son, the head of that which is 
the Son alone? For the Father with the Son is God, but the Son alone is Christ: especially since it is the Word 
already made flesh that speaks; and according to this His humiliation also, the Father is greater than He, as 
He says, "for my Father is greater than l;"(4) so that the very being of God, which is one to Him with the 
Father, is itself the head of the man who is mediator, which He is alone. (5) For if we rightly call the mind the 
chief thing of man, that is, as it were the head of the human substance, although the man himself together with 
the mind is man; why is not the Word with the Father, which together is God, much more suitably and much 
more the head of Christ, although Christ as man cannot be understood except with the Word which was 
made flesh? But this, as we have already said, we shall consider somewhat more carefully hereafter. At 
present the equality and one and the same substance of the Trinity has been demonstrated as briefly as 
possible, that in whatever way that other question be determined, the more rigorous discussion of which we 
have deferred, nothing may hinder us from confessing the absolute equality of the Father, Son, and Holy 
Spirit. 

CHAP. X.-OF THE ATTRIBUTES ASSIGNED BY HILARY TO EACH PERSON. THE TRINITY 
IS REPRESENTED IN THINGS THAT ARE MADE. 

1 1 . A certain writer, when he would briefly intimate the special attributes of each of the persons in the Trinity, 
tells us that "Eternity is in the Father, form in the Image, use in the Gift." And since he was a man of no mean 
authority in handling the Scriptures, and in the assertion of the faith, for it is Hilary who put this in his book (On 
the Trinity, ii.); I have searched into the hidden meaning of these words as far as I can, that is, of the Father, 
and the Image, and the Gift, of eternity, and of form, and of use. And I do not think that he intended more by 
the word eternity, than that the Father has not a father from whom He is; but the Son is from the Father, so as 

to be, and so as to be co-eternal with Him. For if an image perfectly fills the measure of that of which it is the 
image, then the image is made equal to that of which it is the image, not the latter to its own image. And in 
respect to this image he has named form, I believe on account of the quality of beauty, where there is at 
once such great fitness, and prime equality, and prime likeness, differing in nothing, and unequal in no 
respect, and in no part unlike, but answering exactly to Him whose image it is: where there is prime and 
absolute life, to whom it is not one thing to live, and another to be, but the same thing to be and to live; and 
prime and absolute intellect, to whom it is not one thing to live, another to understand, but to understand is to 
live, and is to be, and all things are one: as though a perfect Word (John i. I), to which nothing is wanting, and 
a certain skill of the omnipotent and wise God, full of all living, unchangeable sciences, and all one in it, as 
itself is one from one, with whom it is one. Therein God knew all things which He made by it; and therefore, 
while times pass away and succeed, nothing passes away or succeeds to the knowledge of God. For 
things which are created are not therefore known by God, because they have been made; and not rather 
have been therefore made, even although changeable, because they are known unchangeably by Him. 
Therefore that unspeakable conjunction of the Father and His image is not without fruition, without love, 
without joy. Therefore that love, delight, felicity, or blessedness, if indeed it can be worthily expressed by 
any human word, is called by him, in short, Use; and is the Holy Spirit in the Trinity, not begotten, but the 
sweetness of the begetter and of the begotten, filling all creatures according to their capacity with abundant 
bountifulness and copiousness, that they may keep their proper order and rest satisfied in their proper 
place. 

12. Therefore all these things which are made by divine skill, show in themselves a certain unity, and form, 
and order; for each of them is both some one thing, as are the several natures of bodies and dispositions of 
souls; and is fashioned in some form, as are the figures or qualities of bodies, and the various learning or 
skill of souls; and seeks or preserves a certain order, as are the several weights or combinations of bodies 
and the loves or delights of souls. When therefore we regard the Creator, who is understood by the things 
that are made(1) we must needs understand the Trinity of whom there appear traces in the creature, as is 
fitting. For in that Trinity is the supreme source of all things, and the most perfect beauty, and the most 
blessed delight. Those three, therefore, both seem to be mutually determined to each other, and are in 
themselves infinite. But here in corporeal things, one thing alone is not as much as three together, and two 
are something more than one; but in that highest Trinity one is as much as the three together, nor are two 
anything more than one. And They are infinite in themselves. So both each are in each, and all in each, and 
each in all, and all in all, and all are one. Let him who sees this, whether in part, or "through a glass and in an 
enigma, "(2) rejoice in knowing God; and let him honor Him as God, and give thanks; but let him who does 
not see it, strive to see it through piety, not to cavil at it through blindness. Since God is one, but yet is a 
Trinity. Neither are we to take the words, "of whom, and through whom, and to whom are all things," as used 
indiscriminately [i.e., to denote a unity without distinctions]; nor yet to denote many gods, for "to Him, be 
glory for ever and ever. Amen. "(3) 

THE FIFTEEN BOOKS OF AURELIUS AUGUSTINUS, 
BISHOP OF HIPPO, ON THE TRINITY: BOOK VII 

BOOK VII. 

THE QUESTION IS EXPLAINED, WHICH HAD BEEN DEFERRED IN THE PREVIOUS BOOK, 
VIZ. THAT GOD THE FATHER, WHO BEGAT THE SON, HIS POWER AND WISDOM, IS 
NOT ONLY THE FATHER OF POWER AND WISDOM, BUT ALSO HIMSELF POWER AND 
WISDOM; AND SIMILARLY THE HOLY SPIRIT: YET THAT THERE ARE NOT THREE 
POWERS OR THREE WISDOMS, BUT ONE POWER AND ONE WISDOM, AS THERE IS 
ONE GOD AND ONE ESSENCE. INQUIRY IS THEN MADE, WHY THE LATINS SAY ONE 
ESSENCE, THREE PERSONS, IN GOD; BUT THE GREEKS, ONE ESSENCE, THREE 
SUBSTANCES OR HYPOSTASES: AND BOTH MODES OF EXPRESSION ARE SHOWN TO 
ARISE FROM THE NECESSITIES OF SPEECH, THAT WE MIGHT HAVE AN ANSWER TO 
GIVE WHEN ASKED, WHAT THREE, WHILE TRULY CONFESSING THAT THERE ARE 
THREE, VIZ. THE FATHER, AND THE SON, AND THE HOLY SPIRIT. 

CHAP. 1.--AUGUSTIN RETURNS TO THE QUESTION, WHETHER EACH PERSON OF THE 
TRINITY BY ITSELF IS WISDOM. WITH WHAT DIFFICULTY, OR IN WHAT WAY, THE 
PROPOSED QUESTION IS TO BE SOLVED. 

1 . Let us now inquire more carefully, so far as God grants, into that which a little before we deferred; whether 
each person also in the Trinity can also by Himself and not with the other two be called God, or great, or 
wise, or true, or omnipotent, or just, or anything else that can be said of God, not relatively, but absolutely; or 
whether these things cannot be said except when the Trinity is understood. For the question is 
raised, -because it is written, "Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God,"(1)-whether He is so the 
Father of His own wisdom and His own power, as that He is wise with that wisdom which He begat, and 
powerful with that power which He begat; and whether, since He is always powerful and wise, He always 
begat power and wisdom. For if it be so, then, as we have said, why is He not also the Father of His own 
greatness by which He is great, and of His own goodness by which He is good, and of His own justice by 
which He is just, and whatever else there is? Or if all these things are understood, although under more 
names than one, to be in the same wisdom and power, so that that is greatness which is power, that is 
goodness which is wisdom, and that again is wisdom which is power, as we have already argued; then let 
us remember, that when I mention any one of these, I am to betaken as if I mentioned all. It is asked, then, 
whether the Father also by Himself is wise, and is Himself His own wisdom itself; or whether He is wise in the 
same way as He speaks. For He speaks by the Word which He begat, not by the word which is uttered, and 
sounds, and passes away, but by the Word which was with God, and the Word was God, and all things were 
made by Him:(2) by the Word which is equal to Himself, by whom He always and unchangeably utters 
Himself. For He is not Himself the Word, as He is not the Son nor the image. But in speaking (putting aside 
those words of God in time which are produced in the creature, for they sound and pass away, — in speaking 
then) by that co-eternal Word, He is not understood singly, but with that Word itself, without whom certainly 
He does not speak. Is He then in such way wise as He is one who speaks, so as to be in such way wisdom, 
as He is the Word, and so that to be the Word is to be wisdom, that is, also to be power, so that power and 
wisdom and the Word may be the same, and be so called relatively as the Son and the image: and that the 
Father is not singly powerful or wise, but together with the power and wisdom itself which He begat (genuit); 
just as He is not singly one who speaks, but by that Word and together with that Word which He begat; and 
in like way great by that and together with that greatness, which He begat? And if He is not great by one 
thing, and God by another, but great by that whereby He is God, because it is not one thing to Him to be 
great and another to be God; it follows that neither is He God singly, but by that and together with that deity 
(deitas) which He begat; so that the Son is the deity of the Father, as He is the wisdom and power of the 
Father, and as He is the Word and image of the Father. And because it is not one thing to Him to be, another 
to be God, the Son is also the essence of the Father, as He is His Word and image. And hence 
also-except that He is the Father [the Unbegotten]-the Father is not anything unless because He has the 
Son; so that not only that which is meant by Father (which it is manifest He is not called relatively to Himself 
but to the Son, and therefore is the Father because He has the Son), but that which He is in respect to His 

own substance is so called, because He begat His own essence. For as He is great, only with that 
greatness which He begat, so also He is, only with that essence which He begat; because it is not one thing 
to Him to be, and another to be great. Is He therefore the Father of His own essence, in the same way as He 
is the Father of His own greatness, as He is the Father of His own power and wisdom? since His greatness 
is the same as His power, and His essence the same as His greatness. 

2. This discussion has arisen from that which is written, that "Christ is the power of God, and the wisdom of 
God." Wherefore our discourse is compressed into these narrow limits, while we desire to speak things 
unspeakable; that either we must say that Christ is not the power of God and the wisdom of God, and so 
shamelessly and impiously resist the apostle; or we must acknowledge that Christ is indeed the power of 
God and the wisdom of God, but that His Father is not the Father of His own power and wisdom, which is not 
less impious; for so neither will He be the Father of Christ, because Christ is the power of God and the 
wisdom of God; or that the Father is not powerful with His own power, or wise with His own wisdom: and who 
shall dare to say this? Or yet, again, that we must understand, that in the Father it is one thing to be, another 
thing to be wise, so that He is not by that by which He is wise: a thing usually understood of the soul, which is 
at some times unwise, at others wise; as being by nature changeable, and not absolutely and perfectly 
simple. Or, again, that the Father is not anything in respect to His own substance; and that not only that He is 
the Father, but that He is, is said relatively to the Son. How then can the Son be of the same essence as the 
Father, seeing that the Father, in respect to Himself, is neither His own essence, nor is at all in respect to 
Himself, but even His essence is in relation to the Son? But, on the contrary, much more is He of one and 
[the same essence, since the Father and Son are one and the same essence; seeing that the Father has 
His being itself not in respect to Himself, but to the Son, which essence He begat, and by which essence He 
is whatever He is. Therefore neither [person] is in respect to Himself alone; and both exist relatively the one 
to the other. Or is the Father alone not called Father of himself, but whatever He is called, is called relatively 
to the Son, but the Son is predicated of in reference to Himself? And if it be so, what is predicated of Him in 
reference to Himself? Is it His essence itself? But the Son is the essence of the Father, as He is the power 
and wisdom of the Father, as He is the Word of the Father, and the image of the Father. Or if the Son is 
called essence in reference to Himself, but the Father is not essence, but the begetter of the essence, and 
is not in respect to Himself, but is by that very essence which He begat; as He is great by that greatness 
which He begat: therefore the Son is also called greatness in respect to Himself; therefore He is also 
[called, in like manner, power, and wisdom, and word, and image. But what can be more absurd than that 
He should be called image in respect to Himself? Or if image and word are not the very same with power 
and wisdom, but the former are spoken relatively, and the latter in respect to self, not to another; then we get 
to this, that the Father is not wise with that wisdom which He begat, because He Himself cannot be spoken 
relatively to it, and it cannot be spoken relatively to Him. For all things which are said relatively are said 
reciprocally; therefore it remains that even in essence the Son is spoken of relatively to the Father. But from 
this is educed a most unexpected sense: that essence itself is not essence, or at least that, when it is called 
essence, not essence but something relative is intimated. As when we speak of a master, essence is not 
intimated, but a relative which has reference to a slave; but when we speak of a man, or any such thing 
which is said in respect to self not to something else, then essence is intimated. Therefore when a man is 
called a master, man himself is essence, but he is called master relatively; for he is called man in respect to 
himself, but master in respect to his slave. But in regard to the point from which we started, if essence itself is 
spoken relatively, essence itself is not essence. Add further, that all essence which is spoken of relatively, 
is also something, although the relation be, taken away; as e.g. in the case of a man who is a master, and a 
man who is a slave, and a horse that is a beast of burden, and money that is a pledge, the man, and the 
horse, and the money are spoken in respect to themselves, and are substances or essences; but master, 
and slave, and beast of burden, and pledge, are spoken relatively to something. But if there were not a 
man, that is, some substance, there would be none who could be called relatively a master; and if there 
were no horse having a certain essence, there would be nothing that could be called relatively a beast of 
burden; so if money were not some kind of substance, it could not be called relatively a pledge. Wherefore, 
if the Father also is not something in respect to Himself then there is no one at all that can be spoken of 
relatively to something. For it is not as it is with color. The color of a thing is referred to the thing colored, and 
color is not spoken at all in reference to substance, but is always of something that is colored; but that thing 
of which it is the color, even if it is referred to color in respect to its being colored, is yet, in respect to its 
being a body, spoken of in respect to substance. But in no way may we think, in like manner, that the Father 
cannot be called anything in respect to His own substance, but that whatever He is called, He is called in 
relation to the Son; while the same Son is spoken of both in ret to His own substance and in relation to the 
Father, when He is called great greatness, and powerful power, plainly in respect to Himself, and the 
greatness and power of the great and powerful Father, by which the Father is great and powerful. It is not so; 
but both are substance, and both are one substance. And as it is absurd to say that whiteness is not white, 
so is it absurd to say that wisdom is not wise; and as whiteness is called white in respect to itself, so also 

wisdom is called wise in respect to itself. But the whiteness of a body is not an essence, since the body itself 
is the essence, and that is a quality of it; and hence also a body is said from that quality to be white, to which 
body to be is not the same thing as to be white. For the form in it is one thing, and the color another; and both 
are not in themselves, but in a certain bulk, which bulk is neither form nor color, but is formed and colored. 
True wisdom is both wise, and wise in itself. And since in the case of every soul that becomes wise by 
partaking of wisdom, if it again becomes foolish, yet wisdom in itself remains; nor when that soul was 
changed into folly is the wisdom likewise so changed; therefore wisdom is not in him who becomes wise by 
it, in the same manner as whiteness is in the body which is by it made white. For when the body has been 
changed into another color, that whiteness will not remain, but will altogether cease to be. But if the Father 
who begat wisdom is also made wise by it, and to be is not to Him the same as to be wise, then the Son is 
His quality, not His offspring; and there will no longer be absolute simplicity in the Godhead. But far be it from 
being so, since in truth in the Godhead is absolutely simple essence, and therefore to be is there the same 
as to be wise. But if to be is there the same as to be wise, then the Father is not wise by that wisdom which 
He begat; otherwise He did not beget it, but it begat Him. For what else do we say when we say, that to Him 
to be is the same as to be wise, unless that He is by that whereby He is wise? Wherefore, that which is the 
cause to Him of being wise, is itself also the cause to Him that He is; and accordingly, if the wisdom which 
He begat is the cause to Him of being wise, it is also the cause to Him that He is; and this cannot be the 
case, except either by begetting or by creating Him. But no one ever said in any sense that wisdom is either 
the begetter or the creator of the Father; for what could be more senseless? Therefore both the Father 
Himself is wisdom, and the Son is in such way called the wisdom of the Father, as He is called the light of 
the Father; that is, that in the same manner as light from light, and yet both one light, so we are to understand 
wisdom of wisdom, and yet both one wisdom; and therefore also one essence, since, in God, to be, is the 
same as to be wise. For what to be wise is to wisdom, and to be able is to power, and to be eternal is to 
eternity, and to be just to justice, and to be great to greatness, that being itself is to essence. And since in the 
Divine simplicity, to be wise is nothing else than to be, therefore wisdom there is the same as essence. 

CHAP. 2. -THE FATHER AND THE SON ARE TOGETHER ONE WISDOM, AS ONE 
ESSENCE, ALTHOUGH NOT TOGETHER ONE WORD. 

3. Therefore the Father and the Son together are one essence, and one greatness, and one truth, and one 
wisdom. But the Father and Son both together are not one Word, because both together are not one Son. 
For as the Son is referred to the Father, and is not so called in respect to Himself, so also the Word is 
referred to him whose Word it is, when it is called the Word. Since He is the Son in that He is the Word, and 
He is the Word in that He is the Son. Inasmuch, therefore, as the Father and the Son together are certainly 
not one Son, it follows that the Father and the Son together are not the one Word of both. And therefore He is 
not the Word in that He is wisdom; since He is not called the Word in respect to Himself, but only relatively to 
Him whose Word He is, as He is called the Son in relation to the Father; but He is wisdom by that whereby 
He is essence. And therefore, because one essence, one wisdom. But since the Word is also wisdom, yet 
is not thereby the Word because He is wisdom for He is understood to be the Word relatively, but wisdom 
essentially: let us understand, that when He is called the Word, it is meant, wisdom that is born, so as to be 
both the Son and the Image; and that when these two words are used, namely wisdom (is) born, in one of the 
two, namely barn,(1) both Word, and Image, and Son, are understood, and in all these names essence is 
not expressed, since they are spoken relatively; but in the other word, namely wisdom, since it is spoken 
also in respect to substance, for wisdom is wise in itself, essence also is expressed, and that being of His 
which is to be wise. Whence the Father and Son together are one wisdom, because one essence, and 
singly wisdom of wisdom, as essence of essence. And hence they are not therefore not one essence, 
because the Father is not the Son, and the Son is not the Father, or because the Father is un-begotten, but 
the Son is begotten: since by these names only their relative attributes are expressed. But both together are 
one wisdom and one essence; in which to be, is the same as to be wise. And both together are not the Word 
or the Son, since to be is not the same as to be the Word or the Son, as we have already sufficiently shown 
that these terms are spoken relatively. 

CHAP. 3. -WHY THE SON CHIEFLY IS INTIMATED IN THE SCRIPTURES BY THE NAME 
OF WISDOM, WHILE BOTH THE FATHER AND THE HOLY SPIRIT ARE WISDOM. THAT 
THE HOLY SPIRIT, TOGETHER WITH THE FATHER AND THE SON, IS ONE WISDOM. 

4. Why, then, is scarcely anything ever said in the Scriptures of wisdom, unless to show that it is begotten or 
created of God?-begotten in the case of that Wisdom by which all things are made; but created or made, 
as in men, when they are converted to that Wisdom which is not created anti made but begotten, and are so 
enlightened; for in these men themselves there comes to be something which may be called their wisdom: 

even as the Scriptures foretell or narrate, that "the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us;"(2) for in this 
way Christ was made wisdom, because He was made man. Is it on this account that Wisdom Goes not 
speak m these books, nor is anything spoken of it, except to declare that it is born of God, or made by Him 
(although the Father is Himself wisdom), namely, because wisdom ought to be commended and imitated by 
us, by the imitation of which we are fashioned [rightly]? For the Father speaks it, that it may be His Word: yet 
not as a word producing a sound proceeds from the mouth, or is thought before it is pronounced. For this 
word is completed in certain spaces of time, but that is eternal, and speaks to us by enlightening us, what 
ought to be spoken to men, both of itself and of the Father. And therefore He says, "No man knoweth the 
Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will 
reveal Him:"(3) since the Father reveals by the Son, that is, by His Word. For if that word which we utter, and 
which is temporal and transitory, declares both itself, and that of which we speak, how much more the Word 
of God, by which all things are made? For this Word so declares the Father as He is the Father; because 
both itself so is, and is that which is the Father, in so far as it is wisdom and essence. For in so far as it is the 
Word, it is not what the Father is: because the Word is not the Father, and Word is spoken relatively, as is 
also Son, which assuredly is not the Father. And therefore Christ is the power and wisdom of God, because 
He Himself, being also power and wisdom, is from the Father, who is power and wisdom; as He is light of 
the Father, who is light, and the fountain of life with God the Father, who is Himself assuredly the fountain of 
life. For "with Thee," He says, "is the fountain of life, and in Thy light shall we see light."' Because, "as the 
Father hath life in Himself, so hath He given to the Son to have life in Himself:"(2) and, "He was the true Light, 
which lighteth every man that cometh into the world:" and this light, "the Word," was "with God;" but "the Word 
also was God;"(3) and "God is light, and in Him is no darkness at all:"(4) but a light that is not corporeal, but 
spiritual; yet not in such way spiritual, that it was wrought by illumination, as it was said to the apostles, "Ye 
are the light of the world, "(5) but "the light which lighteth every man," that very supreme wisdom itself who is 
God, of whom we now treat. The Son therefore is Wisdom of wisdom, namely the Father, as He is Light of 
light, and God of God; so that both the Father singly is light, and the Son singly is light; and the Father singly 
is God, and the Son singly is God: therefore the Father also singly is wisdom, and the Son singly is wisdom. 
And as both together are one light and one God, so both are one wisdom. But the Son is "by God made 
unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification;"(6) because we turn ourselves to Him in time, that is, 
from some particular time, that we may remain with Him for ever. And He Himself from a certain time was 
"the Word made flesh, and dwelt among us." 

5. On this account, then,when anything concerning wisdom is declared or narrated in the Scriptures, whether 
as itself speaking, or where anything is spoken of it, the Son chiefly is intimated to us. And by the example of 
Him who is the image, let us also not depart from Gods since we also are the Image of God: not indeed that 
which is equal to Him, since we are made so by the Father through the Son, and not born of the Father, as 
that is. And we are so, because we are enlightened with light; but that is so, because it is the light that 
enlightens; and which, therefore, being without pattern, is to us a pattern. For He does not imitate any one 
going before Him, in respect to the Father, from whom He is never separable at all, since He is the very 
same substance with Him from whom He is. But we by striving imitate Him who abides, and follow Him who 
stands still, and walking in Him, reach out towards Him; because He is made for us a way in time by His 
humiliation, which is to us an eternal abiding-place by His divinity. For since to pure intellectual spirits, who 
have not fallen through pride, He gives an example in the form of God and as equal with God and as God; 
so, in order that He might also give Himself as an example of returning to fallen man who on account of the 
uncleanness of sins and the punishment of mortality cannot see God, "He emptied Himself;" not by 
changing His own divinity, but by assuming our changeableness: and "taking upon Him the form of a 
servant"(7) He came to us into this world, "(8) who "was in this world," because "the world was made by 
Him;"(9) that He might be an example upwards to those who see God, an example downwards to those who 
admire man, an example to the sound to persevere, an example to the sick to be made whole, an example 
to those who are to die that they may not fear, an example to the dead that they may rise again, "that in all 
things He might have the pre-eminence. "(10) So that, because man ought not to follow any except God to 
blessedness, and yet cannot perceive God; by following God made man, he might follow at once Him 
whom he could perceive, and whom he ought to follow. Let us then love Him and cleave to Him, by charity 
spread abroad in our hearts, through the Holy Spirit which is given unto us.(1 1) It is not therefore to be 
wondered at, if, on account of the example which the Image, which is equal to the Father, gives to us, in order 
that we may be refashioned after the image of God, Scripture, when it speaks of wisdom, speaks of the Son, 
whom we follow by living wisely; although the Father also is wisdom, as He is both light and God. 

6. The Holy Spirit also, whether we are to call Him that absolute love which joins together Father and Son, 
and joins us also from beneath, that so that is not unfitly said which is written, "God is love;"(12) how is He not 
also Himself wisdom, since He is light, because "God is light" ? or whether after any other way the essence 
of the Holy Spirit is to be singly and properly named; then, too, since He is God, He is certainly light; and 
since He is light, He is certainly wisdom. But that the Holy Spirit is God, Scripture proclaims by the apostle, 

who says, "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God ?" and immediately subjoins, "And the Spirit of God 
dwelleth in you;"1 3 for God dwelleth in His own temple. For the Spirit of God does not dwell in the temple of 
God as a servant, since he says more plainly in another place, "Know ye not that your body is the temple of 
the Holy Ghost which is in you, and which ye have of God, and ye are not your own? For ye are bought with a 
great price: therefore glorify God in your body."(1) But what is wisdom, except spiritual and unchangeable 
light? For yonder sun also is light, but it is corporeal; and the spiritual creature also is light, but it is not 
unchangeable. Therefore the Father is light, the Son is light, and the Holy Spirit is light; but together not three 
lights, but one light. And so the Father is wisdom, the Son is wisdom, and the Holy Spirit is wisdom, and 
together not three wisdoms, but one wisdom: and because in the Trinity to be is the same as to be wise, the 
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, are one essence. Neither in the Trinity is it one thing to be and another to be 
God; therefore the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, are one God. 

CHAP. 4.--H0W IT WAS BROUGHT ABOUT THAT THE GREEKS SPEAK OF THREE 
HYPOSTASES, THE LATINS OF THREE PERSONS. SCRIPTURE NOWHERE SPEAKS OF 
THREE PERSONS IN ONE GOD. 

7. For the sake, then, of speaking of things that cannot be uttered, that we may be able in some way to utter 
what we are able in no way to utter fully, our Greek friends have spoken of one essence, three substances; 
but the Latins of one essence or substance, three persons; because, as we have already said, (2) essence 
usually means nothing else than substance in our language, that is, in Latin. And provided that what is said 
is understood only in a mystery, such a way of speaking was sufficient, in order that there might be 
something to say when it was asked what the three are, which the true faith pronounces to be three, when it 
both declares that the Father is not the Son, and that the Holy Spirit, which is the gift of God, is neither the 
Father nor the Son. When, then, it is asked what the three are, or who the three are, we betake ourselves to 
the finding out of some special or general name under which we may embrace these three; and no such 
name occurs to the mind, because the super-eminence of the Godhead surpasses the power of customary 
speech. For God is more truly thought than He is altered, and exists more truly than He is thought. For when 
we say that Jacob was not the same as Abraham, but that Isaac was neither Abraham nor Jacob, certainly 
we confess that they are three, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. But when it is asked what three, we reply three 
men, calling them in the plural by a specific name; but if we were to say three animals, then by a generic 
name; for man, as the ancients have defined him, is a rational, mortal animal: or again, as our Scriptures 
usually speak, three souls, since it is fitting to denominate the whole from the better part, that is, to 
denominate both body and soul, which is the whole man, from the soul; for so it is said that seventy-five 
souls went down into Egypt with Jacob, instead of saying so many men. (3) Again, when we say that your 
horse is not mine, and that a third belonging to some one else is neither mine nor yours, then we confess 
that there are three; and if any one ask what three, we answer three horses by a specific name, but three 
animals by a generic one. And yet again, when we say that an ox is not a horse, but that a dog is neither an 
ox nor a horse, we speak of a three; and if any one questions us what three, we do not speak now by a 
specific name of three horses, or three oxen, or three dogs, because the three are not contained under the 
same species, but by a gener three animals; or if under a higher genus, three substances, or three 
creatures, or three natures. But whatsoever things are expressed in the plural number specifically by one 
name, can also be expressed genetically by one name. But all things which are generically called by one 
name cannot also be called specifically by one name. For three horses, which is a specific name, we also 
call three animals; but, a horse, and an ox, and a dog, we call only three animals or substances, which are 
generic names, or anything else that can be spoken generically concerning them; but we cannot speak of 
them as three horses, or oxen, or dogs, which are specific names; for we express those things by one name, 
although in the plural number, which have that in common that is signified by the name. For Abraham, and 
Isaac, and Jacob, have in common that which is man; therefore they are called three men: a horse also, and 
an ox, and a dog, have in common that which is animal; therefore they are called three animals. So three 
several laurels we also call three trees; but a laurel, and a myrtle, and an olive, we call only three trees, or 
three substances, or three natures: and so three stones we call also three bodies; but stone, and wood, and 
iron, we call only three bodies, or by any other higher generic name by which they can be called. Of the 
Father, therefore, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, seeing that they are three, let us ask what three they are, and 
what they have in common. For the being the Father is not common to them, so that they should be 
interchangeably fathers to one another: as friends, since they are so called relatively to each other, can be 
called three friends, because they are so mutually to each other. But this is not the case in the Trinity, since 
the Father only is there father; and not Father of two, but of the Son only. Neither are they three Sons, since 
the Father there is not the Son, nor is the Holy Spirit. Neither three Holy Spirits, because the Holy Spirit also, 
in that proper meaning by which He is also called the gift of God, is neither the Father nor the Son. What 
three therefore? For if three persons, then that which is meant by person is common to them; therefore this 

name is either specific or generic to them, according to the manner of speaking. But where there is no 
difference of nature, there things that are several in number are so expressed generically, that they can also 
be expressed specifically. For the difference of nature causes, that a laurel, and a myrtle, and an olive, or a 
horse, and an ox, and a dog, are not called by the specific name, the former of three laurels, or the latter of 
three oxen, but by the generic name, the former of three trees, and the latter of three animals. But here, where 
there is no difference of essence, it is necessary that these three should have a specific name, which yet is 
not to be found. For person is a generic name, insomuch that man also can be so called, although there is 
so great a difference between man and God. 

8. Further, in regard to that very generic (generalis) word, if on this account we say three persons, because 
that which person means is common to them (otherwise they can in no way be so called, just as they are not 
called three sons, because that which son means is not common to them); why do we not also say three 
Gods? For certainly, since the Father is a person, and the Son a person, and the Holy Spirit a person, 
therefore there are three persons: since then the Father is God, and the Son God, and the Holy Spirit God, 
why not three Gods? Or else, since on account of their ineffable union these three are together one God, why 
not also one person; so that we could not say: three persons, although we call each a person singly, just as 
we cannot say three Gods, although we call each singly God, whether the Father, or the Son, or the Holy 
Spirit? Is it because Scripture does not say three Gods? But neither do we find that Scripture anywhere 
mentions three persons. Or is it because Scripture does not call these three, either three persons or one 
person (for we read of the person of the Lord, but not of the Lord as a person), that therefore it was lawful 
through the mere necessity of speaking and reasoning to say three persons, not because Scripture says it, 
but because Scripture does not contradict it: whereas, if we were to say three Gods, Scripture would 
contradict it, which says, "Hear, O Israel; the Lord thy God is one God?"(1) Why then is it not also lawful to 
say three essences; which, in like manner, as Scripture does not say, so neither does it contradict? For if 
essence is a specific (specialis) name common to three, why are They not to be called three essences, as 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are called three men, because man is the specific name common to all men? 
But if essence is not a specific name, but a generic one, since man, and cattle, and tree, and constellation, 
and angel, are called essences; why are not these called three essences, as three horses are called three 
animals, and three laurels are called three trees, and three stones three bodies? Or if they are not called 
three essences, but one essence, on account of the unity of the Trinity, why is it not the case, that on account 
of the same unity of the Trinity they are not to be called three substances or three persons, but one 
substance and one person? For as the name of essence is common to them, so that each singly is called 
essence, so the name of either substance or person is common to them. For that which must be understood 
of persons according to our usage, this is to be understood of substances according to the Greek usage; 
for they say three substances, one essence, in the same way as we say three persons, one essence or 
substance. 

9. What therefore remains, except that we confess that these terms sprang from the necessity of speaking, 
when copious reasoning was required against the devices or errors of the heretics? For when human 
weakness endeavored to utter in speech to the senses of man what it grasps in the secret places of the 
mind in proportion to its comprehension respecting the Lord God its creator, whether by devout faith, or by 
any discernment whatsoever; it feared to say three essences, lest any difference should be understood to 
exist in that absolute equality. Again, it could not say that there were not three somewhats (tria quaedam), for 
it was because Sabellius said this that he fell into heresy. For it must be devoutly believed, as most certainly 
known from the Scriptures, and must be grasped by the mental eye with undoubting perception, that there is 
both Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit; and that the Son is not the same with the Father, nor the Holy Spirit the 
same with the Father or the Son. It sought then what three it should call them, and answered substances or 
persons; by which names it did not intend diversity to be meant, but singleness to be denied: that not only 
unity might be understood therein from the being called one essence, but also Trinity from the being called 
three substances or persons. For if it is the same thing with God to be (esse) as to subsist (subsistere), they 
were not to be called three substances, in such sense as they are not called three essences; just as, 
because it is the same thing with God to be as to be wise, as we do not say three essences, so neither three 
wisdoms. For so, because it is the same thing to Him to be God as to be, it is not right to say three 
essences, as it is not right to say three Gods. But if it is one thing to God to be, another to subsist, as it is one 
thing to God to be, another to be the Father or the Lord (for that which He is, is spoken in respect to Himself, 
but He is called Father in relation to the Son, and Lord in relation to the creature which serves Him); therefore 
He subsists relatively, as He besets relatively, and bears rule relatively: so then substance will be no 
longer substance, because it will be relative. For as from being, He is called essence, so from subsisting, 
we speak of substance. But it is absurd that substance should be spoken relatively, for everything subsists 
in respect to itself; how much more God?(1) 

CHAP. 5. --IN GOD, SUBSTANCE IS SPOKEN IMPROPERLY, ESSENCE PROPERLY. 

10. If, however, it is fitting that God should be said to subsist-(Forthis word is rightly applied to those things, 
in which as subjects those things are, which are said to be in a subject, as color or shape in body. For body 
subsists, and so is substance; but those things are in the body, which subsists and is their subject, and they 
are not substances, but are in a substance: and so, if either that color or that shape ceases to be, it does not 
deprive the body of being a body, because it is not of the being of body, that it should retain this or that 
shape or color; therefore neither changeable nor simple things are properly called substances.)-lf, I say, 
God subsists so that He can be properly called a substance, then there is something in Him as it were in a 
subject, and He is not simple, i.e. such that to Him to be is the same as is anything else that is said 
concerning Him in respect to Himself; as, for instance, great, omnipotent, good, and whatever of this kind is 
not unfitly said of God. But it is an impiety to say that God subsists, and is a subject in relation to His own 
goodness, and that this goodness is not a substance or rather essence, and that God Himself is not His 
own goodness, but that it is in Him as in a subject. And hence it is clear that God is improperly called 
substance, in order that He may be understood to be, by the more usual name essence, which He is truly 
and properly called; so that perhaps it is right that God alone should be called essence. For He is truly 
alone, because He is unchangeable; and declared this to be His own name to His servant Moses, when He 
says, "I am that I am;" and, "Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel: He who is hath sent me unto 
you. "(2) However, whether He be called essence, which He is properly called, or substance, which He is 
called improperly, He is called both in respect to Himself, not relatively to anything; whence to God to be is 
the same thing as to subsist; and so the Trinity, if one essence, is also Due substance. Perhaps therefore 
they are more conveniently called three persons than three substances. 

CHAP. 6. -WHY WE DO NOT IN THE TRINITY SPEAK OF ONE PERSON, AND THREE 
ESSENCES. WHAT HE OUGHT TO BELIEVE CONCERNING THE TRINITY WHO DOES 
NOT RECEIVE WHAT IS SAID ABOVE. MAN IS BOTH AFTER THE IMAGE, AND IS THE 
IMAGE OF GOD. 

1 1 . But lest I should seem to favor ourselves [the Latins], let us make this further inquiry. Although they [the 
Greeks] also, if they pleased, as they call three substances three hypostases, so might call three persons 
three "prosopa," yet they preferred that word which, perhaps, was more in accordance with the usage of 
their language. For the case is the same with the word persons also; for to God it is not one thing to be, 
another to be a person, but it is absolutely the same thing. For if to be is said in respect to Himself, but 
person relatively; in this way we should say three persons, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; just as we speak 
of three friends, or three relations, or three neighbors, in that they are so mutually, not that each one of them 
is so in respect to himself. Wherefore any one of these is the friend of the other two, or the relation, or the 
neighbor, because these names have a relative signification. What then? Are we to call the Father the 
person of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, or the Son the person of the Father and of the Holy Spirit, or the 
Holy Spirit the person of the Father and of the Son? But neither is the word person commonly so used in any 
case; nor in this Trinity, when we speak of the person of the Father, do we mean anything else than the 
substance of the Father. Wherefore, as the substance of the Father is the Father Himself, not as He is the 
Father, but as He is, so also the person of the Father is not anything else than the Father Himself; for He is 
called a person in respect to Himself, not in respect to the Son, or the Holy Spirit: just as He is called in 
respect to Himself both God and great, and good, and just, and anything else of the kind; and just as to Him 
to be is the same as to be God, or as to be great, or as to be good, so it is the same thing to Him to be, as to 
be a person. Why, therefore, do we not call these three together one person, as one essence and one God, 
but say three persons, while we do not say three Gods or three essences; unless it be because we wish 
some one word to serve for that meaning whereby the Trinity is understood, that we might not be altogether 
silent, when asked, what three, while we confessed that they are three? For if essence is the genus, and 
substance or person the species, as some think, then I must omit what I just now said, that they ought to be 
called three essences, as they are called three substances or persons; as three horses are called three 
horses, and the same are called three animals, since horse is the species, animal the genus. For in this 
case the species is not spoken of in the plural, and the genus in the singular, as if we were to say that three 
horses were one animal; but as they are three horses by the special name, so they are three animals by the 
generic one. But if they say that the name of substance or person does not signify species, but something 
singular and individual; so that any one is not so called a substance or person as he is called a man, for 
man is common to all men, but in the same manner as he is called this or that man, as Abraham, as Isaac, 
as Jacob, or anyone else who, if present, could be pointed out with the finger: so will the same reason reach 
these too. For as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, are called three individuals, so are they called, three men, 
and three souls. Why then are both the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, if we are to reason about 
them also according to genus and species and individual, not so called three essences, as they are called 

three substances or persons? But this, as I said, I pass over: but I do affirm, that if essence is a genus, then a 
single essence has no species; just as, because animal is a genus, a single animal has no species. 
Therefore the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are not three species of one essence. But if essence is a 
species, as man is a species, but those are three which we call substances or persons, then they have the 
same species in common, in such way as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob have m common the species which 
is called man; not as man is subdivided into Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, so can one man also be 
subdivided rate several single men; for this is altogether impossible, since one man is already a single 
man. Why then is one essence subdivided into three substances or persons? For if essence is a species, 
as man is, then one essence is as one man is: or do we, as we say that any three human beings of the 
same sex, of the same constitution of body, of the same mind, are one nature,-forthey are three human 
beings, but one nature, -so also say in the Trinity three substances one essence, or three persons one 
substance or essence? But this is somehow a parallel case, since the ancients also who spoke Latin, 
before they had these terms, which have not long come into use, that is, essence or substance, used for 
them to say nature. We do not therefore use these terms according to genus or species, but as if according 
to a matter that is common and the same. Just as if three statues were made of the same gold, we should 
say three statues one gold, yet should neither call the gold genus, and the statues species; nor the gold 
species, and the statues individuals. For no species goes beyond its own individuals, so as to comprehend 
anything external to them. For when I define what man is, which is aspecific name, every several man that 
exists is contained in the same individual definition, neither does anything belong to it which is not a man. 
But when I define gold, not statues alone, if they be gold, but rings also, and anything else that is made of 
gold, will belong to gold; and even if nothing were made of it, it would still be called gold; since, even if there 
were no gold statues, there will not therefore be no statues at all. Likewise no species goes beyond the 
definition of its genus. For when I define animal, since horse is a species of this genus, every horse is an 
animal; but every statue is not gold. So, although in the case of three golden statues we should rightly say 
three statues, one gold; yet we do not so say it, as to understand gold to be the genus, and the statues to be 
species. Therefore neither do we so call the Trinity three persons or substances, one essence ant one 
God, as though three somethings subsisted out of one matter [leaving a remainder, i. e.]; although whatever 
that is, it is unfolded in these three. For there is nothing else of that essence besides the Trinity. Yet we say 
three persons of the same essence, or three persons one essence; but we do not say three persons out of 
the same essence, as though therein essence were one thing, and person another, as we can say three 
statues out of the same gold; for there it is one thing to be gold, another to be statues. And when we say 
three men one nature, or three men of the same nature, they also can be called three men out of the same 
nature, since out of the same nature there can be also three other such men. But in that essence of the 
Trinity, in no way can any other person whatever exist out of the same essence. Further, in these things, one 
man is not as much as three men together; and two men are something more than one man: and in equal 
statues, three together amount to more of gold than each singly, and one amounts to legs of gold than two. 
But in God it is not so; for the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit together is not a greater essence than the 
Father alone or the Son alone; but these three substances or persons, if they must be so called, together 
are equal to each singly: which the natural man does not comprehend. For he cannot think except under the 
conditions of bulk and space, either small or great, since phantasms or as it were images of bodies flit 
about in his mind. 

12. And until he be purged from this uncleanness, let him believe in the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, one 
God, alone, great, omnipotent, good, just, merciful, Creator of all things visible and invisible, and whatsoever 
can be worthily and truly said of Him in proportion to human capacity. And when he is told that the Father 
only is God, let him not separate from Him the Son or the Holy Spirit; for together with Him He is the only 
God, together with whom also He is one God; because, when we are told that the Son also is the only God, 
we must needs take it without any separation of the Father or the Holy Spirit. And let him so say one 
essence, as not to think one to be either greater or better than, or in any respect differing from, another. Yet 
not that the Father Himself is both Son and Holy Spirit, or whatever else each is singly called in relation to 
either of the others; as Word, which is not said except of the Son, or Gift, which is not said except of the Holy 
Spirit. And on this account also they admit the plural number, as it is written in the Gospel, "I and my Father 
are one."(1) He has both said "one," and "we are(3) one," according to essence, because they are the 
same God; "we are," according to relation, because the one is Father, the other is Son. Sometimes also the 
unity of the essence is left unexpressed, and the relatives alone are mention ed in the plural number: "My 
Father and I will come unto him, and make our abode with him. "(4) We will come, and we will make our 
abode, is the plural number, since it was said before, "I and my Father," that is, the Son and the Father, which 
terms are used relatively to one another. Sometimes the meaning is altogether latent, as in Genesis: "Let us 
make man after our image and likeness. "(5) Both let us make and our is said in the plural, and ought not to 
be received except as of relatives. For it was not that gods might make, or make after the image and 
likeness of gods; but that the Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit might make after the image of the Father, and 

Son, and Holy Spirit, that man might subsist as the image of God. And God is the Trinity. But because that 
image of God was not made altogether equal to Him, as being not born of Him, but created by Him; in order 
to signify this, he is in such way the image as that he is "after the image," that is, he is not made equal by 
parity, but approaches to Him by a sort of likeness. For approach to God is not by intervals of place, but by 
likeness, and withdrawal from Him is by unlikeness. For there are some who draw this distinction, that they 
will have the Son to be the image, but man not to be the image, but "after the image." But the apostle refutes 
them, saying, "For a man indeed ought not to cover his head, forasmuch as he is the image and glory of 
God. "(6) He did not say after the image, but the image. And this image, since it is elsewhere spoken of as 
after the image, is not as if it were said relatively to the Son, who is the image equal to the Father; otherwise 
he would not say after our image. For how our, when the Son is the image of the Father alone? But man is 
said to be "after the image," on account, as we have said, of the inequality of the likeness; and therefore 
after our image, that man might be the image of the Trinity;(7) not equal to the Trinity as the Son is equal to 
the Father, but approaching to it, as has been said, by a certain likeness; just as nearness may in a sense 
be signified in things distant from each other, not in respect of place, but of a sort of imitation. For it is also 
said, "Be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind;"(1) to whom he likewise says, "Be ye therefore 
imitators of God as dear children. "(2) For it is said to the new man, "which is renewed to the knowledge of 
God, after the image of Him that created him. "(3) Or if we choose to admit the plural number, in order to meet 
the needs of argument, even putting aside relative terms, that so we may answer in one term when it is 
asked what three, and say three substances or three persons; then let no one think of any bulk or interval, or 
of any distance of howsoever little unlikeness, so that in the Trinity any should be understood to be even a 
little less than another, in whatsoever way one thing can be less than another: in order that there may be 
neither a confusion of persons, nor such a distinction as that there should be any inequality. And if this 
cannot be grasped by the understanding, let it be held by faith, until He shall dawn in the heart who says by 
the prophet, "If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not understand. "(4) 

THE FIFTEEN BOOKS OF AURELIUS AUGUSTINUS, 
BISHOP OF HIPPO, ON THE TRINITY: BOOK VIII 

BOOK VIM. 

EXPLAINS AND PROVES THAT NOT ONLYTHE FATHER IS NOT GREATER THAN THE 
SON, BUT NEITHER ARE BOTH TOGETHER ANYTHING GREATER THAN THE HOLY 
SPIRIT, NOR ANY TWO TOGETHER IN THE SAME TRINITY ANYTHING GREATER THAN 
ONE, NOR ALL THREE TOGETHER ANYTHING GREATER THAN EACH SEVERALLY. IT IS 
THEN SHOWN HOW THE NATURE ITSELF OF GOD MAY BE UNDERSTOOD FROM OUR 
UNDERSTANDING OF TRUTH, AND FROM OUR KNOWLEDGE OF THE SUPREME GOOD, 
AND FROM THE INNATE LOVE OF RIGHTEOUSNESS, WHEREBY A RIGHTEOUS SOUL IS 
LOVED EVEN BY A SOULTHAT IS ITSELF NOT YET RIGHTEOUS. BUT IT IS URGED 
ABOVE ALL, THAT THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD IS TO BE SOUGHT BY LOVE, WHICH GOD 
IS SAID TO BE IN THE SCRIPTURES; AND IN THIS LOVE IS ALSO POINTED OUT THE 
EXISTENCE OF SOME TRACE OF A TRINITY. 

PREFACE. --THE CONCLUSION OF WHAT HAS BEEN SAID ABOVE. THE RULE TO BE 
OBSERVED IN THE MORE DIFFICULT QUESTIONS OF THE FAITH. 

We have said elsewhere that those things are predicated Specially in the Trinity as belonging severally to 
each person, which are predicated relatively the one to the other, as Father and Son, and the gift of both, the 
Holy Spirit; for the Father is not the Trinity, nor the Son the Trinity, nor the gift the Trinity: but what whenever 
each is singly spoken of in respect to themselves, then they are not spoken of as three in the plural number, 
but one, the Trinity itself, as the Father God, the Son God, and the Holy Spirit God; the Father good, the Son 
good, and the Holy Spirit good; and the Father omnipotent, the Son omnipotent, and the Holy Spirit 
omnipotent: yet neither three Gods, nor three goods, nor three omnipotents, but one God, good, omnipotent, 
the Trinity itself; and whatsoever else is said of them not relatively in respect to each other, but individually in 
respect to themselves. For they are thus spoken of according to I essence, since in them to be is the same 
as to be great, as to be good, as to be wise, and whatever else is said of each person individually therein, 
or of the Trinity itself, in respect to themselves. And that therefore they are called three persons, or three 
substances, not in order that any difference of essence may be understood, but that we may be able to 
answer by some one word, should any one ask what three, or what three things? And that there is so great 
an equality in that Trinity, that not only the Father is not greater than the Son, as regards divinity, but neither 
are the Father and Son together greater than the Holy Spirit; nor is each individual person, whichever it be of 
the three, less than the Trinity itself. This is what we have said; and if it is handled and repeated frequently, it 
becomes, no doubt, more familiarly known: yet some limit, too, must be put to the discussion, and we must 
supplicate God with most devout piety, that He will open our understanding, and take away the inclination of 
disputing, in order that our minds may discern the essence of the truth, that has neither bulk nor 
moveableness. Now, therefore, so far as the Creator Himself aids us in His marvellous mercy, let us 
consider these subjects, into which we will enter more deeply than we entered into those which preceded, 
although they are in truth the same; preserving the while this rule, that what has not yet been made clear to 
our intellect, be nevertheless not loosened from the firmness of our faith. 

CHAP. 1 .--IT IS SHOWN BY REASON THAT IN GOD THREE ARE NOT ANYTHING 
GREATER THAN ONE PERSON. 

2. For we say that in this Trinity two or three persons are not anything greater than one of them; which carnal 
perception does not receive, for no other reason except because it perceives as it can the true things which 
are created, but cannot discern the truth itself by which they are created; for if it could, then the very 
corporeal light would in no way be more clear than this which we have said. For in respect to the substance 
of truth, since it alone truly is, nothing is greater, unless because it more truly is.(1) But in respect to 
whatsoever is intelligible and unchangeable, no one thing is more truly than another, since all alike are 
unchangeably eternal; and that which therein is called great, is not great from any other source than from that 

by which it truly is. Wherefore, where magnitude itself is truth, whatsoever has more of magnitude must 
needs have more of truth; whatsoever therefore has not more of truth, has not also more of magnitude. 
Further, whatsoever has more of truth is certainly more true, just as that is greater which has more of 
magnitude; therefore in respect to the substance of truth that is more great which is more true. But the Father 
and the Son together are not more truly than the Father singly, or the Son singly. Both together, therefore, are 
not anything greater than each of them singly. And since also the Holy Spirit equally is truly, the Father and 
Son together are not anything greater than He, since neither are they more truly. The Father also and the 
Holy Spirit together, since they do not surpass the Son in truth (for they are not more truly), do not surpass 
Him either in magnitude. And so the Son and the Holy Spirit together are just as great as the Father alone, 
since they are as truly. So also the Trinity itself is as great as each several person therein. For where truth 
itself is magnitude, that is not more great which is not more true: since in regard to the essence of truth, to be 
true is the same as to be, and to be is the same as to be great; therefore to be great is the same as to be 
true. And in regard to it, therefore, what is equally true must needs also be equally great. 

CHAP. 2. --EVERY CORPOREAL CONCEPTION MUST BE REJECTED, IN ORDER THAT IT 
MAY BE UNDERSTOOD HOW GOD IS TRUTH. 

3. But in respect to bodies, it may be the case that this gold and that gold may be equally true [real], but this 
may be greater than that, since magnitude is not the same thing in this case as truth; and it is one thing for it 
to be gold, another to be great. So also in the nature of the soul; a soul is not called great in the same 
respect in which it is called true. For he, too, has a true [real] soul who has not a great soul; since the 
essence of body and soul is not the essence of the truth [reality] itself; as is the Trinity, one God, alone, 
great, true, truthful, the truth. Of whom if we endeavor to think, so far as He Himself permits and grants, let us 
not think of any touch or embrace in local space, as if of three bodies, or of any compactness of conjunction, 
as fables tell of three-bodied Geryon; but let whatsoever may occur to the mind, that is of such sort as to be 
greater in three than in each singly, and less in one than in two, be rejected without any doubt; for so 
everything corporeal is rejected. But also in spiritual things let nothing changeable that may have occurred 
to the mind be thought of God. For when we aspire from this depth to that height, it is a step towards no small 
knowledge, if, before we can know what God is, we can already know what He is not. For certainly He is 
neither earth nor heaven; nor, as it were, earth and heaven; nor any such thing as we see in the heaven; nor 
any such thing as we do not see, but which perhaps is in heaven. Neither if you were to magnify in the 
imagination of your thought the light of the sun as much as you are able, either that it may be greater, or that it 
may be brighter, a thousand times as much, or times without number; neither is this God. Neither as(2) we 
think of the pure angels as spirits animating celestial bodies, and changing and dealing with them after the 
will by which they serve God; not even if all, and there are "thousands of thousands, "(3) were brought 
together into one, and became one; neither is any such thing God. Neither if you were to think of the same 
spirits as without bodies-a thing indeed most difficult for carnal thought to do. Behold and see, if thou canst, 
O soul pressed down by the corruptible body, and weighed down by earthly thoughts, many and various; 
behold and see, if thou canst, that God is truth. (4) For it is written that "God is light;"(5) not in such way as 
these eyes see, but in such way as the heart sees, when it is said, He is truth [reality]. Ask not what is truth 
[reality] for immediately the darkness of corporeal images and the clouds of phantasms will put themselves 
in the way, and will disturb that calm which at the first twinkling shone forth to thee, when I said truth [reality]. 
See that thou remainest, if thou canst, in that first twinkling with which thou art dazzled, as it were, by a flash, 
when it is said to thee, Truth [Reality]. But thou canst not; thou wilt glide back into those usual and earthly 
things. And what weight, pray, is it that will cause thee so to glide back, unless it be the bird-lime of the stains 
of appetite thou hast contracted, and the errors of thy wandering from the right path? 

CHAP. 3. -HOW GOD MAY BE KNOWN TO BE THE CHIEF GOOD. THE MIND DOES NOT 
BECOME GOOD UNLESS BY TURNING TO GOD. 

4. Behold again, and see if thou canst. Thou certainly dost not love anything except what is good, since 
good is the earth, with the loftiness of its mountains, and the due measure of its hills, and the level surface of 
its plains; and good is an estate that is pleasant and fertile; and good is a house that is arranged in due 
proportions, and is spacious and bright; and good are animal and animate bodies; and good is air that is 
temperate, and salubrious; and good is food that is agreeable and fit for health; and good is health, without 
pains or lassitude; and good is the countenance of man that is disposed in fit proportions, and is cheerful in 
look, and bright in color; and good is the mind of a friend, with the sweetness of agreement, and with the 
confidence of love; and good is a righteous man; and good are riches, since they are readily useful; and 
good is the heaven, with its sun, and moon, and stars; and good are the angels, by their holy obedience; 
and good is discourse that sweetly teaches and suitably admonishes the hearer; and good is a poem that 

is harmonious in its numbers and weighty in its sense. And why add yet more and more? This thing is good 
and that good, but take away this and that, and regard good itself if thou canst; so wilt thou see God, not 
good by a good that is other than Himself, but the good of all good. For in all these good things, whether 
those which I have mentioned, or any else that are to be discerned or thought, we could not say that one 
was better than another, when we judge truly, unless a conception of the good itself had been impressed 
upon us, such that according to it we might both approve some things as good, and prefer one good to an 
other. So God is to be loved, not this and that good, but the good itself. For the good that must be sought for 
the soul is not one above which it is to fly by judging, but to which it is to cleave by loving; and what car this 
be except God? Not a good mind, or a good angel, or the good heaven, but the good good. For perhaps 
what I wish to say may be more easily perceived in this way. For when, for instance, a mind is called good, 
as there are two words, so from these words I understand two things-one whereby it is mind, and another 
whereby it is good. And itself had no share in making itself a mind, for there was nothing as yet to make itself 
to be anything; but to make itself to be a good mind, I see, must be brought about by the will: not because 
that by which it is mind is not itself anything good;-for how else is it i already called, and most truly called, 
better than the body?-but it is not yet called a good mind, for this reason, that the action of the will still is 
wanted, by which it is to become more excellent; and if it has neglected this, then it is justly blamed, and is 
rightly called not a good mind. For it then differs from the mind which does perform this; and since the latter is 
praiseworthy, the former doubtless, which does not perform, it is blameable. But when it does this of set 
purpose, and becomes a good mind, it yet cannot attain to being so unless it turn itself to something which 
itself is not. And to what can it turn itself that it may become a good mind, except to the good which it loves, 
and seeks, and obtains? And if it turns itself back again from this, and becomes not good, then by the very 
act of turning away from the good, unless that good remain in it from which it turns away, it cannot again turn 
itself back thither if it should wish to amend. 

5. Wherefore there would be no changeable goods, unless there were the unchangeable good. Whenever 
then thou art told of this good thing and that good thing, which things can also in other respects be called not 
good, if thou canst put aside those things which are good by the participation of the good, and discern that 
good itself by the participation of which they are good (for when this or that good thing is spoken of, thou 
understandest together with them the good itself also): if, then, I say thou canst remove these things, and 
canst discern the good in itself, then thou wilt have discerned God. And if thou shalt cleave to Him with love, 
thou shalt be forthwith blessed. But whereas other things are not loved, except because they are good, be 
ashamed, in cleaving to them, not to love the good itself whence they are good. That also, which is a mind, 
only because it is a mind, while it is not yet also good by the turning itself to the unchangeable good, but, as I 
said, is only a mind; whenever it so pleases us, as that we prefer it even, if we understand aright, to all 
corporeal light, does not please us in itself, but in that skill by which it was made. For it is thence approved 
as made, wherein it is seen to have been to be made. This is truth, and simple good: for it is nothing else 
than the good itself, and for this reason also the chief good. For no good can be diminished or increased, 
except that which is good from some other good. Therefore the mind turns itself, in order to be good, to that 
by which it comes to be a mind. Therefore the will is then in harmony with nature, so that the mind may be 
perfected in good, when that good is loved by the turning of the will to it, whence that other good also comes 
which is not lost by the turning away of the will from it. For by turning itself from the chief good, the mind loses 
the being a good mind; but it does not lose the being a mind. And this, too, is a good already, and one 
better than the body. The will, therefore, loses that which the will obtains. For the mind already was, that 
could wish to be turned to that from which it was: but that as yet was not, that could wish to be before it was. 
And herein is our [supreme] good, when we see whether the thing ought to be or to have been, respecting 
which we comprehend that it ought to be or to have been, and when we see that the thing could not have 
been unless it ought to have been, of which we also do not comprehend in what manner it ought to have 
been. This good then is not far from every one of us: for in it we live, and move, and have our being. (1) 

CHAP. 4. --GOD MUST FIRST BE KNOWN BY AN UNERRING FAITH, THAT HE MAY BE 
LOVED. 

6. But it is by love that we must stand firm to this and cleave to this, in order that we may enjoy the presence 
of that by which we are, and in the absence of which we could not be at all. For as "we walk as yet by faith, 
and not by sight,"(2) we certainly do not yet see God, as the same [apostle] saith, "face to face:"(3) whom 
however we shall never see, unless now already we love. But who loves what he does not know? For it is 
possible something may be known and not loved: but I ask whether it is possible that what is not known can 
be loved; since if it cannot, then no one loves God before he knows Him. And what is it to know God except 
to behold Him and steadfastly perceive Him with the mind? For He is not a body to be searched out by 
carnal eyes. But before also that we have power to behold and to perceive God, as He can be beheld and 
perceived, which is permitted to the pure in heart; for "blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see 

God;"(4) except He is loved by faith, it will not be possible for the heart to be cleansed, in order that it may 
be apt and meet to see Him. For where are there those three, in order to build up which in the mind the whole 
apparatus of the divine Scriptures has been raised up, namely Faith, Hope, and Charity's except in a mind 
believing what it does not yet see, and hoping and loving what it believes? Even He therefore who is not 
known, but yet is believed, can be loved. But indisputably we must take care, lest the mind believing that 
which it does not see, feign to itself something which is not, and hope for and love that which is false. For in 
that case, it will not be charity out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned, which is 
the end of the commandment, as the same apostle says. (6) 

7. But it must needs be, that, when by reading or hearing of them we believe in any corporeal things which 
we have not seen, the mind frames for itself something under bodily features and forms, just as it may occur 
to our thoughts; which either is not true, or even if it be true, which can most rarely happen, yet this is of no 
benefit to us to believe in by faith, but it is useful for some other purpose, Which is intimated by means of it. 
For who is there that reads or hears what the Apostle Paul has written, or what has been written of him, that 
does not imagine to himself the countenance both of the apostle himself, and of all those whose names are 
there mentioned? And whereas, among such a multitude of men to whom these books are known, each 
imagines in a different way those bodily features and forms, it is assuredly uncertain which it is that imagines 
them more nearly and more like the reality. Nor, indeed, is our faith busied therein with the bodily 
countenance of those men; but only that by the grace of God they so lived and so acted as that Scripture 
witnesses: this it is which it is both useful to believe, and which must not be despaired of, and must be 
sought. For even the countenance of our Lord Himself in the flesh is variously fancied by the diversity of 
countless imaginations, which yet was one, whatever it was. Nor in our faith which we have of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, is that wholesome which the mind imagines for itself, perhaps far other than the reality, but that which 
we think of man according to his kind: for we have a notion of human nature implanted in us, as it were by 
rule, according to which we know forthwith, that whatever such thing we see is a man or the form of a man. 

CHAP. 5.--H0W THE TRINITY MAY BE LOVED THOUGH UNKNOWN. 

Our conception is framed according to this notion, when we believe that God was made man for us, as an 
example of humility, and to show the love of God towards us. For this it is which it is good for us to believe, 
and to retain firmly and unshakenly in our heart, that the humility by which God was born of a woman, and 
was led to death through contumelies so great by mortal men, is the chiefest remedy by which the swelling 
of our pride may be cured, and the profound mystery by which the bond of sin may be loosed. So also, 
because we know what omnipotence is, we believe concerning the omnipotent God in the power of His 
miracles and of His resurrection, and we frame conceptions respecting actions of this kind, according to the 
species and genera of things that are either ingrafted in us by nature, or gathered by experience, that our 
faith may not be feigned. For neither do we know the countenance of the Virgin Mary; from whom, untouched 
by a husband, nor tainted in the birth itself, He was wonderfully born. Neither have we seen what were the 
lineaments of the body of Lazarus; nor yet Bethany; nor the sepulchre, and that stone which He commanded 
to be removed when He raised Him from the dead; nor the new tomb cut out in the rock, whence He Himself 
arose; nor the Mount of Olives, from whence He ascended into heaven. And, in short, whoever of us have 
not seen these things, know not whether they are as we conceive them to be, nay judge them more 
probably not to be so. For when the aspect either of a place, or a man, or of any other body, which we 
happened to imagine before we saw it, turns out to be the same when it occurs to our sight as it was when it 
occurred to our mind, we are moved with no little wonder. So scarcely and hardly ever does it happen. And 
yet we believe those things most steadfastly, because we imagine them according to a special and 
general notion, of which we are certain. For we believe our Lord Jesus Christ to be born of a virgin who was 
called Mary. But what a virgin is, or what it is to be born, and what is a proper name, we do not believe, but 
certainly know. And whether that was the countenance of Mary which occurred to the mind in speaking of 
those things or recollecting them, we neither know at all, nor believe. It is allowable, then, in this case to say 
without violation of the faith, perhaps she had such or such a countenance, perhaps she had not: but no one 
could say without violation of the Christian faith, that perhaps Christ was born of a virgin. 

8. Wherefore, since we desire to understand the eternity, and equality, and unity of the Trinity, as much as is 
permitted us, but ought to believe before we understand; and since we must watch carefully, that our faith be 
not feigned; since we must have the fruition of the same Trinity, that we may live blessedly; but if we have 
believed anything false of it, our hope would be worthless, and our charity not pure: how then can we love, 
by believing, that Trinity which we do not know? Is it according to the special or general notion, according to 
which we love the Apostle Paul? In whose case, even if he was not of that countenance which occurs to us 
when we think of him (and this we do not know at all), yet we know what a man is. For not to go far away, this 
we are; and it is manifest he, too, was this, and that his soul joined to his body lived after the manner of 
mortals. Therefore we believe this of him, which we find in ourselves, according to the species or genus 

under which all human nature alike is comprised. What then do we know, whether specially or generally, of 
that most excellent Trinity, as if there were many such trinities, some of which we had learned by experience, 
so that we may believe that Trinity, too, to have been such as they, through the rule of similitude, impressed 
upon us, whether a special or a general notion; and thus love also that thing which we believe and do not yet 
know, from the parity of the thing which we do know? But this certainly is not so. Or is it that, as we love in our 
Lord Jesus Christ, that He rose from the dead, although we never saw any one rise from thence, so we can 
believe in and love the Trinity which we do not see, and the like of which we never have seen? But we 
certainly know what it is to die, and what it is to live; because we both live, and from time to time have seen 
and experienced both dead and dying persons. And what else is it to rise again, except to live again, that is, 
to return to life from death? When, therefore, we say and believe that there is a Trinity, we know what a Trinity 
is, because we know what three are; but this is not what we love. For we can easily have this whenever we 
will, to pass over other things, by just holding up three fingers. Or do we indeed love, not every trinity, but the 
Trinity, that is God? We love then in the Trinity, that it is God: but we never saw or knew any other God, 
because God is One; He alone whom we have not yet seen, and whom we love by believing. But the 
question is, from what likeness or comparison of known things can we believe, in order that we may love 
God, whom we do not yet know? 

CHAP. 6. -HOW THE MAN NOT YET RIGHTEOUS CAN KNOW THE RIGHTEOUS MAN 
WHOM HE LOVES. 

9. Return then with me, and let us consider why we love the apostle. Is it at all on account of his human kind, 
which we know right well, in that we believe him to have been a man? Assuredly not; for if it were so, he now 
is not him whom we love, since he is no longer that man, for his soul is separated from his body. But we 
believe that which we love in him to be still living, for we love his righteous mind. From what general or 
special rule then, except that we know both what a mind is, and what it is to be righteous? And we say, 
indeed, not unfitly, that we therefore know what a mind is, because we too have a mind. For neither did we 
ever see it with our eyes, and gather a special or general notion from the resemblance of more minds than 
one, which we had seen; but rather, as I have said before, because we too have it. For what is known so 
intimately, and so perceives itself to be itself, as that by which also all other things are perceived, that is, the 
mind itself? For we recognize the movements of bodies also, by which we perceive that others live besides 
ourselves, from the resemblance of ourselves; since we also so move our body in living as we observe 
those bodies to be moved. For even when a living body is moved, there is no way opened to our eyes to 
see the mind, a thing which cannot be seen by the eyes; but we perceive something to be contained in that 
bulk, such as is contained in ourselves, so as to move in like manner our-own bulk, which is the life and the 
soul. Neither is this, as it were, the property of human foresight and reason, since brute animals also 
perceive that not only they themselves live, but also other brute animals interchangeably, and the one the 
other, and that we ourselves do so. Neither do they see our souls, save from the movements of the body, 
and that immediately and most easily by some natural agreement. Therefore we both know the mind of any 
one from our own, and believe also from our own of him whom we do not know. For not only do we perceive 
that there is a mind, but we can also know what a mind is, by reflecting upon our own: for we have a mind. But 
whence do we know what a righteous man is? For we said above that we love the apostle for no other 
reason except that he is a righteous mind. We know, then, what a righteous man also is, just as we know 
what a mind is. But what a mind is, as has been said, we know from ourselves, for there is a mind in us. But 
whence do we know what a righteous man is, if we are not righteous? But if no one but he who is righteous 
knows what is a righteous man, no one but a righteous man loves a righteous man; for one cannot love him 
whom one believes to be righteous, for this very reason that one does believe him to be righteous, if one 
does not know what it is to be righteous; according to that which we have shown above, that no one loves 
what he believes and does not see, except by some rule of a general or special notion. And if for this 
reason no one but a righteous man loves a righteous man, how will any one wish to be a righteous man who 
is not yet so? For no one wishes to be that which he does not love. But, certainly, that he who is not righteous 
may be so, it is necessary that he should wish to be righteous; and in order that he may wish to be righteous, 
he loves the righteous man. Therefore, even he who is not yet righteous, loves the righteous man.(1) But he 
cannot love the righteous man, who is ignorant what a righteous man is. Accordingly, even he who is not yet 
righteous, knows what a righteous man is. Whence then does he know this? Does he see it with his eyes? Is 
any corporeal thing righteous, as it is white, or black, or square, or round? Who could say this? Yet with 
one's eyes one has seen nothing except corporeal things. But there is nothing righteous in a man except the 
mind; and when a man is called a righteous man, he is. called so from the mind, not from the body. For 
righteousness is in some sort the beauty of the mind, by which men are beautiful; very many too who are 
misshapen and deformed in body. And as the mind is not seen with the eyes, so neither is its beauty. From 
whence then does he who is not yet righteous know what a righteous man is, and love the righteous man that 

he may become righteous? Do certain signs shine forth by the motion of the body, by which this or that man 
is manifested to be righteous? But whence does any one know that these are the signs of a righteous mind 
when he is wholly ignorant what it is to be righteous? Therefore he does know. But whence do we know what 
it is to be righteous, even when we are not yet righteous? If we know from without ourselves, we know it by 
some bodily thing. But this is not a thing of the body. Therefore we know in ourselves what it is to be 
righteous. For I find this nowhere else when I seek to utter it, except within myself; and if I ask another what it 
is to be righteous, he seeks within himself what to answer; and whosoever hence can answer truly, he has 
found within himself what to answer. And when indeed I wish to speak of Carthage, I seek within myself what 
to speak, and I find within myself a notion or image of Carthage; but I have received this through the body, 
that is, through the perception of the body, since I have been present in that city in the body, and I saw and 
perceived it, and retained it in my memory, that I might find within myself a word concerning it, whenever I 
might wish to speak of it. For its word is the image itself of it in my memory, not that sound of two syllables 
when Carthage is named, or even when thai name itself is thought of silently from time to time, but that which I 
discern in my mind, when I utter that dissyllable with my voice, or even before I utter it. So also, when I wish to 
speak of Alexandria, which I never saw, an image of it is present with me. For whereas I had heard from 
many and had believed that city to be great, in such way as it could be told me, I formed an image of it in my 
mind as I was able; and this is with me its word when I wish to speak of it, before I utter with my voice the five 
syllables which make the name that almost every one knows. And yet if I could bring forth that image from 
my mind to the eyes of men who know Alexandria, certainly all either would say, It is not it; or if they said, It is, 
I should greatly wonder; and as I gazed at it in my mind, that is, at the image which was as it were its picture, I 
should yet not know it to be it, but should believe those who retained an image they had seen. But I do not 
so ask what it is to be righteous, nor do I so find it, nor do I so gaze upon it, when I utter it; neither am I so 
approved when I am heard, nor do I so approve when I hear; as though I have seen such a thing with my 
eyes, or learned it by some perception of the body, or heard it from those who had so learned it. For when I 
say, and say knowingly, that mind is righteous which knowingly and of purpose assigns to every one his 
due in life and behavior, I do not think of anything absent, as Carthage, or imagine it as I am able, as 
Alexandria, whether it be so or not; but I discern something present, and I discern it within myself, though I 
myself am not that which I discern; and many if they hear will approve it. And whoever hears me and 
knowingly approves, he too discerns this same thing within himself, even though he himself be not what he 
discerns. But when a righteous man says this, he discerns and says that which he himself is. And whence 
also does he discern it, except within himself? But this is not to be wondered at; for whence should he 
discern himself except within himself? The wonderful thing is, that the mind should see within itself that which 
it has seen nowhere else, and should see truly, and should see the very true righteous mind, and should 
itself be a mind, and yet not a righteous mind, which nevertheless it sees within itself. Is there another mind 
that is righteous in a mind that is not yet righteous Or if there is not, what does it there see when it sees and 
says what is a righteous mind, nor sees it anywhere else but in itself, when itself is not a righteous mind? Is 
that which it sees an inner truth present to the mind which has power to behold it? Yet all have not that power; 
and they who have power to behold it, are not all also that which they behold, that is, they are not also 
righteous minds themselves, just as they are able to see and to say what is a righteous mind. And whence 
will they be able to be so, except by cleaving to that very same form itself which they behold, so that from 
thence they may be formed and may be righteous minds; not only discerning and saying that the mind is 
righteous which knowingly and of purpose assigns to every one that which is his due in life and behavior, but 
so likewise that they themselves may live righteously and be righteous in character, by assigning to every 
one that which is his due, so as to owe no man anything, but to love one another.(1) And whence can any 
one cleave to that form but by loving it? Why then do we love another whom we believe to be righteous, and 
do not love that form itself wherein we see what is a righteous mind, that we also may be able to be 
righteous? Is it that unless we loved that also, we should not love him at all, whom through it we love: but 
whilst we are not righteous, we love that form too little to allow of our being able to be righteous? The man 
therefore who is believed to be righteous, is loved through that form and truth which he who loves discerns 
and understands within himself; but that very form and truth itself cannot be loved from any other source than 
itself. For we do not find any other such thing besides itself, so that by believing we might love it when it is 
unknown, in that we here already know another such thing. For whatsoever of such a kind one may have 
seen, is itself; and there is not any other such thing, since itself alone is such as itself is. He therefore who 
loves men, ought to love them either because they are righteous, or that they may become righteous. For so 
also he ought to love himself, either because he is righteous, or that he may become righteous; for in this 
way he loves his neighbor as himself without any risk. For he who loves himself otherwise, loves himself 
wrongfully, since he loves himself to this end that he may be unrighteous; therefore to this end that he may 
be wicked; and hence it follows next that he does not love himself; for, "He who loveth iniquity, (1) hateth his 
own soul."(2) 

CHAP. 7. --OF TRUE LOVE, BY WHICH WE ARRIVE AT THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE 
TRINITY. GOD IS TO BE SOUGHT, NOT OUTWARDLY, BY SEEKING TO DO WONDERFUL 
THINGS WITH THE ANGELS, BUT INWARDLY, BY IMITATING THE PIETY OF GOOD 
ANGELS. 

10. No other thing, then, is chiefly to be regarded in this inquiry, which we make concerning the Trinity and 
concerning knowing God, except what is true love, nay, rather what is love. For that is to be called love which 
is true, otherwise it is desire; and so those who desire are said improperly to love, just as they who love are 
said improperly to desire. But this is true love, that cleaving to the truth we may live righteously, and so may 
despise all mortal things in comparison with the love of men, whereby we wish them to live righteously. For 
so we should be prepared also to die profitably for our brethren, as our Lord Jesus Christ taught us by His 
example. For as there are two commandments on which hang all the Law and the prophets, love of God and 
love of our neighbor;(3) not without cause the Scripture mostly puts one for both: whether it be of God only, 
as is that text, "For we know that all things work together for good to them that love God;"(4) and again, "But if 
any man love God, the same is known of Him;(5) and that, "Because the love of God is shed abroad in our 
hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us;"(6) and many other passages; because he who loves God 
must both needs do what God has commanded, and loves Him just in such proportion as he does so; 
therefore he must needs also love his neighbor, because God has commanded it: or whether it be that 
Scripture only mentions the love of our neighbor, as in that text, "Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfill 
the law of Christ;"(7) and again, "For all the law is fufilled in one word, even in this, Thou shalt love thy 
neighbor as thyself;"(8) and in the Gospel, "All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye 
even so to them; for this is the Law and the prophets. "(9) And many other passages occur in the sacred 
writings, in which only the love of our neighbor seems to be commanded for perfection, while the love of God 
is passed over in silence; whereas the Law and the prophets hang on both precepts. But this, too, is 
because be who loves his neighbor must needs also love above all else love itself. But "God is love; and 
he that dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God. "(10) Therefore he must needs above all else love God. 

1 1 . Wherefore they who seek God through those Powers which rule over the world, or parts of the world, are 
removed and cast away far from Him; not by intervals of space, but by difference of affections: for they 
endeavor to find a path outwardly, and forsake their own inward things, within which is God. Therefore, even 
although they may either have heard some holy heavenly Power, or in some way or another may have 
thought of it, yet they rather covet its deeds at which human weakness marvels, but do not imitate the piety 
by which divine rest is acquired. For they prefer, through pride, to be able to do that which an angel does, 
more than, through devotion, to be that which an angel is. For no holy being rejoices in his own power, but in 
His from whom he has the power which he filly can have; and he knows it to be more a mark of power to be 
united to the Omnipotent by a pious will, than to be able, by his own power and will, to do what they may 
tremble at who are not able to do such things. Therefore the Lord Jesus Christ Himself, in doing such things, 
in order that He might teach better things to those who marvelled at them, and might turn those who were 
intent and in doubt about unusual temporal things to eternal and inner things, says, "Come unto me, all ye 
that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you." And He does not say, 
Learn of me, because I raise those who have been dead four days; but He says, "Learn of me; for I am 
meek and lowly in heart." For humility, which is most solid, is more powerful and safer than pride, that is most 
inflated. And so He goes on to say, "And ye shall find rest unto your souls, "(1) for "Love(2) is not puffed 
up;"(3) and "God is Love;"(4) and "such as be faithful in love shall rest in(5) Him, "(6) called back from the din 
which is without to silent joys. Behold, "God is Love:" why do we go forth and run to the heights of the 
heavens and the lowest parts of the earth, seeking Him who is within us, if we wish to be with Him? 

CHAP. 8. -THAT HE WHO LOVES HIS BROTHER, LOVES GOD; BECAUSE HE LOVES LOVE 
ITSELF, WHICH IS OF GOD, AND IS GOD. 

12. Let no one say, I do not know what I love. Let him love his brother, and he will love the same love. For he 
knows the love with which he loves, more than the brother whom he loves. So now he can know God more 
than he knows his brother: clearly known more, because more present; known more, because more within 
him; known more, because more certain. Embrace the love of God, and by love embrace God. That is love 
itself, which associates together all good angels and all the servants of God by the bond of sanctity, and 
joins together us and them mutually with ourselves, and joins, us subordinately to Himself. In proportion, 
therefore, as we are healed from the swelling of pride, in such proportion are we more filled with love; and 
with what is he fall, who is full of love, except with God? Well, but you will say, I see love, and, as far as I am 
able, I gaze upon it with my mind, and I believe the Scripture, saying, that "God is love; and he that dwelleth 
in love, dwelleth in God;"(7) but when I see love, I do not see in it the Trinity. Nay, but thou dost see the Trinity 
if thou seest love. But if I can I will put you in mind, that thou mayest see that thou seest it; only let itself be 

present, that we may be moved by love to something good. Since, when we love love, we love one who 
loves something, and that on account of this very thing, that he does love something; therefore what does 
love love, that love itself also may be loved? For that is not love which loves nothing. But if it loves itself it 
must love something, that it may love itself as love. For as a word indicates something, and indicates also 
itself, but does not indicate itself to be a word, unless it indicates that it does indicate something; so love 
also loves indeed itself, but except it love itself as loving something, it loves itself not as love. What 
therefore does love love, except that which we love with love? But this, to begin from that which is nearest to 
us, is our brother. And listen how greatly the Apostle John commends brotherly love: "He that loveth his 
brother abideth in the light, and there is none occasion of stumbling in him. "(8) It is manifest that he placed 
the perfection of righteousness in the love of our brother; for he certainly is perfect in whom "there is no 
occasion of stumbling." And yet he seems to have passed by the love of God in silence; which he never 
would have done, unless because he intends God to be understood in brotherly love itself. For in this same 
epistle, a little further on, he says most plainly thus: "Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God; and 
every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God. He that loveth not, knoweth not God; for God is 
love." And this passage declares sufficiently and plainly, that this same brotherly love itself (for that is 
brotherly love by which we love each other) is set forth by so great authority, not only to be from God, but 
also to be God. When, therefore, we love our brother from love, we love our brother from God; neither can it 
be that we do not love above all else that same love by which we love our brother: whence it may be 
gathered that these two commandments cannot exist unless interchangeably. For since "God is love," he 
who loves love certainly loves God; but he must needs love love, who loves his brother. And so a little after 
he says, "For he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not 
seen"?(9) because the reason that he does not see God is, that he does not love his brother. For he who 
does not love his brother, abideth not in love; and he who abideth not in love, abideth not in God, because 
God is love. Further, he who abideth not in God, abideth not in light; for "God is light, and in Him is no 
darkness at all."(1 0) He therefore who abideth not in light, what wonder is it if he does not see light, that is, 
does not see God, because he is in darkness? But he sees his brother with human sight, with which God 
cannot be seen. But if he loved with spiritual love him whom he sees with human sight, he would see God, 
who is love itself, with the inner sight by which He can be seen. Therefore he who does not love his brother 
whom he sees, how can he love God, whom on that account he does not see, because God is love, which 
he has not who does not love his brother? Neither let that further question disturb us, how much of love we 
ought to spend upon our brother, and how much upon God: incomparably more upon God than upon 
ourselves, but upon our brother as much as upon ourselves; and we love ourselves so much the more, the 
more we love God. Therefore we love God and our neighbor from one and the same love; but we love God 
for the sake of God, and ourselves and our neighbors for the sake of God. 

CHAP. 9. -OUR LOVE OF THE RIGHTEOUS IS KINDLED FROM LOVE ITSELF OF THE 
UNCHANGEABLE FORM OF RIGHTEOUSNESS. 

13. For why is it, pray, that we burn when we hear and read, "Behold, now is the accepted time; behold, now 
is the day of salvation: giving no offense in anything, that the ministry be not blamed: but in all things 
ap-proving ourselves as the ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in 
stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labors, in watchings, in fastings; by pureness, by knowledge, by 
long-suffering, by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, by the word of truth, by the power of God, 
by the armor of righteousness on the right hand and on the left, by honor and dishonor, by evil report and 
good report: as deceivers, and yet true; as unknown, and yet well known; as dying, and, behold, we live; as 
chastened, and not killed; as sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having 
nothing, and yet possessing all things?"(1) Why is it that we are inflamed with love of the Apostle Paul, when 
we read these things, unless that we believe him so to have lived? But we do not believe that the ministers 
of God ought so to live because we have heard it from any one, but because we behold it inwardly within 
ourselves, or rather above ourselves, in the truth itself. Him, therefore, whom we believe to have so lived, we 
love for that which we see. And except we loved above all else that form which we discern as always 
steadfast and unchangeable, we should not for that reason love him, because we hold fast in our belief that 
his life, when he was living in the flesh, was adapted to, and in harmony with, this form. But somehow we are 
stirred up the more to the love of this form itself, through the belief by which we believe some one to have so 
lived; and to the hope by which we no more at all despair, that we, too, are able so to live; we who are men, 
from this fact itself, that some men have so lived, so that we both desire this more ardently, and pray for it 
more confidently. So both the love of that form, according to which they are believed to have lived, makes 
the life of these men themselves to be loved by us; and their life thus believed stirs up a more burning love 
towards that same form; so that the more ardently we love God, the more certainly and the more calmly do 
we see Him, because we behold in God the unchangeable form of righteousness, according to which we 

judge that man ought to live. Therefore faith avails to the knowledge and to the love of God, not as though of 
one altogether unknown, or altogether not loved; but so that thereby He may be known more clearly, and 
loved more steadfastly. 

CHAP. 10. -THERE ARE THREE THINGS IN LOVE, AS IT WERE A TRACE OF THE 
TRINITY. 

14. But what is love or charity, which divine Scripture so greatly praises and proclaims, except the love of 
good? But love is of some one that loves, and with love something is loved. Behold, then, there are three 
things: he that loves, and that which is loved, and love. What, then, is love, except a certain life which 
couples or seeks to couple together some two things, namely, him that loves, and that which is loved? And 
this is so even in outward and carnal loves. But that we may drink in something more pure and clear, let us 
tread down the flesh and ascend to the mind. What does the mind love in a friend except the mind? There, 
then, also are three things: he that loves, and that which is loved, and love. It remains to ascend also from 
hence, and to seek those things which are above, as far as is given to man. But here for a little while let our 
purpose rest, not that it may think itself to have found already what it seeks; but just as usually the place has 
first to be found where anything is to be sought, while the thing itself is not yet found, but we have only found 
already where to look for it; so let it suffice to have said thus much, that we may have, as it were, the hinge of 
some starting-point, whence to weave the rest of our discourse. 

THE FIFTEEN BOOKS OF AURELIUS AUGUSTINUS, 
BISHOP OF HIPPO, ON THE TRINITY: BOOK IX 

BOOK IX. 

THAT A KIND OF TRINITY EXISTS IN MAN, WHO IS THE IMAGE OF GOD, VIZ. THE MIND, 
AND THE KNOWLEDGE WHEREWITH THE MIND KNOWS ITSELF, AND THE LOVE 
WHEREWITH IT LOVES BOTH ITSELF AND ITS OWN KNOWLEDGE; AND THESE THREE 
ARE SHOWN TO BE MUTUALLY EQUAL, AND OF ONE ESSENCE. 

CHAP. 1.--IN WHAT WAY WE MUSTINQUIRE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

1 . WE certainly seek a trinity,— not any trinity, but that Trinity which is God, and the true and supreme and only 
God. Let my hearers then wait, for we are still seeking. And no one justly finds fault with such a search, if at 
least he who seeks that which either to know or to utter is most difficult, is steadfast in the faith. But 
whosoever either sees or teaches better, finds fault quickly and justly with any one who confidently affirms 
concerning it. "Seek God," he says, "and your heart shall live;"(1) and lest any one should rashly rejoice that 
he has, as it were, apprehended it, "Seek," he says, "His face evermore. "(2) And the apostle: "if any man," 
he says, "think that he knoweth anything, he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know. But if any man love 
God, the same is known of Him. "(3) He has not said, has known Him, which is dangerous presumption, but 
"is known of Him." So also in another place, when he had said, "But now after that ye have known God:" 
immediately correcting himself, he says, "or rather are known of God. "(4) And above all in that other place, 
"Brethren," he says, "I count not myself to have apprehended: but this one thing I do, forgetting those things 
which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I press in purpose(5) toward the 
mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus 
minded. "(6) Perfection in this life, he tells us, is nothing else than to forget those things which are behind, and 
to reach forth and press in purpose toward those things which are before. For he that seeks has the safest 
purpose, [who seeks] until that is taken hold of whither we are tending, and for which we are reaching forth. 
But that is the right purpose which starts from faith. For a certain faith is in some way the starting-point of 
knowledge; but a certain knowledge will not be made perfect, except after this life, when we shall see face to 
face. (7) Let us therefore be thus minded, so as to know that the disposition to seek the truth is more safe than 
that which presumes things unknown to be known. Let us therefore so seek as if we should find, and so find 
as if we were about to seek. For "when a man hath done, then he beginneth."(8) Let us doubt without unbelief 
of things to be believed; let us affirm without rashness of things to be understood: authority must be held fast 
in the former, truth sought out in the latter. As regards this question, then, let us believe that the Father, and 
the Son, and the Holy Spirit is one God, the Creator and Ruler of the whole creature; and that the Father is 
not the Son, nor the Holy Spirit either the Father or the Son, but a trinity of persons mutually interrelated, and 

a unity of an equal essence. And let us seek to understand this, praying for help from Himself, whom we wish 
to understand; and as much as He grants, desiring to explain what we understand with so much pious care 
and anxiety, that even if in any case we say one thing for another, we may at least say nothing unworthy. As, 
for the sake of example, if we say anything concerning the Father that does not properly belong to the 
Father, or does belong to the Son, or to the Holy Spirit, or to the Trinity itself; and if anything of the Son which 
does not properly suit with the Son, or at all events which does suit with the Father, or with the Holy Spirit, or 
with the Trinity; or if, again, anything concerning the Holy Spirit, which is not fitly a property of the Holy Spirit, 
yet is not alien from the Father, or from the Son, or from the one God the Trinity itself. Even as now our wish is 
to see whether the Holy Spirit is properly that love which is most excellent which if He is not, either the Father 
is love, or the Son, or the Trinity itself; since we cannot withstand the most certain faith and weighty authority 
of Scripture, saying, "God is love."(1) And yet we ought not to deviate into profane error, so as to say 
anything of the Trinity which does not suit the Creator, but rather the creature, or which is feigned outright by 
mere empty thought. 

CHAP. 2. -THE THREE THINGS WHICH ARE FOUND IN LOVE MUST BE CONSIDERED. (2) 

2. And this being so, let us direct our attention to those three things which we fancy we have found. We are 
not yet speaking of heavenly things, nor yet of God the Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit, but of that 

inadequate image, which yet is an image, that is, man; for our feeble mind perhaps can gaze upon this more 
familiarly and more easily. Well then, when I, who make this inquiry, love anything, there are three things 
concerned-myself, and that which I love, and love itself. For I do not love love, except I love a lover; for 
there is no love where nothing is loved. Therefore there are three things-he who loves, and that which is 
loved, and love. But what if I love none except myself? Will there not then be two things-that which I love, 
and love? For he who loves and that which is loved are the same when any one loves himself; just as to 
love and to be loved, in the same way, is the very same thing when any one loves himself. Since the same 
thing is said, when it is said, he loves himself, and he is loved by himself. For in that case to love and to be 
loved are not two different things: just as he who loves and he who is loved are not two different persons. But 
yet, even so, love and what is loved are still two things. For there is no love when any one loves himself, 
except when love itself is loved. But it is one thing to love one's self, another to love one's own love. For love 
is not loved, unless as already loving something; since where nothing is loved there is no love. Therefore 
there are two things when any one loves himself-love, and that which is loved. For then he that loves and 
that which is loved are one. Whence it seems that it does not follow that three things are to be understood 
wherever love is. For let us put aside from the inquiry all the other many things of which a man consists; and 
in order that we may discover clearly what we are now seeking, as far as in such a subject is possible, let us 
treat of the mind alone. The mind, then, when it loves itself, discloses two things-mind and love. But what is 
to love one's self, except to wish to help one's self to the enjoyment of self? And when any one wishes 
himself to be just as much as he is, then the will is on a par with the mind, and the love is equal to him who 
loves. And if love is a substance, it is certainly not body, but spirit; and the mind also is not body, but spirit. 
Yet love and mind are not two spirits, but one spirit; nor yet two essences, but one: and yet here are two 
things that are one, he that loves and love; or, if you like so to put it, that which is loved and love. And these 
two, indeed, are mutually said relatively. Since he who loves is referred to love, and love to him who loves. 
For he who loves, loves with some love, and love is the love of some one who loves. But mind and spirit are 
not said relatively, but express essence. For mind and spirit do not exist because the mind and spirit of 
some particular man exists. For if we subtract the body from that which is man, which is so called with the 
conjunction of body, the mind and spirit remain. But if we subtract him that loves, then there is no love; and if 
we subtract love, then there is no one that loves. And therefore, in so far as they are mutually referred to one 
another, they are two; but whereas they are spoken in respect to themselves, each are spirit, and both 
together also are one spirit; and each are mind, and both together one mind. Where, then, is the trinity? Let 
us attend as much, as we can, and let us invoke the everlasting light, that He may illuminate our darkness, 
and that we may see in ourselves, as much as we are permitted, the image of God. 

CHAP. 3. -THE IMAGE OF THE TRINITY IN THE MIND OF MAN WHO KNOWS HIMSELF 
AND LOVES HIMSELF. THE MIND KNOWS ITSELF THROUGH ITSELF. 

3. For the mind cannot love itself, except also it know itself; for how can it love what it does not know? Or if 
any body says that the mind, from either general or special knowledge, believes itself of such a character 
as it has by experience found others to be and therefore loves itself, he speaks most foolishly. For whence 
does a mind know another mind, if it does not know itself? For the mind does not know other minds and not 
know itself, as the eye of the body sees other eyes and does not see itself; for we see bodies through the 
eyes of the body, because, unless we are looking into a mirror, we cannot refract and reflect the rays into 
themselves which shine forth through those eyes, and touch whatever we discern,-a subject, indeed, which 
is treated of most subtlely and obscurely, until it be clearly demonstrated whether the fact be so, or whether it 
be not. But whatever is the nature of the power by which we discern through the eyes, certainly, whether it be 
rays or anything else, we cannot discern with the eyes that power itself; but we inquire into it with the mind, 
and if possible, understand even this with the mind. As the mind, then, itself gathers the knowledge of 
corporeal things through the senses of the body, so of incorporeal things through itself. Therefore it knows 
itself also through itself, since it is incorporeal; for if it does not know itself, it does not love itself. 

CHAP. 4.--THE THREE ARE ONE, AND ALSO EQUAL, VIZ. THE MIND ITSELF, AND THE 
LOVE, AND THE KNOWLEDGE OF IT. THAT THE SAME THREE EXIST SUBSTANTIALLY, 
AND ARE PREDICATED RELATIVELY. THAT THE SAME THREE ARE INSEPARABLE. 
THAT THE SAME THREE ARE NOT JOINED AND COMMINGLED LIKE PARTS, BUT THAT 
THEY ARE OF ONE ESSENCE, AND ARE RELATIVES. 

4. But as there are two things (duo quaedam), the mind and the love of it, when it loves itself; so there are two 
things, the mind and the knowledge of it, when it knows itself, Therefore the mind itself, and the love of it, and 
the knowledge of it, are three things (tria quaedam), and these three are one; and when they are perfect they 
are equal. For if one loves himself less than as he is,-as for example, suppose that the mind of a man only 

loves itself as much as the body of a man ought to be loved, whereas the mind is more than the body, -then 
it is in fault, and its love is not perfect. Again, if it loves itself more than as it is,-as if, for instance, it loves itself 
as much as God is to be loved, whereas the mind is incomparably less than God, -here also it is 
exceedingly in fault, and its love of self is not perfect. But it is in fault more perversely and wrongly still, when 
it loves the body as much as God is to be loved. Also, if knowledge is less than that thing which is known, 
and which can be fully known, then knowledge is not perfect; bill if it is greater, then the nature which knows is 
above that which is known, as the knowledge of the body is greater than the body itself, which is known by 
that knowledge. For knowledge is a kind of life in the reason of the knower, but the body is not life; and any 
life is greater than any body, not in bulk, but in power. But when the mind knows itself, its own knowledge 
does not rise above itself, because itself knows, and itself is known. When, therefore, it knows itself entirely, 
and no other thing with itself, then its knowledge is equal to itself; because its knowledge is not from another 
nature, since it knows itself. And when it perceives itself entirely, and nothing more, then it is neither less nor 
greater. We said therefore rightly, that these three things, [mind, love, and knowledge], when they are 
perfect, are by consequence equal. 

5. Similar reasoning suggests to us, if indeed we can any way understand the matter, that these things [i.e. 
love and knowledge] exist in the soul, and that, being as it were involved in it, they are so evolved from it as 
to be perceived and reckoned up substantially, or, so to say, essentially. Not as though in a subject; as 
color, or shape, or any other quality or quantity, are in the body. For anything of this [material] kind does not 
go beyond the subject in which it is; for the color or shape of this particular body cannot be also those of 
another body. But the mind can also love something besides itself, with that love with which it loves itself. 
And further, the mind does not know itself only, but also many other things. Wherefore love and knowledge 
are not contained in the mind as in a subject, but these also exist substantially, as the mind itself does; 
because, even if they are mutually predicated relatively, yet they exist each severally in their own 
substance. Nor are they so mutually predicated relatively as color and the colored subject are; so that color 
is in the colored subject, but has not any proper substance in itself, since colored body is a substance, but 
color is in a substance; but as two friends are also two men, which are substances, while they are said to be 
men not relatively, but friends relatively. 

6. But, further, although one who loves or one who knows is a substance, and knowledge is a substance, 
and love is a substance, but he that loves and love, or, he that knows and knowledge, are spoken of 
relatively to each other, as are friends: yet mind or spirit are not relatives, as neither are men relatives: 
nevertheless he that loves and love, or he that knows and knowledge, cannot exist separately from each 
other, as men can that are friends. Although it would seem that friends, too, can be separated in body, not in 
mind, in as far as they are friends: nay, it can even happen that a friend may even also begin to hate a friend 
and on this account cease to be a friend while the other does not know it, and still loves him. But if the love 
with which the mind loves itself ceases to be, then the mind also will at the same time cease to love. 
Likewise, if the knowledge by which the mind knows itself ceases to be, then the mind will also at the same 
time cease to know itself, just as the head of anything that has a head is certainly a head, and they are 
predicated relatively to each other, although they are also substances: for both a head is a body, and so is 
that which has a head; and if there be no head, then neither will there be that which has a head. Only these 
things can be separated from each other by cutting off, those cannot. 

7. And even if there are some bodies which cannot be wholly separated and divided, yet they would not be 
bodies unless they consisted of their own proper parts. A part then is predicated relatively to a whole, since 
every part is a part of some whole, and a whole is a whole by having all its parts. But since both part and 
whole are bodies, these things are not only predicated relatively, but exist also substantially. Perhaps, then, 
the mind is a whole, and the love with which it loves itself, and the knowledge with which it knows itself, are as 
it were its parts, of which two parts that whole consists. Or are there three equal parts which make up the one 
whole? But no part embraces the whole, of which it is a part; whereas, when the mind knows itself as a whole, 
that is, knows itself perfectly, then the knowledge of it extends through the whole of it; and when it loves itself 
perfectly, then it loves itself as a whole, and the love of it extends through the whole of it. Is it, then, as one 
drink is made from wine and water and honey, and each single part extends through the whole, and yet they 
are three things (for there is no part of the drink which does not contain these three things; for they are not 
joined as if they were water and oil, but are entirely commingled: and they are all substances, and the whole 
of that liquor which is composed of the three is one substance),-is it, I say, in some such way as this we are 
to think these three to be together, mind, love, and knowledge? But water, wine, and honey are not of one 
substance, although one substance results in the drink made from the commingling of them. And I cannot 
see how those other three are not of the same substance, since the mind itself loves itself, and itself knows 
itself; and these three so exist, as that the mind is neither loved nor known by any other thing at all. These 
three, therefore, must needs be of one and the same essence; and for that reason, if they were confounded 
together as it were by a commingling, they could not be in any way three, neither could they be mutually 
referred to each other. Just as if you were to make from one and the same gold three similar rings, although 

connected with each other, they are mutually referred to each other, because they are similar. For 
everything similar is similar to something, and there is a trinity of rings, and one gold. But if they are blended 
with each other, and each mingled with the other through the whole of their own bulk, then that trinity will fall 
through, and it will not exist at all; and not only will it be called one gold, as it was called in the case of those 
three rings, but now it will not be called three things of gold at all. 

CHAP. 5.-THAT THESE THREE ARE SEVERAL IN THEMSELVES, AND MUTUALLY ALL IN 
ALL. 

8. But in these three, when the mind knows itself and loves itself, there remains a trinity: mind, love, 
knowledge; and this trinity is not confounded together by any commingling: although they are each 
severally in themselves and mutually all in all, or each severally in each two, or each two in each. Therefore 
all are in all. For certainly the mind is in itself, since it is called mind in respect to itself: although it is said to 
be knowing, or known, or knowable, relatively to its own knowledge; and although also as loving, and loved, 
or lovable, it is referred to love, by which it loves itself. And knowledge, although it is referred to the mind that 
knows or is known, nevertheless is also predicated both as known and knowing in respect to itself: for the 
knowledge by which the mind knows itself is not unknown to itself. And although love is referred to the mind 
that loves, whose love it is; nevertheless it is also love in respect to itself, so as to exist also in itself: since 
love too is loved, yet cannot be loved with anything except with love, that is with itself. So these things are 
severally in themselves. But so are they in each other; because both the mind that loves is in love, and love 
is in the knowledge of him that loves, and knowledge is in the mind that knows. And each severally is in like 
manner in each two, because the mind which knows and loves itself, is in its own love and knowledge: and 
the love of the mind that loves and knows itself, is in the mind and in its knowledge: and the knowledge of the 
mind that knows and loves itself is in the mind and in its love, because it loves itself that knows, and knows 
itself that loves. And hence also each two is in each severally, since the mind which knows and loves itself, 
is together with its own knowledge in love, and together with its own love in knowledge; and love too itself 
and knowledge are together in the mind, which loves and knows itself. But in what way all are in all, we have 
already shown above; since the mind loves itself as a whole, and knows itself as a whole, and knows its 
own love wholly, and loves its own knowledge wholly, when these three things are perfect in respect to 
themselves. Therefore these three things are marvellously inseparable from each other, and yet each of 
them is severally a substance, and all together are one substance or essence, whilst they are mutually 
predicated relatively. (1) 

CHAP. 6. -THERE IS ONE KNOWLEDGE OF THE THING IN THE THING ITSELF, AND 
ANOTHER IN ETERNAL TRUTH ITSELF. THAT CORPOREAL THINGS, TOO, ARE TO BE 
JUDGED THE RULES OF ETERNAL TRUTH. 

9. But when the human mind knows itself and loves itself, it does not know and love anything unchangeable: 
and each individual man declares his own particular mind by one manner of speech, when he considers 
what takes place in himself; but defines the human mind abstractly by special or general knowledge. And 
so, when he speaks to me of his own individual mind, as to whether he understands this or that, or does not 
understand it, or whether he wishes or does not wish this or that, I believe; but when he speaks the truth of the 
mind of man generally or specially, I recognize and approve. Whence it is manifest, that each sees a thing 
in himself, in such way that another person may believe what he says of it, yet may not see it; but another 
[sees a thing] in the truth itself, in such way that another person also can gaze upon it; of which the former 
undergoes changes at successive times, the latter consists in an unchangeable eternity. For we do not 
gather a generic or specific knowledge of the human mind by means of resemblance by seeing many 
minds with the eyes of the body: but we gaze upon indestructible truth, from which to define perfectly, as far 
as we can, not of what sort is the mind of any one particular man, but of what sort it ought to be upon the 
eternal plan. 

10. Whence also, even in the case of the images of things corporeal which are drawn in through the bodily 
sense, and in some way infused into the memory, from which also those things which have not been seen 
are thought under a fancied image, whether otherwise than they really are, or even perchance as they 
are;-even here too, we are proved either to accept or reject, within ourselves, by other rules which remain 
altogether unchangeable above our mind, when we approve or reject anything rightly. For both when recall 
the walls of Carthage which I have seen, and imagine to myself the walls of Alexandria which I have not 
seen, and, in preferring this to that among forms which in both cases are imaginary, make that preference 
upon grounds of reason; the judgment of truth from above is still strong and clear, and rests firmly upon the 
utterly indestructible rules of its own right; and if it is covered as it were by cloudiness of corporeal images, 
yet is not wrapt up and confounded in them. 

1 1 . But it makes a difference, whether, under that or in that darkness, I am shut off as it were from the clear 
heaven; or whether (as usually happens on lofty mountains), enjoying the free air between both, I at once 
look up above to the calmest light, and down below upon the densest clouds. For whence is the ardor of 
brotherly love kindled in me, when I hear that some man has borne bitter torments for the excellence and 
steadfastness of faith? And if that man is shown to me with the finger, I am eager to join myself to him, to 
become acquainted with him, to bind him to myself in friendship. And accordingly, if opportunity offers, I draw 
near, I address him, I converse with him, I express my goodwill towards him in what words I can, and wish 
that in him too in turn should be brought to pass and expressed goodwill towards me; and I endeavor after a 
spiritual embrace in the way of belief, since I cannot search out so quickly and discern altogether his 
innermost heart. I love therefore the faithful and courageous man with a pure and genuine love. But if he 
were to confess to me in the course of conversation, or were through unguardedness to show in any way, 
that either he believes something unseemly of God, and desires also something carnal in Him, and that he 
bore these torments on behalf of such an error, or from the desire of money for which he hoped, or from 
empty greediness of human praise: immediately it follows that the love with which I was borne towards him, 
displeased, and as it were repelled, and taken away from an unworthy man, remains in that form, after which, 
believing him such as I did, I had loved him; unless perhaps I have come to love him to this end, that he may 
become such, while I have found him not to be such in fact. And in that man, too, nothing is changed: 
although it can be changed, so that he may become that which I had believed him to be already. But in my 
mind there certainly is something changed, viz., the estimate I had formed of him, which was before of one 
sort, and now is of another: and the same love, at the bidding from above of unchangeable righteousness, 
is turned aside from the purpose of enjoying, to the purpose of taking counsel. But the form itself of 
unshaken and stable truth, wherein I should have enjoyed the fruition of the man, believing him to be good, 
and wherein likewise I take counsel that he may be good, sheds in an immoveable eternity the same light of 
incorruptible and most sound reason, both upon the sight of my mind, and upon that cloud of images, which I 
discern from above, when I think of the same man whom I had seen. Again, when I call back to my mind 
some arch, turned beautifully and symmetrically, which, let us say, I saw at Carthage; a certain reality that 
had been made known to the mind through the eyes, and transferred to the memory, causes the imaginary 
view. But I behold in my mind yet another thing, according to which that work of art pleases me; and whence 
also, if it displeased me, I should correct it. We judge therefore of those particular things according to that 
[form of eternal truth], and discern that form by the intuition of the rational mind. But those things themselves 
we either touch if present by the bodily sense, or if absent remember their images as fixed in our memory, or 
picture, in the way of likeness to them, such things as we ourselves also, if we wished and were able, would 
laboriously build up: figuring in the mind after one fashion the images of bodies, or seeing bodies through 
the body; but after another, grasping by simple intelligence what is above the eye of the mind, viz., the 
reasons and the unspeakably beautiful skill of such forms. 

CHAP. 7. -WE CONCEIVE AND BEGET THE WORD WITHIN, FROM THE THINGS WE HAVE 
BEHELD IN THE ETERNAL TRUTH. THE WORD, WHETHER OF THE CREATURE OR OF 
THE CREATOR, IS CONCEIVED BY LOVE. 

12. We behold, then, by the sight of the mind, in that eternal truth from which all things temporal are made, the 
form according to which we are, and according to which we do anything by true and right reason, either in 
ourselves, or in things corporeal; and we have the true knowledge of things, thence conceived, as it were as 
a word within us, and by speaking we beget it from within; nor by being born does it depart from us. And 
when we speak to others, we apply to the word, remaining within us, the ministry of the voice or of some 
bodily sign, that by some kind of sensible remembrance some similar thing may be wrought also in the 
mind of him that hears,-similar, I say, to that which does not depart from the mind of him that speaks. We do 
nothing, therefore, through the members of the body in our words and actions, by which the behavior of men 
is either approved or blamed, which we do not anticipate by a word uttered within ourselves. For no one 
willingly does anything, which he has not first said in his heart. 

13. And this word is conceived by love, either of the creature or of the Creator, that is, either of changeable 
nature or of unchangeable truth. (1) 

CHAP. 8. --IN WHAT DESIRE AND LOVE DIFFER. 

[Conceived] therefore, either by desire or by love: not that the creature ought not to be loved; but if that love 
[of the creature] is referred to the Creator, then it will not be desire (cupiditas), but love (charitas). For it is 
desire when the creature is loved for itself. And then it does not help a man through making use of it, but 
corrupts him in the enjoying it. When, therefore, the creature is either equal to us or inferior, we must use the 
inferior in order to God, but we must enjoy the equal duly in God. For as thou oughtest to enjoy thyself, not in 

thyself, but in Him who made thee, so also him whom thou lovest as thyself. Let us enjoy, therefore, both 
ourselves and our brethren in the Lord; and hence let us not dare to yield, and as it were to relax, ourselves 
to ourselves in the direction downwards. Now a word is born, when, being thought out, it pleases us either to 
the effect of sinning, or to that of doing right. Therefore love, as it were a mean, conjoins our word and the 
mind from which it is conceived, and without any confusion binds itself as a third with them, in an incorporeal 
embrace. 

CHAP. 9. --IN THE LOVE OF SPIRITUAL THINGS THE WORD BORN IS THE SAME AS THE 
WORD CONCEIVED. IT IS OTHERWISE IN THE LOVE OF CARNAL THINGS. 

14. But the word conceived and the word born are the very same when the will finds rest in knowledge itself, 
as is the case in the love of spiritual things. For instance, he who knows righteousness perfectly, and loves it 
perfectly, is already righteous; even if no necessity exist of working according to it outwardly through the 
members of the body. But in the love of carnal and temporal things, as in the offspring of animals, the 
conception of the word is one thing, the bringing forth another. For here what is conceived by desiring is born 
by attaining. Since it does; not suffice to avarice to know and to love gold, except it also have it; nor to know 
and love to eat, or to lie with any one, unless also one does it; nor to know and love honors and power, 
unless they actually come to pass. Nay, all these things, even if obtained, do not suffice. "Whosoever 
drinketh of this water," He says, "shall thirst again. "(1) And so also the Psalmist, "He hath conceived pain 
and brought forth iniquity. "(2) And he speaks of pain or labor as conceived, when those things are 
conceived which it is not sufficient to know and will, and when the mind burns and grows sick with want, until it 
arrives at those things, and, as it were, brings them forth. Whence in the Latin language we have the word 
"parta" used elegantly for both "reperta" and "comperta," which words sound as if derived from bringing 
forth. (3) Since "lust, when it hath conceived, bringeth forth sin. "(4) Wherefore the Lord proclaims, "Come unto 
me all ye that labor and are heavy laden;"(5) and in another place "Woe unto them that are with child, and to 
them that give suck, in those days!"(6) And when therefore He referred all either right actions or sins to the 
bringing forth of the word, "By thy mouth, "(7) He says, "thou shalt be justified, and by thy mouth(8) thou shalt 
be condemned, "(9) intending thereby not the visible mouth, but that which is within and invisible, of the 
thought and of the heart. 

CHAP. 10. -WHETHER ONLY KNOWLEDGE THAT IS LOVED IS THE WORD OF THE MIND. 

1 5. It is rightly asked then, whether all knowledge is a word, or only knowledge that is loved. For we also 
know the things which we hate; but what we do not like, cannot be said to be either conceived or brought 
forth by the mind. For not all things which in anyway touch it, are conceived by it; but some only reach the 
point of being known, but yet are not spoken as words, as for instance those of which we speak now. For 
those are called words in one way, which occupy spaces of time by their syllables, whether they are 
pronounced or only thought; and in another way, all that is known is called a word imprinted on the mind, as 
long as it can be brought forth from the memory and defined, even though we dislike the thing itself; and in 
another way still, when we like that which is conceived in the mind. And that which the apostle says, must be 
taken according to this last kind of word, "No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost;"(10) 
since those also say this, but according to another meaning of the term "word," of whom the Lord Himself 
says, "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. "(1 1) Nay, even in 
the case of things which we hate, when we rightly dislike and rightly censure them, we approve and like the 
censure bestowed upon them, and it becomes a word. Nor is it the knowledge of vices that displeases us, 
but the vices themselves. For I like to know and define what intemperance is; and this is its word. Just as 
there are known faults in art, and the knowledge of them is rightly approved, when a connoisseur discerns 
the species or the privation of excellence, as to affirm and deny that it is or that it is not; yet to be without 
excellence and to fall away into fault, is worthy of condemnation. And to define intemperance, and to say its 
word, belongs to the art of morals; but to be intemperate belongs to that which that art censures. Just as to 
know and define what a solecism is, belongs to the art of speaking; but to be guilty of one, is a fault which the 
same art reprehends. A word, then, which is the point we wish now to discern and intimate, is knowledge 
together with love. Whenever, then, the mind knows and loves itself, its word is joined to it by love. And since 
it loves knowledge and knows love, both the word is in love and love is in the word, and both are in him who 
loves and speaks. (1) 

CHAP. 11. -THAT THE IMAGE OR BEGOTTEN WORD OF THE MIND THAT KNOWS ITSELF 
IS EQUALTO THE MIND ITSELF. 

16. But all knowledge according to species is like the thing which it knows. For there is another knowledge 

according to privation, according to which we speak a word only when we condemn. And this condemnation 
of a privation is equivalent to praise of the species, and so is approved. The mind, then, contains some 
likeness to a known species, whether when liking that species or when disliking its privation. And hence, in 
so far as we know God, we are like Him, but not like to the point of equality, since we do not know Him to the 
extent of His own being. And as, when we speak of bodies by means of the bodily sense, there arises in our 
mind some likeness of them, which is a phantasm of the memory; for the bodies themselves are not at all in 
the mind, when we think them, but only the likenesses of those bodies; therefore, when we approve the latter 
for the former, We err, for the approving of one thing for another is an error; yet the image of the body in the 
mind is a thing of a better sort than the species of the body itself, inasmuch as the former is in a better nature, 
viz.. in a living substance, as the mind is: so when we know God, although we are made better than we were 
before we knew Him, and above all when the same knowledge being also liked and worthily loved 
becomes a word, and so that knowledge becomes a kind of likeness of God; yet that knowledge is of a 
lower kind, since it is in a lower nature; for the mind is creature, but God is Creator. And from this it may be 
inferred, that when the mind knows and approves itself, this same knowledge is in such way its word, as that 
it is altogether on a par and equal with it, and the same; because it is neither the knowledge of a lower 
essence, as of the body, nor of a higher, as of God. And whereas knowledge bears a likeness to that which 
it knows, that is, of which it is the knowledge; in this case it has perfect and equal likeness, when the mind 
itself, which knows, is known. And so it is both image and word; because it is uttered concerning that mind to 
which it is equalled in knowing, and that which is begotten is equal to the begetter. 

CHAP. 12. -WHY LOVE IS NOT THE OFFSPRING OF THE MIND, AS KNOWLEDGE IS SO. 
THE SOLUTION OF THE QUESTION. THE MIND WITH THE KNOWLEDGE OF ITSELF AND 
THE LOVE OF ITSELF IS THE IMAGE OF THE TRINITY. 

17. What then is love? Will it not be an image? Will it not be a word? Will it not be begotten? For why does 
the mind beget its knowledge when it knows itself, and not beget its love when it loves itself? For if it is the 
cause of its own knowing, for the reason that it is knowable, it is also the cause of its own love because it is 
lovable. It is hard, then, to say why it does not beget both. For there is a further question also respecting the 
supreme Trinity itself, the omnipotent God the Creator, after whose image man is made, which troubles men, 
whom the truth of God invites to the faith by human speech; viz.. why the Holy Spirit is not also to be either 
believed or understood to be begotten by God the Father, so that He also may be called a Son. And this 
question we are endeavoring in some way to investigate in the human mind, in order that from a lower 
image, in which our own nature itself as it were answers, upon being questioned, in a way more familiar to 
ourselves, we may be able to direct a more practised mental vision from the enlightened creature to the 
unchangeable light; assuming, however, that the truth itself has persuaded us, that as no Christian doubts 
the Word of God to be the Son, so that the Holy Spirit is love. Let us return, then, to a more careful 
questioning and consideration upon this subject of that image which is the creature, that is, of the rational 
mind; wherein the knowledge of some things coming into existence in time, but which did not exist before, 
and the love of some things which were not loved before, opens to us more clearly what to say: because to 
speech also itself, which must be disposed in time, that thing is easier of explanation which is 
comprehended in the order of time. 

18. First, therefore, it is clear that a thing may possibly be knowable, that is, such as can be known, and yet 
that it may be unknown; but that it is not possible for that to be known which is not knowable. Wherefore it 
must be clearly held that everything whatsoever that we know begets at the same time in us the knowledge 
of itself; for knowledge is brought forth from both, from the knower and from the thing known. When, therefore, 
the mind knows itself, it alone is the parent of its own knowledge; for it is itself both the thing known and the 
knower of it. But it was knowable to itself also before it knew itself, only the knowledge of itself was not in 
itself so long as it did not know itself. In knowing itself, then, it begets a knowledge of itself equal to itself; 
since it does not know itself as less than itself is, nor is its knowledge the knowledge of the essence of some 
one else, not only because itself knows, but also because it knows itself, as we have said above What then 
is to be said of love; why, when the mind loves itself, it should not seem also to have begotten the love of 
itself? For it was lovable to itself even before it loved itself since it could love itself; just as it was knowable to 
itself even before it knew itself, since it could know itself. For if it were not knowable to itself, it never could 
have known itself; and so, if it were not lovable to itself, it never could have loved itself. Why therefore may it 
not be said by loving itself to have begotten its own love, as by knowing itself it has begotten its own 
knowledge? Is it because it is thereby indeed plainly shown that this is the principle of love, whence it 
proceeds? for it proceeds from the mind itself, which is lovable to itself before it loves itself, and so is the 
principle of its own love by which it loves itself: but that this love is not therefore rightly said to be begotten by 
the mind, as is the knowledge of itself by which the mind knows itself, because in the case of knowledge the 
thing has been found already, which is what we call brought forth or discovered ;(1) and this is commonly 

preceded by an inquiry such as to find rest when that end is attained. For inquiry is the desire of finding, or, 
what is the same thing, of discovering. (2) But those things which are discovered are as it were brought forth, 
whence they are like offspring; but wherein, except in the case itself of knowledge? For in that case they are 
as it were uttered and fashioned. For although the things existed already which we found by seeking, yet the 
knowledge of them did not exist, which knowledge we regard as an offspring that is born. Further, the desire 
(appetitus) which there is in seeking proceeds from him who seeks, and is in some way in suspense, and 
does not rest in the end whither it is directed, except that which is sought be found and conjoined with him 
who seeks. And this desire, that is, inquiry,-although it does not seem to be love, by which that which is 
known is loved, for in this case we are still striving to know,-yet it is something of the same kind. For it can be 
called will (voluntas), since every one who seeks wills (vult) to find; and if that is sought which belongs to 
knowledge, every one who seeks wills to know. But if he wills ardently and earnestly, he is said to study 
(studere): a word that is most commonly employed in the case of pursuing and obtaining any branches of 
learning. Therefore, the bringing forth of the mind is preceded by some desire, by which, through seeking 
and finding what we wish to know, the offspring, viz. knowledge itself, is born. And for this reason, that desire 
by which knowledge is conceived and brought forth, cannot rightly be called the bringing forth and the 
offspring; and the same desire which led us to long for the knowing of the thing, becomes the love of the 
thing when known, while it holds and embraces its accepted offspring, that is, knowledge, and unites it to its 
begetter. And so there is a kind of image of the Trinity in the mind itself, and the knowledge of it, which is its 
offspring and its word concerning itself, and love as a third, and these three are one, and one substance. (3) 
Neither is the offspring less, since the mind knows itself according to the measure of its own being; nor is the 
love less, since it loves itself according to the measure both of its own knowledge and of its own being. 

THE FIFTEEN BOOKS OF AURELIUS AUGUSTINUS, 
BISHOP OF HIPPO, ON THE TRINITY: BOOKX 

BOOKX. 

IN WHICH THERE IS SHOWN TO BE ANOTHER TRINITY IN THE MIND OF MAN, AND ONE 
THAT APPEARS MUCH MORE EVIDENTLY, VIZ. IN HIS MEMORY, UNDERSTANDING, 
AND WILL. 

CHAP. 1.--THE LOVE OF THE STUDIOUS MIND, THAT IS, OF ONE DESIROUS TO KNOW, 
IS NOT THE LOVE OF A THING WHICH IT DOES NOT 

1. Let Us now proceed, then, in due order, with a more exact purpose, to explain this same point more 
thoroughly. And first, since no one can love at all a thing of which he is wholly ignorant, we must carefully 
consider of what sort is the love of those who are studious, that is, of those who do not already know, but are 
still desiring to know any branch of learning. Now certainly, in those things whereof the word study is not 
commonly used, love often arises from hearsay, when the reputation of anything for beauty inflames the 
mind to the seeing and enjoying it; since the mind knows generically wherein consist the beauties of 
corporeal things, from having seen them very frequently, and since there exists within a faculty of approving 
that which outwardly is longed for. And when this happens, the love that is called forth is not of a thing wholly 
unknown, since its genus is thus known. But when we love a good man whose face we never saw, we love 
him from the knowledge of his virtues, which virtues we know [abstractly] in the truth itself. But in the case of 
learning, it is for the most part the authority of others who praise and commend it that kindles our love of it; 
although nevertheless we could not burn with any zeal at all for the study of it, unless we had already in our 
mind at least a slight impression of the knowledge of each kind of learning. For who, for instance, would 
devote any care and labor to the learning of rhetoric, unless he knew before that it was tim science of 
speaking? Sometimes, again, we marvel at the results of learning itself, which we have heard of or 
experienced; and hence burn to obtain, by learning, the power of attaining these results. Just as if it were 
said to one who did not know his letters, that there is a kind of learning which enables a man to send words, 
wrought with the hand in silence, to one who is ever so far absent, for him in turn to whom they are sent to 
gather these words, not with his ears, but with his eyes; and if the man were to see the thing actually done, is 
not that man, since he desires to know how he can do this thing, altogether moved to study with a view to the 
result which he already knows and holds? So it is that the studious zeal of those who learn is kindled: for that 
of which any one is utterly ignorant, he can in no way love. 

2. So also, if any one hear an unknown sign, as, for instance, the sound of some word of which he does not 
know the signification, he desires to know what it is; that is, he desires to know what thing it is which it is 
agreed shall be brought to mind by that sound: as if he heard the word temetum(1) uttered, and not knowing, 
should ask what it is. He must then know already that it is a sign, i.e. that the word is not an empty sound, but 
that something is signified by it; for in other respects this trisyllabic word is known to him already, and has 
already impressed its articulate form upon his mind through the sense of hearing. And then what more is to 
be required in him, that he may go on to a greater knowledge of that of which all the letters and all the 
spaces of its several sounds are already known, unless that it shall at the same time have become known 
to him that it is a sign, and shall have also moved him with the desire of knowing of what it is the sign? The 
more, then, the thing is known, yet not fully known, the more the mind desires to know concerning it what 
remains to be known. For if he knew it to be only such and such a spoken word, and did not know that it was 
the sign of something, he would seek nothing further, since the sensible thing is already perceived as far as 
it can be by the sense. But because he knows it to be not only a spoken word, but also a sign, he wishes to 
know it perfectly; and no sign is known perfectly, except it be known of what it is the sign. He then who with 
ardent carefulness seeks to know this, and inflamed by studious zeal perseveres in the search; can such an 
one be said to be without love? What then does he love? For certainly nothing can be loved unless it is 
known. For that man does not love those three syllables which he knows already. But if he loves this in them, 
that he knows them to signify something, this is not the point now in question, for it is not this which he seeks 
to know. But we are now asking what it is he loves, in that which he is desirous to know, but which certainly he 
does not yet know; and we are therefore wondering why he loves, since we know most assuredly that 
nothing can be loved unless it be known. What then does he love, except that he knows and perceives in 

the reason of things what excellence there is in learning, in which the knowledge of all signs is contained; 
and what benefit there is in the being skilled in these, since by them human fellowship mutually 
communicates its own perceptions, lest the assemblies of men should be actually worse than utter solitude, 
if they were not to mingle their thoughts by conversing together? The soul, then, discerns this fitting and 
serviceable species, and knows it, and loves it; and he who seeks the meaning of any words of which he is 
ignorant, studies to render that species perfect in himself as much as he can: for it is one thing to behold it in 
the light of truth, another to desire it as within his own capacity. For he beholds in the light of truth how great 
and how good a thing it is to understand and to speak all tongues of all nations, and so to hear no tongue 
and to be heard by none as from a foreigner. The beauty, then, of this knowledge is already discerned by 
thought, and the thing being known is loved; and that thing is so regarded, and so stimulates the studious 
zeal of learners, that they are moved with respect to it, and desire it eagerly in all the labor which they spend 
upon the attainment of such a capacity, in order that they may also embrace in practice that which they know 
beforehand by reason. And so every one, the nearer he approaches that capacity in hope, the more 
fervently desires it with love; for those branches of learning are studied the more eagerly, which men do not 
despair of being able to attain; for when any one entertains no hope of attaining his end, then he either loves 
lukewarmly or does not love at all, howsoever he may see the excellence of it. Accordingly, because the 
knowledge of all languages is almost universally felt to be hopeless, every one studies most to know that of 
his own nation; but if he feels that he is not sufficient even to comprehend this perfectly, yet no one is so 
indolent in this knowledge as not to wish to know, when he hears an unknown word, what it is, and to seek 
and learn it if he can. And while he is seeking it, certainly he has a studious zeal of learning, and seems to 
love a thing he does not know; but the case is really otherwise. For that species touches the mind, which the 
mind knows and thinks, wherein the fitness is clearly visible which accrues from the associating of minds 
with one another, in the hearing and returning of known and spoken words. And this species kindles 
studious zeal in him who seeks what indeed he knows not, but gazes upon and loves the unknown form to 
which that pertains. If then, for example, any one were to ask, What is temetum (for I had instanced this word 
already), and it were said to him, What does this matter to you? he will answer, Lest perhaps I hear some 
one speaking, and understand him not; or perhaps read the word somewhere, and know not what the writer 
meant. Who, pray, would say to such an inquirer, Do not care about understanding what you hear; do not 
care about knowing what you read? For almost every rational soul quickly discerns the beauty of that 
knowledge, through which the thoughts of men are mutually made known by the enunciation of significant 
words; and it is on account of this fitness thus known, and because known therefore loved, that such an 
unknown word is studiously sought out. When then he hears and learns that wine was called "temetum" by 
our forefathers, but that the word is already quite obsolete in our present usage of language, he will think 
perhaps that he has still need of the word on account of this or that book of those forefathers. But if he holds, 
these also to be superfluous, perhaps he does now come to think the word not worth remembering, since he 
sees it has nothing to do with that species of learning which he knows with the mind, and gazes upon, and so 
loves. 

3. Wherefore in all cases the love of a studious mind, that is, of one that wishes to know what it does not 
know, is not the love of that thing which it does not know, but of that which it knows; on account of which it 
wishes to know what it does not know. Or if it is so inquisitive as to be carried away, not for any other cause 
known to it, but by the mere love of knowing things unknown then such an inquisitive person is, doubtless 
distinguishable from an ordinary student, yet does not, any more than he, love things he does not know; nay, 
on the contrary, he is more fitly said to hate things he knows not, of which he wishes that there should be 
none, in wishing to know everything. But lest any one should lay before us a more difficult question, by 
declaring that it is just as impossible for any one to hate what he does not know, as to love what he does not 
know we will not withstand what is true; but it must be understood that it is not the same thing to say he loves 
to know things unknown, as to say he loves things unknown. For it is possible that a man may love to know 
things unknown; but it is not possible that he should love things unknown. For the word to know is not placed 
there without meaning; since he who loves to know things unknown, does not love the unknown things 
themselves, but the knowing of them. And unless he knew what knowing means, no one could say 
confidently, either that he knew or that he did not know. For not only he who says I know, and says so truly, 
must needs know what knowing is; but he also who says, I do not know, and says so confidently and truly, 
and knows that he says so truly, certainly knows what knowing is; for he both distinguishes him who does not 
know from him who knows, when he looks into himself and says truly I do not know; and whereas he knows 
that he says this truly, whence should he know it, if he did not know what knowing is? 

CHAP. 2. -NO ONE AT ALL LOVES THINGS UNKNOWN. 

4. No studious person, then, no inquisitive person, loves things he does not know, even while he is urgent 
with the most vehement desire to know what he does not know. For he either knows already generically 

what he loves, and longs to know it also in some individual or individuals, which perhaps are praised, but 
not yet known to him; and he pictures in his mind an imaginary form by which he may be stirred to love. And 
whence does he picture this, except from those things which he has already known? And yet perhaps he will 
not love it, if he find that form which was praised to be unlike that other form which was figured and in thought 
most fully known to his mind. And if he has loved it, he will begin to love it from that time when he learned it; 
since a little before, that form which was loved was other than that which the mind that formed it had been 
wont to exhibit to itself. But if he shall find it similar to that form which report had proclaimed, and to be such 
that he could truly say I was already loving thee; yet certainly not even then did he love a form he did not 
know, since he had known it in that likeness. Or else we see somewhat in the species of the eternal reason, 
and therein love it; and when this is manifested in some image of a temporal thing, and we believe the 
praises of those who have made trial of it, and so love it, then we do not love anything unknown, according 
to that which we have already sufficiently discussed above. Or else, again, we love something known, and 
on account of it seek something unknown; and so it is by no means the love of the thing unknown that 
possesses us, but the love of the thing known, to which we know the unknown thing belongs, so that we know 
that too which we seek still as unknown; as a little before I said of an unknown word. Or else, again, every 
one loves the very knowing itself, as no one can fail to know who desires to know anything. For these 
reasons they seem to love things unknown who wish to know anything which they do not know, and who, on 
account of their vehement desire of inquiry, cannot be said to be without love. But how different the case 
really is, and that nothing at all can be loved which is not known, I think I must have persuaded every one 
who. carefully looks upon truth. But since the examples which we have given belong to those who desire to 
know something which they themselves are not, we must take thought lest perchance some new notion 
appear, when the mind desires to know itself. 

CHAP. 3. -THAT WHEN THE MIND LOVES ITSELF, IT IS NOT UNKNOWN TO ITSELF. 

5. What, then, does the mind love, when it seeks ardently to know itself, whilst it is still unknown to itself? For, 
behold, the mind seeks to know itself, and is excited thereto by studious zeal. It loves, therefore; but what 
does it love? Is it itself? But how can this be when it does not yet know itself, and no one can love what he 
does not know? Is it that report has declared to it its own species, in like way as we commonly hear of 
people who are absent? Perhaps, then, it does not love itself, but loves that which it imagines of itself, which 
is perhaps widely different from what itself is: or if the phantasy in the mind is like the mind itself, and so when 
it loves this fancied image, it loves itself before it knew itself, because it gazes upon that which is like itself; 
then it knew other minds from which to picture itself, and so is known to itself generically. Why, then, when it 
knows other minds, does it not know itself, since nothing can possibly be more present to it than itself? But if, 
as other eyes are more known to the eyes of the body, than those eyes are to themselves; then let it not 
seek itself, because it never will find itself. For eyes can never see themselves except in looking-glasses; 
and it cannot be supposed in any way that anything of that kind can be applied also to the contemplation of 
incorporeal things, so that the mind should know itself, as it were, in a looking-glass. Or does it see in the 
reason of eternal truth how beautiful it is to know one's self, and so loves this which it sees, and studies to 
bring it to pass in itself? because, although it is not known to itself, yet it is known to it how good it is, that it 
should be known to itself. And this, indeed, is very wonderful, that it does not yet know itself, and yet knows 
already how excellent a thing it is to know itself. Or does it see some most excellent end, viz. its own serenity 
and blessedness, by some hidden remembrance, which has not abandoned it, although it has gone far 
onwards, and believes that it cannot attain to that same end unless it know itself? And so while it loves that, it 
seeks this; and loves that which is known, on account of which it seeks that which is unknown. But Why 
should the remembrance of its own blessedness be able to last, and the remembrance of itself not be able 
to last as well; that so it should know itself which wishes to attain, as well as know that to which it wishes to 
attain? Or when it loves to know itself, does it love, not itself, which it does not yet know, but the very act of 
knowing; and feel the more annoyed that itself is wanting to its own knowledge wherewith it wishes to 
embrace all things? And it knows what it is to know; and whilst it loves this, which knows, desires also to 
know itself. Whereby, then, does it know its own knowing, if it does not know itself? For it knows that it knows 
other things, but that it does not know itself; for it is from hence that it knows also what knowing is. In what way, 
then, does that which does not know itself, know itself as knowing anything? For it does not know that some 
other mind knows, but that itself does so. Therefore it knows itself. Further, when it seeks to know itself, it 
knows itself now as seeking. Therefore again it knows itself. And hence it cannot altogether not know itself, 
when certainly it does so far know itself as that it knows itself as not knowing itself. But if it does not know 
itself not to know itself, then it does not seek to know itself. And therefore, in the very fact that it seeks itself, it 
is clearly convicted of being more known to itself than unknown. For it knows itself as seeking and as not 
knowing itself, in that it seeks to know itself. 

CHAP. 4.--H0W THE MIND KNOWS ITSELF, NOT IN PART, BUT AS A WHOLE. 

6. What then shall we say? Does that which knows itself in part, not know itself in part? But it is absurd to say, 
that it does not as a whole know what it knows. I do not say, it knows wholly; but what it knows, it as a whole 
knows. When therefore it knows anything about itself, which it can only know as a whole, it knows itself as a 
whole. But it does know that itself knows something, while yet except as a whole it cannot know anything. 
Therefore it knows itself as a whole. Further, what in it is so known to itself, as that it lives? And it cannot at 
once be a mind, and not live, while it has also something over and above, viz., that it understands: for the 
souls of beasts also live, but do not understand. As therefore a mind is a whole mind, so it lives as a whole. 
But it knows that it lives. Therefore it knows itself as a whole. Lastly, when the mind seeks to know itself, it 
already knows that it is a mind: otherwise it knows not whether it seeks itself, and perhaps seeks one thing 
while intending to seek another. For it might happen that itself was not a mind, and so, in seeking to know a 
mind, that it did not seek to know itself. Wherefore since the mind, when it seeks to know what mind is, knows 
that it seeks itself, certainly it knows that itself is a mind. Furthermore, if it knows this in itself, that it is a mind, 
and a whole mind, then it knows itself as a whole. But suppose it did not know itself to be a mind, but in 
seeking itself only knew that it did seek itself. For so, too, it may possibly seek one thing for another, if it 
does not know this: but that it may not seek one thing for another, without doubt it knows what it seeks. But if it 
knows what it seeks, and seeks itself, then certainly it knows itself. What therefore more does it seek? But if it 
knows itself in part, but still seeks itself in part, then it seeks not itself, but part of itself. For when we speak of 
the mind itself, we speak of it as a whole. Further, because it knows that it is not yet found by itself as a 
whole, it knows how much the whole is. And so it seeks that which is wanting, as we are wont to seek to recall 
to the mind something that has slipped from the mind, but has not altogether gone away from it; since we can 
recognize it, when it has come back, to be the same thing that we were seeking. But how can mind come into 
mind, as though it were possible for the mind not to be in the mind? Add to this, that if, having found a part, it 
does not seek itself as a whole, yet it as a whole seeks itself. Therefore as a whole it is present to itself, and 
there is nothing left to be sought: for that is wanting which is sought, not the mind which seeks. Since 
therefore it as a whole seeks itself, nothing of it is wanting. Or if it does not as a whole seek itself, but the part 
which has been found seeks the part which has not yet been found then the mind does not seek itself, of 
which no part seeks itself. For the part which has been found, does not seek itself; nor yet does the part itself 
which has not yet been found, seek itself; since it is sought by that part which has been already found. 
Wherefore, since neither the mind as a whole seeks itself, nor does any part of it seek itself, the mind does 
not seek itself at all. 

CHAP. 5.--WHY THE SOUL IS ENJOINED TO KNOW ITSELF. WHENCE COME THE 
ERRORS OF THE MIND CONCERNING ITS OWN SUBSTANCE. 

7. Why therefore is it enjoined upon it, that it should know itself? I suppose, in order that, it may consider itself, 
and live according to its own nature; that is, seek to be regulated according to its own nature, viz., under Him 
to whom it ought to be subject, and above those things to which it is to be preferred; under Him by whom it 
ought to be ruled, above those things which it ought to rule. For it does many things through vicious desire, 
as though in forgetfulness of itself. For it sees some things intrinsically excellent, in that more excellent nature 
which is God: and whereas it ought to remain steadfast that it may enjoy them, it is turned away from Him, by 
wishing to appropriate those things to itself, and not to be like to Him by His gift, but to be what He is by its 
own, and it begins to move and slip gradually down into less and less, which it thinks to be more and more; 
for it is neither sufficient for itself, nor is anything at all sufficient for it, if it withdraw from Him who is alone 
sufficient: and so through want and distress it becomes too intent upon its own actions and upon the unquiet 
delights which it obtains through them: and thus, by the desire of acquiring knowledge from those things that 
are without, the nature of which it knows and loves, and which it feels can be lost unless held fast with 
anxious care, it loses its security, and thinks of itself so much the less, in proportion as it feels the more 
secure that it cannot lose itself. So, whereas it is one thing not to know oneself, and another not to think of 
oneself (for we do not say of the man that is skilled in much learning, that he is ignorant of grammar, when he 
is only not thinking of it, because he is thinking at the time of the art of medicine);-whereas, then, I say it is 
one thing not to know oneself, and another not to think of oneself, such is the strength of love, that the mind 
draws in with itself those things which it has long thought of with love, and has grown into them by the close 
adherence of diligent study, even when it returns in some way to think of itself. And because these things are 
corporeal which it loved externally through the carnal senses; and because it has become entangled with 
them by a kind of daily familiarity, and yet cannot carry those corporeal things themselves with itself 
internally as it were into the region of incorporeal nature; therefore it combines certain images of them, and 
thrusts them thus made from itself into itself. For it gives to the forming of them somewhat of its own 
substance, yet preserves the while something by which it may judge freely of the species of those images; 

and this something is more properly the mind, that is, the rational understanding, which is preserved that it 
may judge. For we see that we have those parts, of the soul which are informed by the likenesses of 
corporeal things, in common also with beasts. 

CHAP. 6. -THE OPINION WHICH THE MIND HAS OF ITSELF IS DECEITFUL. 

8. But the mind errs, when it so lovingly and intimately connects itself with these images, as even to consider 
itself to be something of the same kind. For so it is conformed to them to some extent, not by being this, but 
by thinking it is so: not that it thinks itself to be an image, but outright that very thing itself of which it entertains 
the image. For there still lives in it the power of distinguishing the corporeal thing which it leaves without, from 
the image of that corporeal thing which it contains therefrom within itself: except when these images are so 
projected as if felt without and not thought within, as in the case of people who are asleep, or mad, or in a 
trance. 

CHAP. 7. -THE OPINIONS OF PHILOSOPHERS RESPECTING THE SUBSTANCE OF THE 
SOUL. THE ERROR OF THOSE WHO ARE OF OPINION THAT THE SOUL IS CORPOREAL, 
DOES NOT ARISE FROM DEFECTIVE KNOWLEDGE OF THE SOUL, BUT FROM THEIR 
ADDING THERETO SOMETHING FOREIGN TO IT. WHAT IS MEANT BY FINDING. 

9. When, therefore, it thinks itself to be something of this kind, it thinks itself to be a corporeal thing; and since 
it is perfectly conscious of its own superiority, by which it rules the body, it has hence come to pass that the 
question has been raised what part of the body has the greater power in the body; and the opinion has 
been held that this is the mind, nay, that it is even the whole soul altogether. And some accordingly think it to 
be the blood, others the brain, others the heart; not as the Scripture says, "I will praise Thee, O Lord, with my 
whole heart;" and, "Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart;"(1) for this word by misapplication or 
metaphor is transferred from the body to the soul; but they have simply thought it to be that small part itself of 
the body, which we see when the inward parts are rent asunder. Others, again, have believed the soul to be 
made up of very minute and individual corpustules, which they call atoms, meeting in themselves and 
cohering. Others have said that its substance is air, others fire. Others have been of opinion that it is no 
substance at all, since they could not think any substance unless it is body, and they did not find that the soul 
was body; but it was in their opinion the tempering together itself of our body, or the combining together of 
the elements, by which-that flesh is as it were conjoined. And hence all of these have held the soul to be 
mortal; since, whether it were body, or some combination of body, certainly it could not in either case 
continue always without death. But they who have held its substance to be some kind of life the reverse of 
corporeal, since they have found it to be a life that animates and quickens every living body, have by 
consequence striven also, according as each was able, to prove it immortal, since life cannot be without 
life. 

For as to that fifth kind of body, I know not what, which some have added to the four well-known elements of 
the world, and have said that the soul was made of this, I do not think we need spend time in discussing it in 
this place. For either they mean by body what we mean by it, viz., that of which a partis less than the whole in 
extension of place, and they are to be reckoned among those who have believed the mind to be corporeal: 
or if they call either all substance, or all changeable substance, body, whereas they know that not all 
substance is contained in extension of place by any length and breadth and height, we need not contend 
with them about a question of words. 

10. Now, in the case of all these opinions, any one who sees that the nature of the mind is at once 
substance, and yet not corporeal,-that is, that it does not occupy a less extension of place with a less part of 
itself, and a greater with a greater,-must needs see at the same time that they who are of opinion that it is 
corporeal? do not err from defect of knowledge concerning mind, but because they associate with it 
qualities without which they are not able to conceive any nature at all. For if you bid them conceive of 
existence that is without corporeal phantasms, they hold it merely nothing. And so the mind would not seek 
itself, as though wanting to itself. For what is so present to knowledge as that which is present to the mind? Or 
what is so present to the mind as the mind itself? And hence what is called "invention," if we consider the 
origin of the word, what else does it mean, unless that to find out(3) is to "come into" that which is sought? 
Those things accordingly which come into the mind as it were of themselves, are not usually said to be 
found out, (4) although they may be said to be known; since we did not endeavor by seeking to come into 
them, that is to invent or find them out. And therefore, as the mind itself really seeks those things which are 
sought by the eyes or by any other sense of the body (for the mind directs even the carnal sense, and then 
finds out or invents, when that sense comes to the things which are sought); so, too, it finds out or invents 
other things which it ought to know, not with the medium of corporeal sense, but through itself, when it "comes 
into" them; and this, whether in the case of the higher substance that is in God, or of the other parts of the 

soul; just as it does when it judges of bodily images themselves, for it finds these within, in the soul, 
impressed through the body. 

CHAP. 8. -HOW THE SOUL INQUIRES INTO ITSELF. WHENCE COMES THE ERROR OF 
THE SOUL CONCERNING ITSELF. 

1 1 . It is then a wonderful question, in what manner the soul seeks and finds itself; at what it aims in order to 
seek, or whither it comes, that it may come into or find out. For what is so much in the mind as she mind itself? 
But because it is in those things which it thinks of with love, and is wont to be in sensible, that is, in corporeal 
things with love, it is unable to be in itself without the images of those corporeal things. And hence shameful 
error arises to block its way, whilst it cannot separate from itself the images of sensible things, so as to see 
itself alone. For they have marvellously cohered with it by the close adhesion of love. And herein consists 
its uncleanness; since, while it strives to think of itself alone, it fancies itself to be that, without which it cannot 
think of itself. When, therefore, it is bidden to become acquainted with itself, let it not seek itself as though it 
were withdrawn from itself; but let it withdraw that which it has added to itself. For itself lies more deeply within, 
not only than those sensible things, which are clearly without, but also than the images of them; which are 
indeed in some part of the soul, viz., that which beasts also have, although these want understanding, which 
is proper to the mind. As therefore the mind is within, it goes forth in some sort from itself, when it exerts the 
affection of love towards these, as it were, footprints of many acts of attention. And these footprints are, as it 
were, imprinted on the memory, at the time when the corporeal things which are without are perceived in 
such way, that even when those corporeal things are absent, yet the images of them are at hand to those 
who think of them. Therefore let the mind become acquainted with itself, and not seek itself as if it were 
absent; but fix upon itself the act of [voluntary] attention, by which it was wandering among other things, and 
let it think of itself. So it will see that at no time did it ever not love itself, at no time did it ever not know itself; 
but by loving another thing together with itself it has confounded itself with it, and in some sense has grown 
one with it. And so, while it embraces diverse things, as though they were one, it has come to think those 
things to be one which are diverse. 

CHAP. 9. -THE MIND KNOWS ITSELF, BY THE VERY ACT OF UNDERSTANDING THE 
PRECEPT TO KNOW ITSELF. 

12. Let it not therefore seek to discern itself as though absent, but take pains to discern itself as present. Nor 
let it take knowledge of itself as if it did not know itself, but let it distinguish itself from that which it knows to be 
another. For how will it take pains to obey that very precept which is given it, "Know thyself," if it knows not 
either what "know" means or what "thyself means? But if it knows both, then it knows also itself. Since "know 
thyself is not so said to the mind as is "Know the cherubim and the seraphim;" for they are absent, and we 
believe concerning them, and according to that belief they are declared to be certain celestial powers. Nor 
yet again as it is said, Know the will of that man: for this it is not within our reach to perceive at all, either by 
sense or understanding, unless by corporeal signs actually set forth; and this in such a way that we rather 
believe than understand. Nor again as it is said to a man, Behold thy own face; which he can only do in a 
looking-glass. For even our own face itself is out of the reach of our own seeing it; because it is not there 
where our look can be directed. But when it is said to the mind, Know thyself; then it knows itself by that very 
act by which it understands the word "thyself;" and this for no other reason than that it is present to itself. But if 
it does not understand what is said, then certainly it does not do as it is bid to do. And therefore it is bidden 
to do that thing which it does do, when it understands the very precept that bids it. 

CHAP. 10. -EVERY MIND KNOWS CERTAINLY THREE THINGS CONCERNING 
ITSELF-THAT IT UNDERSTANDS, THAT IT IS, AND THAT IT LIVES, 

13. Let it not then add anything to that which it knows itself to be, when it is bidden to know itself. For it knows, 
at any rate, that this is said to itself; namely, to the self that is, and that lives, and that understands. But a 
dead body also is, and cattle live; but neither a dead body nor cattle understand. Therefore it so knows that 
it so is, and that it so lives, as an understanding is and lives. When, therefore, for example's sake, the mind 
thinks itself air, it thinks that air understands; it knows, however, that itself understands, but it does not know 
itself to be air, but only thinks so. Let it separate that which it thinks itself; let it discern that which it knows; let 
this remain to it, about which not even have they doubted who have thought the mind to be this corporeal 
thing or that. For certainly every mind does not consider itself to be air; but some think themselves fire, 
others the brain, and some one kind of corporeal thing, others another, as I have mentioned before; yet all 
know that they themselves understand, and are, and live; but they refer understanding to that which they 
understand, but to be, and to live, to themselves. And no one doubts, either that no one understands who 

does not live, or that no one lives of whom it is not true that he is; and that therefore by consequence that 
which understands both is and lives; not as a dead body is which does not live, nor as a soul lives which 
does not understand, but in some proper and more excellent manner. Further, they know that they will, and 
they equally know that no one can will who is not and who does not live; and they also refer that will itself to 
something which they will with that will. They know also that they remember; and they know at the same time 
that nobody could remember, unless he both was and lived; but we refer memory itself also to something, in 
that we remember those things. Therefore the knowledge and science of many things are contained in two 
of these three, memory and understanding; but will must be present, that we may enjoy or use them. For we 
enjoy things known, in which things themselves the will finds delight for their own sake, and so reposes; but 
we use those things, which we refer to some other thing which we are to enjoy. Neither is the life of man 
vicious and culpable in any other way, than as wrongly using and wrongly enjoying. But it is no place here to 
discuss this. 

14. But since we treat of the nature of the mind, let us remove from our consideration all knowledge which is 
received from without, through the senses of the body; and attend more carefully to the position which we 
have laid down, that all minds know and are certain concerning themselves. For men certainly have 
doubted whether the power of living, of remembering, of understanding, of willing, of thinking, of knowing, of 
judging, be of air, or of fire, or of the brain, or of the blood, or of atoms, or besides the usual four elements of 
a fifth kind of body, I know not what; or .whether the combining or tempering together of this our flesh itself has 
power to accomplish these things. And one has attempted to establish this, and another to establish that. 
Yet who ever doubts that he himself lives, and remembers, and understands, and wills, and thinks, and 
knows, and judges? Seeing that even if he doubts, he lives; if he doubts, he remembers why he doubts; if he 
doubts, he understands that he doubts; if he doubts, he wishes to be certain; if he doubts, he thinks; if he 
doubts, he knows that he does not know; if he doubts, he judges that he ought not to assent rashly. 
Whosoever therefore doubts about anything else, ought not to doubt of all these things; which if they were 
not, he would not be able to doubt of anything. 

15. They who think the mind to be either a body or the combination or tempering of the body, will have all 
these things to seem to be in a subject, so that the substance is air, or fire, or some other corporeal thing, 
which they think to be the mind; but that the understanding (intelligentia) is in this corporeal thing as its 
quality, so that this corporeal tiring is the subject, but the understanding is in the subject: viz. that the mind is 
the subject, which they judge to be a corporeal thing, but the understanding [intelligence], or any other of 
those things which we have mentioned as certain to us, is in that subject. They also hold nearly the same 
opinion who deny the mind itself to be body, but think it to be the combination or tempering together of the 
body; for there is this difference, that the former say that the mind itself is the substance, in which the 
understanding [intelligence] is, as in a subject; but the latter say that the mind itself is in a subject, viz. in the 
body, of which it is the combination or tempering together. And hence, by consequence, what else can they 
think, except that the understanding also is in the same body as in a subject? 

16. And all these do not perceive that the mind knows itself, even when it seeks for itself, as we have already 
shown. But nothing is at all rightly said to be known while its substance is not known. And therefore, when the 
mind knows itself, it knows its own substance; and when it is certain about itself, it as certain about its own 
substance. But it is certain about itself, as those things which are said, above prove convincingly; although it 
is not at all certain whether itself is air, or fire, or some body, or some function of body. Therefore it is not any 
of these. And to that whole which is bidden to know itself, belongs this, that it is certain that it is not any of 
those things of which it is uncertain, and is certain that it is that only, which only it is certain that it is. For it 
thinks in this way of fire, or air, and whatever else of the body it thinks of. Neither can it in any way be brought 
to pass that it should so think that which itself is, as it thinks that which itself is not. Since it thinks all these 
things through an imaginary phantasy, whether fire, or air, or this or that body, or that part or combination and 
tempering together of the body: nor assuredly is it said to be all those things, but some one of them. But if it 
were any one of them, it would think this one in a different manner from the rest viz. not through an imaginary 
phantasy, as absent things are thought, which either themselves or some of like kind have been touched by 
the bodily sense; but by some inward, not feigned, but true presence (for nothing is more present to it than 
itself); just as it thinks that itself lives, and remembers, and understands, and wills. For it knows these things 
in itself, and does not imagine them as though it had touched them by the sense outside itself, as corporeal 
things are touched. And if it attaches nothing to itself from the thought of these things, so as to think itself to be 
something of the kind, then whatsoever remains to it from itself that alone is itself. 

CHAP. 11. -IN MEMORY, UNDERSTANDING [OR INTELLIGENCE], AND WILL, WE HAVE TO 
NOTE ABILITY, LEARNING, AND USE. MEMORY, UNDERSTANDING, AND WILL ARE ONE 
ESSENTIALLY, AND THREE RELATIVELY. 

17. Putting aside, then, for a little while all other things, of which the mind is certain concerning itself, let us 

especially consider and discuss these three-memory, understanding, will. For we may commonly discern 
in these three the character of the abilities of the young also; since the more tenaciously and easily a boy 
remembers, and the more acutely he understands, and the more ardently he studies, the more praiseworthy 
is he in point of ability. But when the question is about any one's learning, then we ask not how solidly and 
easily he remembers, or how shrewdly he understands; but what it is that he remembers, and what it is that 
he understands. And because the mind is regarded as praiseworthy, not only as being learned, but also as 
being good, one gives heed not only to what he remembers and what he understands, but also to what he 
wills (velit); not how ardently he wills, but first what it is he wills, and then how greatly he wills it. For the mind 
that loves eagerly is then to be praised, when it loves that which ought to be loved eagerly. Since, then, we 
speak of these three-ability, knowledge, use-the first of these is to be considered under the three heads, of 
what a man can do in memory, and understanding, and will. The second of them is to be considered in 
regard to that which any one has in his memory and in his understanding, which he has attained by a 
studious will. But the third, viz. use, lies in the will, which handles those things that are contained in the 
memory and understanding, whether it refer them to anything further, or rest satisfied with them as an end. 
For to use, is to take up something into the power of the will; and to enjoy, is to use with joy, not any longer of 
hope, but of the actual thing. Accordingly, every one who enjoys, uses; for he takes up something into the 
power of the will, wherein he also is satisfied as with an end. But not every one who uses, enjoys, if he has 
sought after that, which he takes up into the power of the will, not on account of the thing itself, but on account 
of something else. 

18. Since, then, these three, memory, understanding, wills are not three lives, but one life; nor three minds, 
but one mind; it follows certainly that neither are they three substances, but one substance. Since memory, 
which is called life, and mind, and substance, is so called in respect to itself; but it is called memory, 
relatively to something. And I should say the same also of understanding and of will, since they are called 
understanding and will relatively to something; but each in respect to itself is life, and mind, and essence. 
And hence these three are one, in that they are one life, one mind, one essence; and whatever else they are 
severally called in respect to themselves, they are called also together, not plurally, but in the singular 
number. But they are three, in that wherein they are mutually referred to each other; and if they were not 
equal, and this not only each to each, but also each to all, they certainly could not mutually contain each 
other; for not only is each contained by each, but also all by each. For I remember that I have memory and 
understanding, and will; and I understand that I understand, and will, and remember; and I will that I will, and 
remember, and understand; and I remember together my whole memory, and understanding, and will. For 
that of my memory which I do not remember, is not in my memory; and nothing is so much in the memory as 
memory itself. Therefore I remember the whole memory. Also, whatever I understand I know that I 
understand, and I know that I will whatever I will; but whatever I know I remember. Therefore I remember the 
whole of my understanding, and the whole of my will. Likewise, when I understand these three things, I 
understand them together as whole. For there is none of things intelligible which I do not understand, except 
what I do not know; but what I do not know, I neither remember, nor will. Therefore, whatever of things 
intelligible I do not understand, it follows also that I neither remember nor will. And whatever of things 
intelligible I remember and will, it follows that I understand. My will also embraces my whole understanding 
and my whole memory whilst I use the whole that I understand and remember. And, therefore, while all are 
mutually comprehended by each, and as wholes, each as a whole is equal to each as a whole, and each 
as a whole at the same time to all as wholes; and these three are one, one life, one mind, one essence. (1) 

CHAP. 12. -THE MIND IS AN IMAGE OF THE TRINITY IN ITS OWN MEMORY, AND 
UNDERSTANDING, AND WILL. 

19. Are we, then, now to go upward, with whatever strength of purpose we may, to that chiefest and highest 
essence, of which the human mind is an inadequate image, yet an image? Or are these same three things 
to be yet more distinctly made plain in the soul, by means of those things which we receive from without, 
through the bodily sense, wherein the knowledge of corporeal things is impressed upon us in time? Since 
we found the mind itself to be such in its own memory, and understanding, and will, that since it was 
understood always to know and always to will itself, it was understood also at the same time always to 
remember itself, always to understand and love itself, although not always to think of itself as separate from 
those things which are not itself; and hence its memory of itself, and understanding of itself, are with difficult 
discerned in it. For in this case, where these two things are very closely con-joined, and one is not preceded 
by the other by any time at all, it looks as if they were not two things, but one called by two names; and love 
itself is not so plainly felt to exist when the sense of need does not disclose it, since what is loved is always 
at hand. And hence these things may be more lucidly set forth, even to men of duller minds, if such topics 
are treated of as are brought within reach of the mind in time, and happen to it in time; while it remembers 
what it did not remember before, and sees what it did not see before, and loves what it did not love before. 

But this discussion demands now another beginning, by reason of the measure of the present book. 

THE FIFTEEN BOOKS OF AURELIUS AUGUSTINUS, 
BISHOP OF HIPPO, ON THE TRINITY: BOOKXI 

BOOK XI. 

A KIND OF IMAGE OF THE TRINITY IS POINTED OUT, EVEN IN THE OUTER MAN; FIRST 
OF ALL, IN THOSE THINGS WHICH ARE PERCEIVED FROM WITHOUT, VIZ. IN THE 
BODILY OBJECT THAT IS SEEN, AND IN THE FORM THAT IS IMPRESSED BY IT UPON 
THE SIGHT OF THE SEER, AND IN THE PURPOSE OF THE WILLTHAT COMBINES THE 
TWO; ALTHOUGH THESE THREE ARE NEITHER MUTUALLY EQUAL, NOR OF ONE 
SUBSTANCE. NEXT, A KIND OF TRINITY, IN THREE SOMEWHATS OF ONE SUBSTANCE, 
IS OBSERVED TO EXIST IN THE MIND ITSELF, AS IT WERE INTRODUCED THERE FROM 
THOSE THINGS THAT ARE PERCEIVED FROM WITHOUT; VIZ. THE IMAGE OF THE 
BODILY OBJECT WHICH IS IN THE MEMORY, AND THE IMPRESSION FORMED 
THEREFROM WHEN THE MIND'S EYE OF THE THINKER IS TURNED TO IT, AND THE 
PURPOSE OF THE WILL COMBINING BOTH. AND THIS LATTER TRINITY IS ALSO SAID 
TO PERTAIN TO THE OUTER MAN, IN THAT IT IS INTRODUCED INTO THE MIND FROM 
BODILY OBJECTS, WHICH ARE PERCEIVED FROM WITHOUT. 

CHAP. 1.--A TRACE OF THE TRINITY ALSO IN THE OUTER MAN. 

1 . No one doubts that, as the inner man is endued with understanding, so is the outer with bodily sense. Let 
us try, then, if we can, to discover in this outer man also, some trace, however slight, of the Trinity, not that 
itself also is in the same manner the; image of God. For the opinion of the apostle is evident, which declares 
the inner man to be renewed in the knowledge of God after the image of Him that created him:(1) whereas 
he says also in another place, "But though our outer man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by 
day. "(2) Let us seek, then, so far as we can, in that which perishes, some image of the Trinity, if not so 
express, yet perhaps more easy to be discerned. For that outer man also is not called man to no purpose, 
but because there is in it some likeness of the inner man. And owing to that very order of our condition 
whereby we are made mortal and fleshly, we handle things visible more easily and more familiarly than 
things intelligible; since the former are outward, the latter inward; and the former are perceived by the bodily 
sense, the latter are understood by the mind; and we ourselves, i.e. our minds, are not sensible things, that 
is, bodies, but intelligible things, since we are life. And yet, as I said, we are so familiarly occupied with 
bodies, and our thought has projected itself outwardly with so wonderful a proclivity towards bodies, that, 
when it has been withdrawn from the uncertainty of things corporeal, that it may be fixed with a much more 
certain and stable knowledge in that which is spirit, it flies back to those bodies, and seeks rest there 
whence it has drawn weakness. And to this its feebleness I we must suit our argument; so that, if we would 
endeavor at any time to distinguish more aptly, and intimate more readily, the inward spiritual thing, we must 
take examples of likenesses from outward things pertaining to the body. The outer man, then, endued as he 
is with the bodily sense, is conversant with bodies. And this bodily sense, as is easily observed, is fivefold; 
seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching. But it is both a good deal of trouble, and is not necessary, that 
we should inquire of all these five senses about that which we seek. For that which one of them declares to 
us, holds also good in the rest. Let us use, then, principally the testimony of the eyes. For this bodily sense 
far surpasses the rest; and in proportion to its difference of kind, is nearer to the sight of the mind. 

CHAP. 2. -A CERTAIN TRINITY IN THE SIGHT. THAT THERE ARE THREE THINGS IN 
SIGHT, WHICH DIFFER IN THEIR OWN NATURE. IN WHAT MANNER FROM A VISIBLE 
THING VISION IS PRODUCED, OR THE IMAGE OF THAT THING WHICH IS SEEN. THE 
MATTER IS SHOWN MORE CLEARLY BY AN EXAMPLE. HOW THESE THREE COMBINE IN 
ONE. 

2. When, then, we see any corporeal object, these three things, as is most easy to do, are to be considered 
and distinguished: First, the object itself which we see; whether a stone, or flame, or any other thing that can 
be seen by the eyes; and this certainly might exist also already before it was seen; next, vision or the act of 
seeing, which did not exist before we perceived the object itself which is presented to the sense; in the third 

place, that which keeps the sense of the eye in the object seen, so long as it is seen, viz. the attention of the 
mind. In these three, then, not only is there an evident distinction, but also a diverse nature. For, first, that 
visible body is of a far different nature from the sense of the eyes, through the incidence of which sense 
upon it vision arises. And what plainly is vision itself other than perception informed by that thing which is 
perceived? Although there is no vision if the visible object be withdrawn, nor could there be any vision of the 
kind at all if there were no body that could be seen; yet the body by which the sense of the eyes is informed, 
when that body is seen, and the form itself which is imprinted by it upon the sense, which is called vision, are 
by no means of the same substance. For the body that is seen is, in its own nature, separable; but the 
sense, which was already in the living subject, even before it saw what it was able to see, when it fell in with 
something visible,-or the vision which comes to be in the sense from the visible body when now brought 
into connection with it and seen,-the sense, then, I say, or the vision, that is, the sense informed from without, 
belongs to the nature of the living subject, which is altogether other than that body which we perceive by 
seeing, and by which the sense is not so formed as to be sense, but as to be vision. For unless the sense 
were also in us before the presentation to us of the sensible object, we should not differ from the blind, at 
times when we are seeing nothing, whether in darkness, or when our eyes are closed. But we differ from 
them in this, that there is in us, even when we are not seeing, that whereby we are able to see, which is 
called the sense; whereas this is not in them, nor are they called blind for any other reason than because 
they have it not. Further also, that attention of the mind which keeps the sense in that thing which we see, and 
connects both, not only differs from that visible thing in its nature; in that the one is mind, and the other body; 
but also from the sense and the vision itself: since this attention is the act of the mind alone; but the sense of 
the eyes is called a bodily sense, for no other reason than because the eyes themselves also are 
members of the body; and although an inanimate body does not perceive, yet the soul commingled with the 
body perceives through a corporeal instrument, and that instrument is called sense. And this sense, too, is 
cut off and extinguished by suffering on the part of the body, when any one is blinded; while the mind 
remains the same; and its attention, since the eyes are lost, has not, indeed, the sense of the body which it 
may join, by seeing, to the body without it, and so fix its look thereupon and see it, yet by the very effort 
shows that, although the bodily sense be taken away, itself can neither perish nor be diminished. For there 
remains unimpaired a desire [appetitus] of seeing, whether it can be carried into effect or not. These three, 
then, the body that is seen, and vision itself, and the attention of mind which joins both together, are 
manifestly distinguishable, not only on account of the properties of each, but also on account of the 
difference of their natures. 

3. And since, in this case, the sensation does not proceed from that body which is seen, but from the body of 
the living being that perceives, with which the soul is tempered together in some wonderful way of its own; 
yet vision is produced, that is, the sense itself is informed, by the body which is seen; so that now, not only is 
there the power of sense, which can exist also unimpaired even in darkness, provided the eyes are sound, 
but also a sense actually informed, which is called vision. Vision, then, is produced from a thing that is 
visible; but not from that alone, unless there be present also one who sees. Therefore vision is produced 
from a thing that is visible, together with one who sees; in such way that, on the part of him who sees, there is 
the sense of seeing and the intention of looking and gazing at the object; while yet that information of the 
sense, which is called vision, is imprinted only by the body which is seen, that is, by some visible thing; 
which being taken away, that form remains no more which was in the sense so long as that which was seen 
was present: yet the sense itself remains, which existed also before anything was perceived; just as the 
trace of a thing in water remains so long as the body itself, which is impressed on it, is in the water; but if this 
has been taken away, there will no longer be any such trace, although the water remains, which existed also 
before it took the form of that body. And therefore we cannot, indeed, say that a visible thing produces the 
sense; yet it produces the form, which is, as it were, its own likeness, which comes to be in the sense, when 
we perceive anything by seeing. But we do not distinguish, through the same sense, the form of the body 
which we see, from the form which is produced by it in the sense of him who sees; since the union of the two 
is so close that there is no room for distinguishing them. But we rationally infer that we could not have 
sensation at all, unless some similitude of the body seen was wrought in our own sense. For when a ring is 
imprinted on wax, it does not follow that no image is produced, because we cannot discern it unless when it 
has been separated. But since, after the wax is separated, what was made remains, so that it can be seen; 
we are on that account easily persuaded that there was already also in the wax a form impressed from the 
ring before it was separated from it. But if the ring were imprinted upon a fluid, no image at all would appear 
when it was withdrawn; and yet none the less for this ought the reason to discern that there was in that fluid 
before the ring was withdrawn a form of the ring produced from the ring, which is to be distinguished from that 
form which is in the ring, whence that form was produced which ceases to be when the ring is withdrawn, 
although that in the ring remains, whence the other was produced. And so the [sensuous] perception of the 
eyes may not be supposed to contain no image of the body, which is seen as long as it is seen, [merely] 
because when that is withdrawn the image does not remain. And hence it is very difficult to persuade men of 

duller mind that an image of the visible thing is formed in our sense, when we see it, and that this same form 
is vision. 

4. But if any perhaps attend to what I am about to mention, they will find no such trouble in this inquiry. 
Commonly, when we have looked for some little time at a light, and then shut our eyes, there seem to play 
before our eyes certain bright colors variously changing themselves, and shining less and less until they 
wholly cease; and these we must understand to be the remains of that form which was wrought in the sense, 
while the shining body was seen, and that these variations take place in them as they slowly and step by 
step fade away. For the lattices, too, of windows, should we happen to be gazing at them, appear often in 
these colors; so that it is evident that our sense is affected by such impressions from that thing which is seen. 
That form therefore existed also while we were seeing, and at that time it was more clear and express. But it 
was then closely joined with the species of that thing which was being perceived, so that it could not be at all 
distinguished from it; and this was vision itself. Why, even when the little flame of a lamp is in some way, as it 
were, doubled by the divergent rays of the eyes, a twofold vision comes to pass, although the thing which is 
seen is one. For the same rays, as they shoot forth each from its own eye, are affected severally, in that they 
are not allowed to meet evenly and conjointly, in regarding that corporeal thing, so that one combined view 
might be formed from both. And so, if we shut one eye, we shall not see two flames, but one as it really is. But 
why, if we shut the left eye, that appearance ceases to be seen, which was on the right; and if, in turn, we shut 
the right eye, that drops out of existence which was on the left, is a matter both tedious in itself, and not 
necessary at all to our present subject to inquire and discuss. For it is enough for the business in hand to 
consider, that unless some image, precisely like the thing we perceive, were produced in our sense, the 
appearance of the flame would not be doubled according to the number of the eyes; since a certain way of 
perceiving has been employed, which could separate the union of rays. Certainly nothing that is really 
single can be seen as if it were double by one eye, draw it down, or press, or distort it as you please, if the 
other is shut. 

5. The case then being so, let us remember how these three things, although diverse in nature, are 
tempered together into a kind of unity; that is, the form of the body which is seen, and the image of it 
impressed on the sense, which is vision or sense informed, and the will of the mind which applies the sense 
to the sensible thing, and retains the vision itself in it. The first of these, that is, the visible thing itself, does not 
belong to the nature of the living being, except when we discern our own body. But the second belongs to 
that nature to this extent, that it is wrought in the body, and through the body in the soul; for it is wrought in the 
sense, which is neither without the body nor without the soul. But the third is of the soul alone, because it is 
the will. Although then the substances of these three are so different, yet they coalesce into such a unity that 
the two former can scarcely be distinguished, even with the intervention of the reason as judge, namely the 
form of the body which is seen, and the image of it which is wrought in the sense, that is, vision. And the will 
so powerfully combines these two, as both to apply the sense, in order to be informed, to that thing which is 
perceived, and to retain it when informed in that thing. And if it is so vehement that it can be called love, or 
desire, or lust, it vehemently affects also the rest of the body of the living being; and where a duller and 
harder matter does not resist, changes it into like shape and color. One may see the little body of a 
chameleon vary with ready change, according to the colors which it sees. And in the case of other animals, 
since their grossness of flesh does not easily admit change, the offspring, for the most part, betray the 
particular fancies of the mothers, whatever it is that they have beheld with special delight. For the more 
tender, and so to say, the more formable, are the primary seeds, the more effectually and capably they 
follow the bent of the soul of the mother, and the phantasy that is wrought in it through that body, which it has 
greedily beheld. Abundant instances might be adduced, but one is sufficient, taken from the most trustworthy 
books; viz. what Jacob did, that the sheep and goats might give birth to offspring of various colors, by 
placing variegated rods before them in the troughs of water for them to look at as they drank, at the time they 
had conceived. (1) 

CHAP. 3. -THE UNITY OF THE THREE TAKES PLACE IN THOUGHT, VIZ. OF MEMORY, OF 
INTERNAL VISION, AND OF WILL COMBINING BOTH. 

6. The rational soul, however, lives in a degenerate fashion.when it lives according to a trinity of the outer 
man; that is, when it applies to those things which form the bodily sense from without, not a praiseworthy will, 
by which to refer them to some useful end, but a base desire, by which to cleave to them. Since even if the 
form of the body, which was corporeally perceived, be withdrawn, its likeness remains in the memory, to 
which the will may again direct its eye, so as to be formed thence from within, as the sense was formed from 
without by the presentation of the sensible body. And so that trinity is produced from memory, from internal 
vision, and from the will which unites both. And when these three things are combined into one, from that 
combination^) itself they are called conception. (3) And in these three there is no longer any diversity of 
substance. For neither is the sensible body there, which is altogether distinct from the nature of the living 

being, nor is the bodily sense there informed so as to produce vision, nor does the will itself perform its 
office of applying the sense, that is to be informed, to the sensible body, and of retaining it in it when 
informed; but in place of that bodily species which was perceived from without, there comes the memory 
retaining that species which the soul has imbibed through the bodily sense; and in place of that vision which 
was outward when the sense was informed through the sensible body, there comes a similar vision within, 
while the eye of the mind is informed from that which the memory retains, and the corporeal things that are 
thought of are absent; and the will itself, as before it applied the sense yet to be informed to the corporeal 
thing presented from without, and united it thereto when informed, so now converts the vision of the 
recollecting mind to memory, in order that the mental sight may be informed by that which the memory has 
retained, and so there may be in the conception a like vision. And as it was the reason that distinguished the 
visible appearance by which the bodily sense was informed, from the similitude of it, which was wrought in 
the sense when informed in order to produce vision (otherwise they had been so united as to be thought 
altogether one and the same); so, although that phantasy also, which arises from the mind thinking of the 
appearance of a body that it has seen, consists of the similitude of the body which the memory retains, 
together with that which is thence formed in the eye of the mind that recollects; yet it so seems to be one and 
single, that it can only be discovered to be two by the judgment of reason, by which we understand that 
which remains in the memory, even when we think it from some other source, to be a different thing from that 
which is brought into being when we remember, that is, come back again to the memory, and there find the 
same appearance. And if this were not now there, we should say that we had so forgotten as to be 
altogether unable to recollect. And if the eye of him who recollects were not informed from that thing which 
was in the memory, the vision of the thinker could in no way take place; but the conjunction of both, that is, of 
that which the memory retains, and of that which is thence expressed so as to inform the eye of him who 
recollects, makes them appear as if they were one, because they are exceedingly like. But when the eye of 
the concipient is turned away thence, and has ceased to look at that which was perceived in the memory, 
then nothing of the form that was impressed thereon will remain in that eye, and it will be informed by that to 
which it had again been turned, so as to bring about another conception. Yet that remains which it has left in 
the memory, to which it may again be turned when we recollect it, and being turned thereto may be informed 
by it, and become one with that whence it is informed. 

CHAP. 4.--H0W THIS UNITY COMES TO PASS. 

7. But if that will which moves to and fro, hither and thither, the eye that is to be informed, and unites it when 
formed, shall have wholly converged to the inward phantasy, and shall have absolutely turned the mind's 
eye from the presence of the bodies which lie around the senses, and from the I very bodily senses 
themselves, and shall have, wholly turned it to that image, which is perceived within; then so exact a 
likeness of the bodily species expressed from the memory is presented, that not even reason itself is 
permitted to discen whether the body itself is seen without, or only something of the kind thought of within. For 
men sometimes either allured or frightened by over-much thinking of visible things, have even suddenly 
uttered words accordingly, as if in real fact they were engaged in the very midst of such actions or sufferings. 
And I remember some one telling me that he was wont to perceive in thought, so distinct and as it were solid, 
a form of a female body, as to be moved, as though it were a reality. Such power has the soul over its own 
body, and such influence has it in turning and changing the quality of its [corporeal] garment; just as a man 
may be affected when clothed, to whom his clothing sticks. It is the same kind of affection, too, with which we 
are beguiled through imaginations in sleep. But it makes a very great difference, whether the senses of the 
body are lulled to torpor, as in the case of sleepers, or disturbed from their inward structure, as in the case of 
madmen, or distracted in some other mode, as in that of diviners or prophets; and so from one or other of 
these causes, the intention of the mind is forced by a kind of necessity upon those images which occur to it, 
either from memory, or by some other hidden force through certain spiritual commixtures of a similarly 
spiritual substance: or whether, as sometimes happens to people in health and awake, that the will 
occupied by thought turns itself away from the senses, and so informs the eye of the mind by various 
images of sensible things, as though those sensible things themselves were actually perceived. But these 
impressions of images not only take place when the will is directed upon such things by desiring them, but 
also when, in order to avoid and guard against them, the mind is carried away to look upon these very thing 
so as to flee from them. And hence, not only desire, but fear, causes both the bodily eye to be informed by 
the sensible things themselves, and the mental eye (acies) by the images of those sensible things. 
Accordingly, the more vehement has been either fear or desire, the more distinctly is the eye informed, 
whether in the case of him who [sensuously] perceives by means of the body that which lies close to him in 
place, or in the case of him who conceives from the image of the body which is contained in the memory. 
What then a body in place is to the bodily sense, that, the similitude of a body in memory is to the eye of the 
mind; and what the vision of one who looks at a thing is to that appearance of the body from which the sense 

is informed, that, the vision of a concipient is to the image of the body established in the memory, from which 
the eye of the mind is informed; and what the intention of the will is towards a body seen and the vision to be 
combined with it, in order that a certain unity of three things may therein take place, although their nature is 
diverse, that, the same intention of the will is towards combining the image of the body which is in the 
memory, and the vision of the concipient, that is, the form which the eye of the mind has taken in returning to 
the memory, in order that here too a certain unity may take place of three things, not now distinguished by 
diversity of nature, but of one and the same substance; because this whole is within, and the whole is one 
mind. 

CHAP. 5.--THE TRINITY OF THE OUTER MAN, OR OF EXTERNAL VISION, IS NOT AN 
IMAGE OF GOD. THE LIKENESS OF GOD IS DESIREDEVEN IN SINS. IN EXTERNAL 
VISION THE FORM OF THE CORPOREAL THING IS AS IT WERE THE PARENT, VISION 
THE OFFSPRING; BUT THE WILLTHAT UNITES THESE SUGGESTS THE HOLY SPIRIT. 

8. But as, when [both] the form and species of a body have perished, the will cannot recall to it the sense of 
perceiving; so, when the image which memory bears is blotted out by forgetfulness, the will will be unable to 
force back the eye of the mind by recollection, so; as to be formed thereby. But because the i mind has 
great power to imagine not only things forgotten, but also things that it never I saw, or experienced, either by 
increasing, or diminishing, or changing, or compounding, after its pleasure, those which have not dropped 
out of its remembrance, it often imagines things to be such as either it knows they are not, or does not know 
that they are. And in this case we have to take care, lest it either speak falsely that it may deceive, or hold an 
opinion so as to be deceived. And if it avoid these two evils, then imagined phantasms do not hinder it: just 
as sensible things experienced or retained by memory do not hinder it, if they are neither passionately 
sought for when pleasant, nor basely shunned when unpleasant. But when the will leaves better things, and 
greedily wallows in these, then it becomes unclean; and they are so thought of hurtfully, when they are 
present, and also more hurtfully when they are absent. And he therefore lives badly and degenerately who 
lives according to the trinity of the outer man; because it is the purpose of using things sensible and 
corporeal, that has begotten also that trinity, which although it imagines within, yet imagines things without. 
For no one could use those things even well, unless the images of things perceived by the senses were 
retained in the memory. And unless the will for the greatest part dwells, in the higher and interior things, and 
unless that will itself, which is accommodated either to bodies without, or to the images of them within, refers 
whatever it receives in them to a better and truer life, and rests in that end by gazing at which it judges that 
those things ought to be done; what else do we do, but that which the apostle prohibits us from doing, when 
he says, "Be not conformed to this world"?(1) And therefore that trinity is not an image of God since it is 
produced in the mind itself through the bodily sense, from the lowest, that is, the corporeal creature, than 
which the mind is higher. Yet neither is it altogether dissimilar: for what is there that has not a likeness of God, 
in proportion to its kind and measure, seeing that God made all things very good, (2) and for no other reason 
except that He Himself is supremely good? In so far, therefore, as anything that is, is good, in so far plainly it 
has still some likeness of the supreme good, at however, great a distance; and if a natural likeness, then 
certainly a right and well-ordered one; but if a faulty likeness, then certainly a debased and perverse one. 
For even souls in their very sins strive after nothing else but some kind of likeness of God, in a proud and 
preposterous, and, so to say, slavish liberty. So neither could our first parents have been persuaded to sin 
unless it had been said, "Ye shall be as gods. "(3) No doubt every thing in the creatures which is in any way 
like God, is not also to be called His image; but that alone than which He Himself alone is higher. For that 
only is in all points copied from Him, between which and Himself no nature is interposed. 

9. Of that vision then; that is, of the form which is wrought in the sense of him who sees; the form of the bodily 
thing from which it is wrought, is, as it were, the parent. But it is not a true parent; whence neither is that a true 
offspring; for it is not altogether born therefrom, since something else is applied to the bodily thing in order 
that it may be formed from it, namely, the sense of him who sees. And for this reason, to love this is to be 
estranged.4 Therefore the will which unites both, viz. the quasi-parent and the quasi-child, is more spiritual 
than either of them. For that bodily thing which is discerned, is not spiritual at all. But the vision which comes 
into existence in the sense, has something spiritual mingled with it, since it cannot come into existence 
without the soul. But it is not wholly spiritual; since that which is formed is a sense of the body. Therefore the 
will which unites both is confessedly more spiritual, as I have said; and so it begins to suggest (insinuare), 
as it were, the person of the Spirit in the Trinity. But it belongs more to the sense that is formed, than to the 
bodily thing whence it is formed. For the sense and will of an animate being belongs to the soul, not to the 
stone or other bodily thing that is seen. It does not therefore proceed from that bodily thing as from a parent; 
yet neither does it proceed from that other as it were offspring, namely, the vision and form that is in the 
sense. For the will existed before the vision came to pass, which will applied the sense that was to be 
formed to the bodily thing that was to be discerned; but it was not yet satisfied. For how could that which was 

not yet seen satisfy? And satisfaction means a will that rests content. And, therefore, we can neither call the 
will the quasi-offspring of vision, since it existed before vision; nor the quasi-parent, since that vision was not 
formed and expressed from the will, but from the bodily thing that was seen. 

CHAP. 6. --OF WHAT KIND WE ARE TO RECKON THE REST (REQUIES), AND END (FINIS), 
OF THE WILL IN VISION. 

10. Perhaps we can rightly call vision the end and rest of the will, only with respect tO this one object 
[namely, the bodily thing that is visible]. For it will not will nothing else merely because it sees something 
which it is now willing. It is not therefore the whole will itself of the man, of which the end is nothing else than 
blessedness; but the will provisionally directed to this one object, which has as its end in seeing, nothing but 
vision, whether it refer the thing seen to any other thing or not. For if it does not refer the vision to anything 
further, but wills only to see this, there can be no question made about showing that the end of the will is the 
vision; for it is manifest. But if it does refer it to anything further, then certainly it does will something else, and 
it will not be now a will merely to see; or if to see, not one to seethe particular thing. Just as, if any one 
wished to see the scar, that from thence he might learn that there had been a wound; or wished to see the 
window, that through the window he might see the passers-by: all these and other such acts of will have their 
own proper [proximate] ends, which are referred to that [final] end of the will by which we will to live 
blessedly, and to attain to that life which is not referred to anything else, but suffices of itself to him who loves 
it. The will then to see, has as its end vision; and the will to see this particular thing, has as its end the vision 
of this particular thing. Therefore the will to see the scar, desires its own end, that is, the vision of the scar, 
and does not reach beyond it; for the will to prove that there had been a wound, is a distinct will, although 
dependent upon that, of which the end also is to prove that there had been a wound. And the will to see the 
window, has as its end the vision of the window; for that is another and further will which depends upon it, viz. 
to see the passers-by through the window, of which also the end is the vision of the passers-by. But all the 
several wills that are bound to each other, are a once right, if that one is good, to which all are referred; and if 
that is bad, then all are bad. And so the connected series of right wills is a sort of road which consists as it 
were of certain steps, whereby to ascend to blessedness; but the entanglement of depraved and distorted 
wills is a bond by which he will be bound who thus acts, so as to be cast into outer darkness. (1) Blessed 
therefore are they who in act and character sing the song of the steps [degrees] ;(2) and woe to those that 
draw sin, as it were a long rope. (3) And it is just the same to speak of the will being in repose, which we call 
its end, if it is still referred to something further, as if we should say that the foot is at rest in walking, when it is 
placed there, whence yet another foot may be planted in the direction of the man's steps. But if something 
so satisfies, that the will acquiesces in it with a certain delight; it is nevertheless not yet that to which the man 
ultimately tends; but this too is referred to something further, so as to be regarded not as the native country 
of a citizen, but as a place of refreshment, or even of stopping, for a traveller. 

CHAP. 7. -THERE IS ANOTHER TRINITY IN THE MEMORY OF HIM WHO THINKS OVER 
AGAIN WHAT HE HAS SEEM. 

1 1 . But yet again, take the case of another trinity, more inward indeed than that which is in things sensible, 
and in the senses, but which is yet conceived from thence; while now it is no longer the sense of the body 
that is informed from the body, but the eye of the mind that is informed from the memory, since the species of 
the body which we perceived from without has inhered in the memory itself. And that species, which is in the 
memory, we call the quasi-parent of that which is wrought in the phantasy of one who conceives. For it was in 
the memory also, before we conceived it, just as the body was in place also before we [sensuously] 
perceived it, in order that vision might take place. But when it is conceived, then from that form which the 
memory retains, there is copied in the mind's eye (acie) of him who conceives, and by remembrance is 
formed, that species, which is the quasi-offspring of that which the memory retains. But neither is the one a 
true parent, nor the other a true offspring. For the mind's vision which is formed from memory when we think 
anything by recollection, does not proceed from that species which we remember as seen; since we could 
not indeed have remembered those things, unless we had seen them; yet the mind's eye, which is informed 
by the recollection, existed also before we saw the body that we remember; and therefore how much more 
before we committed it to memory? Although therefore the form which is wrought in the mind's eye of him 
who remembers, is wrought from that form which is in the memory; yet the mind's eye itself does not exist 
from thence, but existed before it. And it follows, that if the one is not a true parent, neither is the other a true 
offspring. But both that quasi-parent and that quasi-offspring suggest something, whence the inner and truer 
things may appear more practically and more certainly. 

12. Further, it is more difficult to discern clearly, whether the will which connects the vision to the memory is 
not either the parent or the offspring of some one of them; and the likeness and equality of the same nature 

and substance cause this difficulty of distinguishing. For it is not possible to do in this case, as with the 
sense that is formed from without (which is easily discerned from the sensible body, and again the will from 
both), on account of the difference of nature which is mutually in all three, and of which we have treated 
sufficiently above. For although this trinity, of which we at present speak, is introduced into the mind from 
without; yet it is transacted within, and there is no part of it outside of the nature of the mind itself. In what way, 
then, can it be demonstrated that the will is neither the quasi-parent, nor the quasi-offspring, either of the 
corporeal likeness which is contained in the memory, or of that which is copied thence in recollecting; when 
it so unites both in the act of conceiving, as that they appear singly as one, and cannot be discerned except 
by reason? It is then first to be considered that there cannot be any will to remember, unless we retain in the 
recesses of the memory either the whole, or some part, of that thing which we wish to remember. For the very 
will to remember cannot arise in the case of a thing which we have forgotten altogether and absolutely; 
since we have already remembered that the thing which we wish to remember is or has been, in our 
memory. For example, if I wish to remember what I supped on yesterday, either I have already remembered 
that I did sup, or if not yet this, at least I have remembered something about that time itself, if nothing else; at 
all events, I have remembered yesterday, and that part of yesterday in which people usually sup, and what 
supping is. For if I had not remembered anything at all of this kind, I could not wish to remember what I 
supped on yesterday. Whence we may perceive that the will of remembering proceeds, indeed, from those 
things which are retained in the memory, with the addition also of those which, by the act of discerning, are 
copied thence through recollection; that is, from the combination of something which we have remembered, 
and of the vision which was thence wrought, when we remembered, in the mind's eye of him who thinks. But 
the will itself which unites both requires also some other thing, which is, as it were, close at hand, and 
adjacent to him who remembers. There are, then, as many trinities of this kind as there are remembrances; 
because there is no one of them wherein there are not these three things, viz. that which was stored up in the 
memory also before it was thought, and that which takes place in the conception when this is discerned, and 
the will that unites both, and from both and itself as a third, completes one single thing. Or is it rather that we 
so recognize some one trinity in this kind, as that we are to speak generally, of whatever corporeal species 
lie hidden in the memory, as of a single unity, and again of the general vision of the mind which remembers 
and conceives such things, as of a single unity, to the combination of which two there is to be joined as a 
third the will that combines them, that this whole may be a certain unity made up from three? 

CHAP. 8. -DIFFERENT MODES OF CONCEIVING. 

But since the eye of the mind cannot look at all things together, in one glance, which the memory retains, 
these trinities of thought alternate in a series of withdrawals and successions, and so that trinity becomes 
most innumerably numerous; and yet not infinite, if it pass not beyond the number of things stored up in the 
memory. For, although we begin to reckon from the earliest perception which any one has of material things 
through any bodily sense, and even take in also those things which he has forgotten, yet the number would 
undoubtedly be certain and determined, although innumerable. For we not only call infinite things 
innumerable, but also those, which, although finite, exceed any one's power of reckoning. 

13. But we can hence perceive a little more clearly that what the memory stores up and retains is a different 
thing from that which is thence copied in the conception of the man who remembers, although, when both are 
combined together, they appear to be one and the same; because we can only remember just as many 
species of bodies as we have actually seen, and so great, and such, as we have actually seen; for the mind 
imbibes them into the memory from the bodily sense; whereas the things seen in conception, although 
drawn from those things which are in the memory, yet are multiplied and varied innumerably, and altogether 
without end. For I remember, no doubt, but one sun, because according to the fact, I have seen but one; but if 
I please, I conceive of two, or three, or as many as I will; but the vision of my mind, when I conceive of many, 
is formed from the same memory by which I remember one. And I remember it just as large as I saw it. For if I 
remember it as larger or smaller than I saw it, then I no longer remember what I saw, and so I do not 
remember it. But because I remember it, I remember it as large as I saw it; yet I conceive of it as greater or 
as less according to my will. And I remember it as I saw it; but I conceive of it as running its course as I will, 
and as standing still where I will, and as coming whence I will, and whither I will. For it is in my power to 
conceive of it as square, although I remember it as round; and again, of what color I please, although I have 
never seen, and therefore do not remember, a green sun; and as the sun, so all other things. But owing to 
the corporeal and sensible nature of these forms of things, the mind falls into error when it imagines them to 
exist without, in the same mode in which it conceives them within, either when they have already ceased to 
exist without, but are still retained in the memory, or when in any other way also, that which we remember is 
formed in the mind, not by faithful recollection, but after the variations of thought. 

14. Yet it very often happens that we believe also a true narrative, told us by others, of things which the 
narrators have themselves perceived by their senses. And in this case, when we conceive the things 

narrated to us, as we hear them, the eye of the mind does not seem to be turned back to the memory, in 
order to bring up visions in our thoughts; for we do not conceive these things from our own recollection, but 
upon the narration of another; and that trinity does not here seem to come to its completion, which is made 
when the species lying hid in the memory, and the vision of the man that remembers, are combined by will 
as a third. For I do not conceive that which lay hid in my memory, but that which I hear, when anything is 
narrated to me. I am not speaking of the words themselves of the speaker, lest any one should suppose 
that I have gone off to that other trinity, which is transacted without, in sensible things, or in the senses: but I 
am conceiving of those species of material things, which the narrator signifies to me by words and sounds; 
which species certainly I conceive of not by remembering, but by hearing. But if we consider the matter more 
carefully, even in this case, the limit of the memory is not overstepped. For I could not even understand the 
narrator, if I did not remember generically the individual things of which he speaks, even although I then hear 
them for the first time as connected together in one tale. For he who, for instance, describes to me some 
mountain stripped of timber, and clothed with olive trees, describes it to me who remembers the species 
both of mountains, and of timber, and of olive trees; and if I had forgotten these, I should not know at all of 
what he was speaking, and therefore could not conceive that description. And so it comes to pass, that 
every one who conceives things corporeal, whether he himself imagine anything, or hear, or read, either a 
narrative of things past, or a foretelling of things future, has recourse to his memory, and finds there the limit 
and measure of all the forms at which he gazes in his thought. For no one can conceive at all, either a color 
or a form of body, which he never saw, or a sound which he never heard, or a flavor which he never tasted, 
or a scent which he never smelt, or any touch of a corporeal thing which he never felt. But if no one 
conceives anything corporeal except what he has [sensuously] perceived, because no one remembers 
anything corporeal except what he has thus perceived, then, as is the limit of perceiving in bodies, so is the 
limit of thinking in the memory. For the sense receives the species from that body which we perceive, and 
the memory from the sense; but the mental eye of the concipient, from the memory. 

15. Further, as the will applies the sense to the bodily object, so it applies the memory to the sense, and the 
eye of the mind of the concipient to the memory. But that which harmonizes those things and unites them, 
itself also disjoins and separates them, that is, the will. But it separates the bodily senses from the bodies 
that are to be perceived, by movement of the body, either to hinder our perceiving the thing, or that we may 
cease to perceive it: as when we avert our eyes from that which we are unwilling to see, or shut them; so, 
again, the ears from sounds, or the nostrils from smells. So also we turn away from tastes, either by shutting 
the mouth, or by casting the thing out of the mouth. In touch, also, we either remove the bodily thing, that we 
may not touch what we do not wish, or if we were already touching it, we fling or push it away. Thus the will 
acts by movement of the body, so that the bodily sense shall not be joined to the sensible things. And it 
does this according to its power; for when it endures hardship in so doing, on account of the condition of 
slavish mortality, then torment is the result, in such wise that nothing remains to the will save endurance. But 
the will averts the memory from the sense; when, through its being intent on something else, it does not suffer 
things present to cleave to it. As any one may see, when often we do not seem to ourselves to have heard 
some one who was speaking to us, because we were thinking of something else. But this is a mistake; for 
we did hear, but we do not remember, because the words of the speaker presently slipped out of the 
perception of our ears, through the bidding of the will being diverted elsewhere, by which they are usually 
fixed in the memory. Therefore, we should say more accurately in such a case, we do not remember, than, 
we did not hear; for it happens even in reading, and to myself very frequently, that when I have read through 
a page or an epistle, I do not know what I have read, and I begin it again. For the purpose of the will being 
fixed on something else, the memory was not so applied to the bodily sense, as the sense itself was 
applied to the letters. So, too, any one who walks with the will intent on something else, does not know where 
he has got to; for if he had not seen, he would not have walked thither, or would have felt his way in walking 
with greater attention, especially if he was passing through a place he did not know; yet, because he walked 
easily, certainly he saw; but because the memory was not applied to the sense itself in the same way as the 
sense of the eyes was applied to the places through which he was passing, he could not remember at all 
even the last thing he saw. Now, to will to turn away the eye of the mind from that which is in the memory, is 
nothing else but not to think thereupon. 

CHAP. 9. --SPECIES IS PRODUCED BY SPECIES IN SUCCESSION. 

16. In this arrangement, then, while we begin from the bodily species and arrive finally at the species which 
comes to be in the intuition (contuitu) of the concipient, we find four species born, as it were, step by step one 
from the other, the second from the first, the third from the second, the fourth from the third: since from the 
species of the body itself, there arises that which comes to be in the sense of the percipient; and from this, 
that which comes to be in the memory; and from this, that which comes to be in the mind's eye of the 
concipient. And the will, therefore, thrice combines as it were parent with offspring: first the species of the 

body with that to which it gives birth in the sense of the body; and that again with that which from it comes to 
be in the memory; and this also, thirdly, with that which is born from it in the intuition of the concipient's mind. 
But the intermediate combination which is the second, although it is nearer to the first, is yet not so like the 
first as the third is. For there are two kinds of vision, the one of [sensuous] perception (sentientis), the other of 
conception (cogitantis). But in order that the vision of conception may come to be, there is wrought for the 
purpose, in the memory, from the vision of [sensuous] I perception something like it, to which the eye of the 
mind may turn itself in conceiving, as the glance (acies) of the eyes turns itself in [sensuously] perceiving to 
the bodily object, have, therefore, chosen to put forward two trinities in this kind: one when the vision of 
[sensuous] perception is formed from the bodily object, the other when the vision of conception is formed 
from the memory. But I have refrained from commending an intermediate one; because we do not 
commonly call it vision, when the form which comes to be in the sense of him who perceives, is on-trusted to 
the memory. Yet in all cases the will does not appear unless as the combiner as it were of parent and 
offspring; and so, proceed from whence it may, it can be called neither parent nor offspring. (1) 

CHAP. 10. -THE IMAGINATION ALSO ADDS EVEN TO THINGS WE HAVE NOT SEEN, 
THOSE THINGS WHICH WE HAVE SEEN ELSEWHERE. 

17. But if we do not remember except what we have [sensuously] perceived, nor conceive except what we 
remember; why do we often conceive things that are false, when certainly we do not remember falsely those 
things which we have perceived, unless it be because that will (which I have already taken pains to show as 
much as I can to be the uniter and the separater of things of this kind) leads the vision of the conceiver that is 
to be formed, after its own will and pleasure, through the hidden stores of the memory; and, in order to 
conceive [imagine] those things which we do not remember, impels it to take one thing from hence, and 
another from thence, from those which we do remember; and these things combining into one vision make 
something which is called false, because it either does not exist externally in the nature of corporeal things, 
or does not seem copied from the memory, in that we do not remember that we ever saw such a thing. For 
who ever saw a black swan? And therefore no one remembers a black swan; yet who is there that cannot 
conceive it? For it is easy to apply to that shape which we have come to know by seeing it, a black color, 
which we have not the less seen in other bodies; and because we have seen both, we remember both. 
Neither do I remember a bird with four feet, because I never saw one; but I contemplate such a phantasy 
very easily, by adding to some winged shape such as I have seen, two other feet, such as I have likewise 
seen.(1) And therefore, in conceiving conjointly, what we remember to have seen singly, we seem not to 
conceive that which we remember; while we really do this under the law of the memory, whence we take 
everything which we join together after our own pleasure in manifold and diverse ways. For we do not 
conceive even the very magnitudes of bodies, which magnitudes we never saw, without help of the memory; 
for the measure of space to which our gaze commonly reaches through the magnitude of the world, is the 
measure also to which we enlarge the bulk of bodies, whatever they may be, when we conceive them as 
great as we can. And reason, indeed, proceeds still beyond, but phantasy does not follow her; as when 
reason announces the infinity of number also, which no vision of him who conceives according to corporeal 
things can apprehend. The same reason also teaches that the most minute atoms are infinitely divisible; yet 
when we have come to those slight and minute particles which we remember to have seen, then we can no 
longer behold phantasms more slender and more minute, although reason does not cease to continue to 
divide them. So we conceive no corporeal things, except either those we remember, or from those things 
which we remember. 

CHAP. 11. -NUMBER, WEIGHT, MEASURE. 

18. But because those things which are impressed on the memory singly, can be conceived according to 
number, measure seems to belong to the memory, but number to the vision; because, although the 
multiplicity of such visions is innumerable, yet a limit not to be transgressed is prescribed for each in the 
memory. Therefore, measure appears in the memory, number in the vision of things: as there is some 
measure in visible bodies themselves, to which measure the sense of those who see is most numerously 
adjusted, and from one visible object is formed the vision of many beholders, so that even a single person 
sees commonly a single thing under a double appearance, on account of the number of his two eyes, as we 
have laid down above. Therefore there is some measure in those things whence visions are copied, but in 
the visions themselves there is number. But the will which unites and regulates these things, and combines 
them into a certain unity, and does not quietly rest its desire of [sensuously] perceiving or of conceiving, 
except in those things from whence the visions are formed, resembles weight. And therefore I would just 
notice by way of anticipation these three things, measure, number, weight, which are to be perceived in all 
other things also. In the meantime, I have now shown as much as I can, and to whom I can, that the will is the 

uniterofthe visible thing and of the vision; as it were, of parent and of offspring; whether in [sensuous] 
perception or in conception, and that it cannot be called either parent or offspring. Wherefore time 
admonishes us to seek for this same trinity in the inner man, and to strive to pass inwards from that animal 
and carnal and (as he is called) outward man, of whom I have so long spoken. And here we hope to be able 
to find an image of God according to the Trinity, He Himself helping our efforts, who as things themselves 
show, and as Holy Scripture also witnesses, has regulated all things in measure, and number, and 
weight.(2) 

THE FIFTEEN BOOKS OF AURELIUS AUGUSTINUS, 
BISHOP OF HIPPO, ON THE TRINITY: BOOK XII 

BOOK XII. 

COMMENCING WITH A DISTINCTION BETWEEN WISDOM AND KNOWLEDGE, POINTS 
OUT A KIND OF TRINITY, OF A PECULIAR SORT, IN THAT WHICH IS PROPERLY CALLED 
KNOWLEDGE, AND WHICH IS THE LOWER OF THE TWO; AND THIS TRINITY, 
ALTHOUGH IT CERTAINLY PERTAINS TO THE INNER MAN, IS STILL NOT YET TO BE 
CALLED OR THOUGHT AN IMAGE OF GOD. 

CHAP. 1.--0F WHAT KIND ARE THE OUTER AND THE INNER MAN. 

1 . COME now, and let us see where lies, as it were, the boundary line between the outer and inner man. For 
whatever we have in the mind common with the beasts, thus much is rightly said to belong to the outer man. 
For the outer man is not to be considered to be the body only, but with the addition also of a certain peculiar 
life of the body, whence the structure of the body derives its vigor, and all the senses with which he is 
equipped for the perception of outward things; and when the images of these outward things already 
perceived, that have been fixed in the memory, are seen again by recollection, it is still a matter pertaining 
to the outer man. And in all these things we do not differ from the beasts, except that in shape of body we are 
not prone, but upright. And we are admonished through this, by Him who made us, not to be like the beasts 
in that which is our better part-that is, the mind-while we differ from them by the uprightness of the body. Not 
that we are to throw our mind into those bodily things which are exalted; for to seek rest for the will, even in 
such things, is to prostrate the mind. But as the body is naturally raised upright to those bodily things which 
are most elevated, that is, to things celestial; so the mind, which is a spiritual substance, must be raised 
upright to those things which are most elevated in spiritual things, not by the elation of pride, but by the 
dutifulness of righteousness. 

CHAP. 2. --MAN ALONE OF ANIMATE CREATURES PERCEIVES THE ETERNAL REASONS 
OF THINGS PERTAINING TO THE BODY. 

2. And the beasts, too, are able both to perceive things corporeal from without, through the senses of the 
body, and to fix them in the memory, and remember them, and in them to seek after things suitable, and shun 
things inconvenient. But to note these things, and to retain them not only as caught up naturally but also as 
deliberately committed to memory, and to imprint them again by recollection and conception when now just 
slipping away into forgetfulness; in order that as conception is formed from that which the memory contains, 
so also the contents themselves of the memory may be fixed firmly by thought: to combine again imaginary 
objects of sight, by taking this or that of what the memory remembers, and, as it were, tacking them to one 
another: to examine after what manner it is that in this kind things like the true are to be distinguished from the 
true, and this not in things spiritual, but in corporeal things themselves;-these acts, and the like, although 
performed in reference to things sensible, and those which the mind has deduced through the bodily 
senses, yet, as they are combined with reason, so are not common to men and beasts. But it is the part of 
the higher reason to judge of these corporeal things according to incorporeal and eternal reasons; which, 
unless they were above the human mind, would certainly not be unchangeable; and yet, unless something 
of our own were subjoined to them, we should not be able to employ them as our measures by which to 
judge of corporeal things. But we judge of corporeal things from the rule of dimensions and figures, which 
the mind knows to remain unchangeably. (1) 

CHAP. 3. -THE HIGHER REASON WHICH BELONGS TO CONTEMPLATION, AND THE 
LOWER WHICH BELONGS TO ACTION, ARE IN ONE MIND. 

3. But that of our own which thus has to do with the handling of corporeal and temporal things, is indeed 
rational, in that it is not common to us with the beasts; but it is drawn, as it were, out of that rational substance 
of our mind, by which we depend upon and cleave to the intelligible and unchangeable truth, and which is 
deputed to handle and direct the inferior things. For as among all the beasts there was not found for the man 

a help like unto him, unless one were taken from himself, and formed to be his consort: so for that mind, by 
which we consult the supernal and inward truth, there is no like help for such employment as man's nature 
requires among things corporeal out of those parts of the soul which we have in common with the beasts. 
And so a certain part of our reason, not separated so as to sever unity, but, as it were, diverted so as to be a 
help to fellowship, is parted off for the performing of its proper work. And as the twain is one flesh in the case 
of male and female, so in the mind one nature embraces our intellect and action, or our counsel and 
performance, or our reason and rational appetite, or whatever other more significant terms there may be by 
which to express them; so that, as it was said of the former, "And they two shall be in one flesh, "(1) it may be 
said of these, they two are in one mind. 

CHAP. 4.--THE TRINITY AND THE IMAGE OF GOD IS IN THAT PART OF THE MIND ALONE 
WHICH BELONGS TO THE CONTEMPLATION OF ETERNAL THINGS. 

4. When, therefore, we discuss the nature of the human mind, we discuss a single subject, and do not 
double it into those two which I have mentioned, except in respect to its functions. Therefore, when we seek 
the trinity in the mind, we seek it in the whole mind, without separating the action of the reason in things 
temporal from the contemplation of things eternal, so as to have further to seek some third thing, by which a 
trinity may be completed. But this trinity must needs be so discovered in the whole nature of the mind, as that 
even if action upon temporal things were to be withdrawn, for which work that help is necessary, with a view 
to which some part of the mind is diverted in order to deal with these inferior things, yet a trinity would still be 
found in the one mind that is no where parted off; and that when this distribution has been already made, not 
only a trinity may be found, but also an image of God, in that alone which belongs to the contemplation of 
eternal things; while in that other which is diverted from it in the dealing with temporal things, although there 
may be a trinity, yet there cannot be found an image of God. 

CHAP. 5.--THE OPINION WHICH DEVISES AN IMAGE OF THE TRINITY IN THE MARRIAGE 
OF MALE AND FEMALE, AND IN THEIR OFFSPRING. 

5. Accordingly they do not seem to me to advance a probable opinion, who lay it down that a trinity of the 
image of God in three persons, so far as regards human nature, can so be discovered as to be completed 
in the marriage of male and female and in their offspring; in that the man himself, as it were, indicates the 
person of the Father, but that which has so proceeded from him as to be born, that of the Son; and so the 
third person as of the Spirit, is, they say, the woman, who has so proceeded from the man as not herself to 
be either son or daughter,(2) although it was by her conception that the offspring was born. For the Lord hath 
said of the Holy Spirit that He proceedeth from the Father,(3) and yet he is not a son. In this erroneous 
opinion, then, the only point probably alleged, and indeed sufficiently shown according to the faith of the 
Holy Scripture, is this, -in the account of the original creation of the woman, -that what so comes into 
existence from some person as to make another person, cannot in every case be called a son; since the 
person of the woman came into existence from the person of the man, and yet she is not called his daughter. 
All the rest of this opinion is in truth so absurd, nay indeed so false, that it is most easy to refute it. For I pass 
over such a thing, as to think the Holy Spirit to be the mother of the Son of God, and the wife of the Father; 
since perhaps it may be answered that these things offend us in carnal things, because we think of bodily 
conceptions and births. Although these very things themselves are most chastely thought of by the pure, to 
whom all things are pure; but to the defiled and unbelieving, of whom both the mind and conscience are 
polluted, nothing is pure;(1) so that even Christ, born of a virgin according to the flesh, is a stumbling-block to 
some of them. But yet in the case of those supreme spiritual things, after the likeness of which those kinds of 
the inferior creature also are made although most remotely, and where there is nothing that can be injured 
and nothing corruptible, nothing born in time, nothing formed from that which is formless, or whatever like 
expressions there may be; yet they ought not to disturb the sober prudence of any one, lest in avoiding 
empty disgust he run into pernicious error. Let him accustom himself so to find in corporeal things the traces 
of things spiritual, that when he begins to ascend upwards from thence, under the guidance of reason, in 
order to attain to the unchangeable truth itself through which these things were made, he may not draw with 
himself to things above what he despises in things below. For no one ever blushed to choose for himself 
wisdom as a wife, because the name of wife puts into a man's thoughts the corruptible connection which 
consists in begetting children; or because in truth wisdom itself is a woman in sex, since it is expressed in 
both Greek and Latin tongues by a word of the feminine gender. 

CHAP. 6. --WHY THIS OPINION IS TO BE REJECTED. 

6. We do not therefore reject this opinion, because we fear to think of that holy and inviolable and 

unchangeable Love, as the spouse of God the Father, existing as it does from Him, but not as an offspring in 
order to beget the Word by which all things are, made; but because divine Scripture evidently shows it to be 
false. For God said, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness;" and a little after it is said, "So God 
created man in the image of God. "(2) Certainly, in that it is of the plural number, the word "our" would not be 
rightly used if man were made in the image of one person, whether of the Father, or of the Son, or of the Holy 
Spirit; but because he was made in the image of the Trinity, on that account it is said, "After our image." But 
again, lest we should think that three Gods were to be believed in the Trinity, whereas the same Trinity is 
one God, it is said, "So God created man in the image of God," instead of saying, "In His own image." 

7. For such expressions are customary in the Scriptures; and yet some persons, while maintaining the 
Catholic faith, do not carefully attend to them, in such wise that they think the words, "God made man in the 
image of God, "to mean that the Father made man after the image of the Son; and they thus desire to assert 
that the Son also is called God in the divine Scriptures, as if there were not other most true and clear proofs 
wherein the Son is called not only God, but also the true God. For whilst they aim at explaining another 
difficulty in this text, they become so entangled that they cannot extricate themselves. For if the Father made 
man after the image of the Son, so that he is not the image of the Father, but of the Son, then the Son is unlike 
the Father. But if a pious faith teaches us, as it does, that the Son is like the Father after an equality of 
essence, then that which is made in the likeness of the Son must needs also be made in the likeness of the 
Father. Further, if the Father made man not in His own image, but in the image of His Son, why does He not 
say, "Let us make man after Thy image and likeness," whereas He does say, "our;" unless it be because 
the image of the Trinity was made in man, that in this way man should be the image of the one true God, 
because the Trinity itself is the one true God? Such expressions are innumerable in the Scriptures, but it will 
suffice to have produced these. It is so said in the Psalms, "Salvation belongeth unto the Lord; Thy blessing 
is upon Thy people;"(3) as if the words were spoken to some one else, not to Him of whom it had been said, 
"Salvation belongeth unto the Lord." And again, "For by Thee," he says, "I shall be delivered from 
temptation, and by hoping in my God I shall leap over the wall;"(4) as if he said to some one else, "By Thee I 
shall be delivered from temptation." And again, "In the heart of the king's enemies; whereby the people fall 
under Thee;"(5) as if he were to say, in the heart of Thy enemies. For he had said to that King, that is, to our 
Lord Jesus Christ, "The people fall under Thee," whom he intended by the word King, when he said, "In the 
heart of the king's enemies." Things of this kind are found more rarely in the New Testament. But yet the 
apostle says to the Romans, "Concerning His Son who was made to Him of the seed of David according to 
the flesh, and declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the 
resurrection of the dead of Jesus Christ our Lord;"(6) as though he were speaking above of some one else. 
For what is meant by the Son of God declared by the resurrection of the dead of Jesus Christ, except of the 
same Jesus Christ who was declared to be Son of God with power? And as then in this passage, when we 
are told, "the Son of God with power of Jesus Christ," or "the Son of God according to the spirit of holiness of 
Jesus Christ," or "the Son of God by the resurrection of the dead of Jesus Christ," whereas it might have 
been expressed in the ordinary way, In His own power, or according to the spirit of His own holiness, or by 
the resurrection of His dead, or of their dead: as, I says we are not compelled to understand another person, 
but one and the same, that is, the person of the Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ; so, when we are told that 
"God made man in the image of God," although it might have been more usual to say, after His own image, 
yet we are not compelled to understand any other person in the Trinity, but the one and selfsame Trinity 
itself, who is one God, and after whose image man is made. 

8. And since the case stands thus, if we are to accept the same image of the Trinity, as not in one, but in 
three human beings, father and mother and son, then the man was not made after the image of God before a 
wife was made for him, and before they procreated a son; because there was not yet a trinity. Will any one 
say there was already a trinity, because, although not yet in their proper form, yet in their original nature, both 
the woman was already in the side of the man, and the son in the loins of his father? Why then, when 
Scripture had said, "God made man after the image of God," did it go on to say, "God created him; male 
and female created He them: and God blessed them"?(1) (Or if it is to be so divided, "And God created 
man," so that thereupon is to be added, "in the image of God created He him," and then subjoined in the 
third place, "male and female created He them;" for some have feared to say, He made him male and 
female, lest something monstrous, as it were; should be understood, as are those whom they call 
hermaphrodites, although even so both might be understood not falsely in the singular number, on account 
of that which is said, "Two in one flesh.") Why then, as I began by saying, in regard to the nature of man 
made after the image of God, does Scripture specify nothing except male and female? Certainly, in order to 
complete the image of the Trinity, it ought to have added also son, although still placed in the loins of his 
father, as the woman was in his side. Or was it perhaps that the woman also had been already made, and 
that Scripture had combined in a short and comprehensive statement, that of which it was going to explain 
afterwards more carefully, how it was done; and that therefore a son could not be mentioned, because no 
son was yet born? As if the Holy Spirit could not have comprehended this, too, in that brief statement, while 

about to narrate the birth of the son afterwards in its own place; as it narrated afterwards in its own place, that 
the woman was taken from the side of the man, (2) and yet has not omitted here to name her. 

CHAP. 7. -HOW MAN IS THE IMAGE OF GOD. WHETHER THE WOMAN IS NOT ALSO THE 
IMAGE OF GOD. HOW THE SAYING OF THE APOSTLE, THAT THE MAN IS THE IMAGE OF 
GOD, BUT THE WOMAN IS THE GLORY OF THE MAN, IS TO BE UNDERSTOOD 
FIGURATIVELY AND MYSTICALLY. 

9. We ought not therefore so to understand that man is made in the image of the supreme Trinity, that is, in 
the image of God, as that the same image should be understood to be in three human beings; especially 
when the apostle says that the man is the image of God, and on that account removes the covering from his 
head, which he warns the woman to use, speaking thus: " For a man indeed ought not to cover his head, 
forasmuch as he is the image and glory of God; but the woman is the glory of the man." What then shall we 
say to this? If the woman fills up the image of the trinity after the measure of her own person, why is the man 
still called that image after she has been taken out of his side? Or if even one person of a human being out 
of three can be called the image of God, as each person also is God in the supreme Trinity itself, why is the 
woman also not the image of God? For she is instructed for this very reason to cover her head, which be is 
forbidden to do because he is the image of God. (3) 

10. But we must notice how that which the apostle says, that not the woman but the man is the image of God, 
is not contrary to that which is written in Genesis, "God created man: in the image of God created He him; 
male and female created He them: and He blessed them." For this text says that human nature itself, which 
is complete [only] in both sexes, was made in the image of God; and it does not separate the woman from 
the image of God which it signifies. For after saying that God made man in the image of God, "He created 
him," it says, "male and female:" or at any rate, punctuating the words otherwise, "male and female created 
He them." How then did the apostle tell us that the man is the image of God, and therefore he is forbidden to 
cover his head; but that the woman is not so, and therefore is commanded to cover hers? Unless, forsooth, 
according to that which I have said already, when I was treating of the nature of the human mind, that the 
woman together with her own husband is the image of God, so that that whole substance may be one 
image; but when she is referred separately to her quality of help-meet, which regards the woman herself 
alone, then she is not the image of God; but as regards the man alone, he is the image of God as fully and 
completely as when the woman too is joined with him in one. As we said of the nature of the human mind, that 
both in the case when as a whole it contemplates the truth it is the image of God; and in the case when 
anything is divided from it, and diverted in order to the cognition of temporal things; nevertheless on that 
side on which it beholds and consults truth, here also it is the image of God, but on that side whereby it is 
directed to the cognition of the lower things, it is not the image of God. And since it is so much the more 
formed after the image of God, the more it has extended itself to that which is eternal, and is on that account 
not to be restrained, so as to withhold and refrain itself from thence; therefore the man ought not to cover his 
head. But because too great a progression towards inferior things is dangerous to that rational cognition 
that is conversant with things corporeal and temporal; this ought to have power on its head, which the 
covering indicates, by which it is signified that it ought to be restrained. For a holy and pious meaning is 
pleasing to the holy angels. (1) For God sees not after the way of time, neither does anything new take place 
in His vision and knowledge, when anything is done in time and transitorily, after the way in which such things 
affect the senses, whether the carnal senses of animals and men, or even the heavenly senses of the 
angels. 

1 1 . For that the Apostle Paul, when speaking outwardly of the sex of male and female, figured the mystery of 
some more hidden truth, may be understood from this, that when he says in another place that she is a 
widow indeed who is desolate, without children and nephews, and yet that she ought to trust in God, and to 
continue in prayers night and day, (2) he here indicates, that the woman having been brought into the 
transgression by being deceived, is brought to salvation by child-bearing; and then he has added, "If they 
continue in faith, and charity, and holiness, with sobriety. "(3) As if it could possibly hurt a good widow, if either 
she had not sons, or if those whom she had did not choose to continue in good works. But because those 
things which are called good works are, as it were, the sons of our life, according to that sense of life in which 
it answers to the question, What is a man's life? that is, How does he act in these temporal things? which life 
the Greeks do not call but Bios; and because these good works are chiefly performed in the way of offices 
of mercy, while works of mercy are of no profit, either to Pagans, or to Jews who do not believe in Christ, or to 
any heretics or schismstics whatsoever in whom faith and charity and sober holiness are not found: what the 
apostle meant to signify is plain, and in so far figuratively and mystically, because he was speaking of 
covering the head of the woman, which will remain mere empty words, unless referred to some hidden 
sacrament. 

12. For, as not only most true reason but also the authority of the apostle himself declares, man was not 

made in the image of God according to the shape of his body, but according to his rational mind. For the 
thought is a debased and empty one, which holds God to be circumscribed and limited by the lineaments of 
bodily members. But further, does not the same blessed apostle say, "Be renewed in the spirit of your mind, 
and put on the new man, which is created after God;"(4) and in another place more clearly, "Putting off the 
old man," he says, "with his deeds; put on the new man, which is renewed to the knowledge of God after the 
image of Him that created him?"(5) If, then, we are renewed in the spirit of our mind, and he is the new man 
who is renewed to the knowledge of God after the image of Him that created him; no one can doubt, that 
man was made after the image of Him that created him, not according to the body, nor indiscriminately 
according to any part of the mind, but according to the rational mind, wherein the knowledge of God can 
exist And it is according to this renewal, also, that we are made sons of God by the baptism of Christ; and 
putting on the new man, certainly put on Christ through faith. Who is there, then, who will hold women to be 
alien from this fellowship, whereas they are fellow-heirs of grace with us; and whereas in another place the 
same apostle says, "For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus; for as many as have been 
baptized into Christ have put on Christ: there is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is 
neither male nor female; for ye are all one in Christ Jesus?"(1) Pray, have faithful women then lost their 
bodily sex? But because they are there renewed after the image of God, where there is no sex; man is there 
made after the image of God, where there is no sex, that is, in the spirit of his mind. Why, then, is the man on 
that account not bound to cover his head, because he is the image and glory of God, while the woman is 
bound to do so, because she is the glory of the man; as though the woman were not renewed in the spirit of 
her mind, which spirit is renewed to the knowledge of God after the image of Him who created him? But 
because she differs from the man in bodily sex, it was possible rightly to represent under her bodily 
covering that part of the reason which is diverted to the government of temporal things; so that the image of 
God may remain on that side of the mind of man on which it cleaves to the beholding or the consulting of the 
eternal reasons of things; and this, it is clear, not men only, but also women have. 

CHAP. 8. -TURNING ASIDE FROM THE IMAGE OF GOD. 

13. A common nature, therefore, is recognized in their minds, but in their bodies a division of that one mind 
itself is figured. As we ascend, then, by certain steps of thought within, along the succession of the parts of 
the mind, there where something first meets us which is not common to ourselves with the beasts reason 
begins, so that here the inner man can now be recognized. And if this inner man himself, through that reason 
to which the administering of things temporal has been delegated, slips on too far by over-much progress 
into outward things, that which is his head moreover consenting, that is, the (so to call it)masculine part which 
presides in the watch-tower of counsel not restraining or bridling it: then he waxeth old because of all his 
enemies, (2) viz. the demons with their prince the devil, who are envious of virtue; and that vision of eternal 
things is withdrawn also from the head himself, eating with his spouse that which was forbidden, so that the 
light of his eyes is gone from him;(3) and so both being naked from that enlightenment of truth, and with the 
eyes of their conscience opened to behold how they were left shameful and unseemly, like the leaves of 
sweet fruits, but without the fruits themselves, they so weave together good words without the fruit of good 
works, as while living wickedly to cover over their disgrace as it were by speaking well. (4) 

CHAP. 9. -THE SAME ARGUMENT IS CONTINUED. 

14. For the soul loving its own power, slips onwards from the whole which is common, to a part, which 
belongs especially to itself. And that apostatizing pride, which is called "the beginning of sin, "(5) whereas it 
might have been most excellently governed by the laws of God, if it had followed Him as its ruler in the 
universal creature, by seeking something more than the whole, and struggling to govern this by a law of its 
own, is thrust on, since nothing is more than the whole, into caring for a part; and thus by lusting after 
something more, is made less; whence also covetousness is called "the root of all evil. "(6) And it 
administers that whole, wherein it strives to do something of its own against the laws by which the whole is 
governed, by its own body, which it possesses only in part; and so being delighted by corporeal forms and 
motions, because it has not the things themselves within itself, and because it is wrapped up in their images, 
which it has fixed in the memory, and is foully polluted by fornication of the phantasy, while it refers all its 
functions to those ends, for which it curiously seeks corporeal and temporal things through the senses of the 
body, either it affects with swelling arrogance to be more excellent than other souls that are given up to the 
corporeal senses, or it is plunged into a foul whirlpool of carnal pleasure. 

CHAP. 10. -THE LOWEST DEGRADATION REACHED BY DEGREES. 

15. When the soul then consults either for itself or for others with a good will towards perceiving the inner and 

higher things, such as are possessed in a chaste embrace, without any narrowness or envy, not 
individually, but in common by all who love such things; then even if it be deceived in anything, through 
ignorance of things temporal (for its action in this case is a temporal one), and if it does not hold fast to that 
mode of acting which it ought, the temptation is but one common to man. And it is a great thing so of pass 
through this life, on which we travel, as it were, like a road on our return home, that no temptation may take 
us, but what is common to man.(1) For this is a sin, without the body, and must not be reckoned fornication, 
and on that account is very easily pardoned. But when the soul does anything in order to attain those things 
which are perceived through the body, through lust of proving or of surpassing or of handling them, in order 
that it may place in them its final good, then whatever it does, it does wickedly, and commits fornication, 
sinning against its own body:(2) and while snatching from within the deceitful images of corporeal things, and 
combining them by vain thought, so that nothing seems to it to be divine, unless it be of such a kind as this; 
by selfish greediness it is made fruitful in errors, and by selfish prodigality it is emptied of strength. Yet it 
would not leap on at once from the commencement to such shameless and miserable fornication, but, as it 
is written, "He that contemneth small things, shall fall by little and little. "(3) 

CHAP. 11. -THE IMAGE OF THE BEAST IN MAN. 

16. For as a snake does not creep on with open steps, but advances by the very minutest efforts of its 
several scales; so the slippery motion of falling away [from what is good] takes possession of the negligent 
only gradually, and beginning from a perverse desire for the likeness of God, arrives in the end at the 
likeness of beasts. Hence it is that being naked of their first garment, they earned by mortality coats of 
skins. (4) For-the true honor of man is the image and likeness of God, which is not preserved except it be in 
relation to Him by whom it is impressed. The less therefore that one loves what is one's own, the more one 
cleaves to God. But through the desire of making trial of his own power, man by his own bidding falls down 
to himself as to a sort of intermediate grade. And so, while he wishes to be as God is, that is, under no one, 
he is thrust on, even from his own middle grade, by way of punishment, to that which is lowest, that is, to 
those things in which beasts delight: and thus, while his honor is the likeness of God, but his dishonor is the 
likeness of the beast, "Man being in honor abideth not: he is compared to the beasts that are foolish, and is 
made like to them. "(5) By what path, then, could he pass so great a distance from the highest to the lowest, 
except through his own intermediate grade? For when he neglects the love of wisdom, which remains 
always after the same fashion, and lusts after knowledge by experiment upon things temporal and mutable, 
that knowledge puffeth up, it does not edify:(6) so the mind is overweighed and thrust out, as it were, by its 
own weight from blessedness; and learns by its own punishment, through that trial of its own 
intermediateness, what the difference is between the good it has abandoned and the bad to which it has 
committed itself; and having thrown away and destroyed its strength, it cannot return, unless by the grace of 
its Maker calling it to repentance, and forgiving its sins. For who will deliver the unhappy soul from the body 
of this death, unless the grace of God through Jesus Christ our Lord?(7) of which grace we will discourse in 
its place, so far as He Himself enables us. 

CHAP. 12. -THERE IS A KIND OF HIDDEN WED LOCK IN THE INNER MAN. UNLAWFUL 
PLEASURES OF THE THOUGHTS. 

17. Let us now complete, so far as the Lord helps us, the discussion which we have undertaken, respecting 
that part of reason to which knowledge belongs, that is, the cognizance of things temporal and changeable, 
which is necessary for managing the affairs of this life. For as in the case of that visible wedlock of the two 
human beings who were made first, the serpent did not eat of the forbidden tree, but only persuaded them to 
eat of it; and the woman did not eat alone, but gave to her husband, and they eat together; although she 
alone spoke with the serpent, and she alone was led away by him:(8) so also in the case of that hidden and 
secret kind of wedlock, which is transacted and discerned in a single human being, the carnal, or as I may 
say, since it is directed to the senses of the body, the sensuous movement of the soul, which is common to 
us with beasts, is shut off from the reason of wisdom. For certainly bodily things are perceived by the sense 
of the body; but spiritual things, which are eternal and unchangeable, are understood by the reason of 
wisdom. But the reason of knowledge has appetite very near to it: seeing that what is called the science or 
knowledge of actions reasons concerning the bodily things which are perceived by the bodily sense; if well, 
in order that it may refer that knowledge to the end of the chief good; but if ill, in order that it may enjoy them 
as being such good things as those wherein it reposes with a false blessedness. Whenever, then, that 
carnal or animal sense introduces into this purpose of the mind which is conversant about things temporal 
and corporeal, with a view to the offices of a man's actions, by the living force of reason, some inducement 
to enjoy itself, that is, to enjoy itself as if it were some private good of its own, not as the public and common, 
which is the unchangeable, good; then, as it were, the serpent discourses with the woman. And to consent to 

this allurement, is to eat of the forbidden tree. But if that consent is satisfied by the pleasure of thought alone, 
but the members are so restrained by the authority of higher counsel that they are not yielded as instruments 
of unrighteousness unto sin;(1) this, I think, is to be considered as if the woman alone should have eaten the 
forbidden food. But if, in this consent to use wickedly the things which are perceived through the senses of 
the body, any sin at all is so determined upon, that if there is the power it is also fulfilled by the body; then 
that woman must be understood to have given the unlawful food to her husband with her, to be eaten 
together. For it is not possible for the mind to determine that a sin is not only to be thought of with pleasure, 
but also to be effectually committed, unless also that intention of the mind yields, and serves the bad action, 
with which rests the chief power of applying the members to an outward act, or of restraining them from one. 

18. And yet, certainly, when the mind is pleased in thought alone with unlawful things, while not indeed 
determining that they are to be done, but yet holding and pondering gladly things which ought to have been 
rejected the very moment they touched the mind, it cannot be denied to be a sin, but far less than if it were 
also determined to accomplished it in outward act. And therefore pardon must be sought for such thoughts 
too, and the breast must be smitten, and it must be said, "Forgive us our debts;" and what follows must be 
done, and must be joined in our prayer, "As we also forgive our debtors. "(2) For it is not as it was with those 
two first human beings, of which each one bare his own person; and so, if the woman alone had eaten the 
forbidden food, she certainly alone would have been smitten with the punishment of death: it cannot, I say, 
be so said also in the case of a single human being now, that if the thought, remaining alone, be gladly fed 
with unlawful pleasures, from which it ought to turn away directly, while yet there is no determination that the 
bad actions are to be done, but only that they are retained with pleasure in remembrance, the woman as it 
were can be condemned without the man. Far be it from us to believe this. For here is one person, one 
human being, and he as a whole will be condemned, unless those things which, as lacking the will to do, 
and yet having the will to please the mind with them, are perceived to be sins of thought alone, are 
pardoned through the grace of the Mediator. (3) 

19. This reasoning, then, whereby we have sought in the mind of each several human being a certain 
rational wedlock of contemplation and action, with functions distributed through each severally, yet with the 
unity of the mind preserved in both; saving meanwhile the truth of that history which divine testimony hands 
down respecting the first two human beings, that is, the man and his wife, from whom the human species is 
propagated;(4)-this reasoning, I say, must be listened to only thus far, that the apostle may be understood 
to have intended to signify something to be sought in one individual man, by assigning the image of God to 
the man only, and not also to the woman, although in the merely different sex of two human beings. 

CHAP. 13. -THE OPINION OF THOSE WHO HAVE THOUGHT THAT THE MIND WAS 
SIGNIFIED BY THE MAN, THE BODILY SENSE BY THE WOMAN, 

20. Nor does it escape me, that some who before us were eminent defenders of the Catholic faith and 
expounders of the word of God, while they looked for these two things in one human being, whose entire 
soul they perceived to be a sort of excellent paradise, asserted that the man was the mind, but that the 
woman was the bodily sense. And according to this distribution, by which the man is assumed to be the 
mind, but the woman the bodily sense, all things seem aptly to agree together if they are handled with due 
attention: unless that it is written, that in all the beasts and flying things there was not found for man an 
helpmate like to himself; and then the woman was made out of his side(5) And on this account I, for my part, 
have not thought that the bodily sense should be taken for the woman, which we see to be common to 
ourselves and to the beasts; but I have desired to find something which the beasts had not; and I have 
rather thought the bodily sense should be understood to be the serpent, whom we read to have been more 
subtle than all beasts of the field. (6) For in those natural good things which we see are common to ourselves 
and to the irrational animals, the sense excels by a kind of living power; not the sense of which it is written in 
the epistle addressed to the Hebrews, where we read, that "strong meat belongeth to them that are of full 
age, even those who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil;"(1) for 
these "senses" belong to the rational nature and pertain to the understanding; but that sense which is 
divided into five parts in the body, through which corporeal species and motion is perceived not only by 
ourselves, but also by the beasts. 

21. But whether that the apostle calls the man the image and glory of God, but the woman the glory of the 
man, (2) is to be received in this, or that, or in any other way; yet it is clear, that when we live according to 
God, our mind which is intent on the invisible things of Him ought to be fashioned with proficiency from His 
eternity, truth, charity; but that something of our own rational purpose, that is, of the same mind, must be 
directed to the using of changeable and corporeal things, without which this life does not go on; not that we 
may be conformed to this world, (3) by placing our end in such good things, and by forcing the desire of 
blessedness towards them, but that whatever we do rationally in the using of temporal things, we may do it 
with the contemplation of attaining eternal things, passing through the former, but cleaving to the latter. 

CHAP. 14.-WHAT IS THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN WISDOM AND KNOWLEDGE. THE 
WORSHIP OF GOD IS THE LOVE OF HIM. HOW THE INTELLECTUAL COGNIZANCE OF 
ETERNALTHINGS COMES TO PASS THROUGH WISDOM. 

For knowledge also has its own good measure, if that in it which puffs up, or is wont to puff up, is conquered 
by love of eternal things, which does not puff up, but, as we know, edifieth.(4) Certainly without knowledge the 
virtues themselves, by which one lives rightly, cannot be possessed, by which this miserable life may be so 
governed, that we may attain to that eternal life which is truly blessed. 

22. Yet action, by which we use temporal things well, differs from contemplation of eternal things; and the 
latter is reckoned to wisdom, the former to knowledge. For although that which is wisdom can also be called 
knowledge, as the apostle too speaks, where he says, "Now I know in part, but then shall I know even as 
also I am known;"(5) when doubtless he meant his words to be understood of the knowledge of the 
contemplation of God, which will be the highest reward of the saints; yet where he says, "For to one is given 
by the Spirit the word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit, "(6) certainly he 
distinguishes without doubt these two things, although he does not there explain the difference, nor in what 
way one may be discerned from the other. But having examined a great number of passages from the Holy 
Scriptures, I find it written in the Book of Job, that holy man being the speaker, "Behold, piety, that is wisdom; 
but to depart from evil is knowledge. "(7) In thus distinguishing, it must be understood that wisdom belongs to 
contemplation, knowledge to action. For in this place he meant by piety the worship of God, which in Greek 
is called <greek>qeosbeia</greek>. For the sentence in the Greek MSS. has that word. And what is there in 
eternal things more excellent than God, of whom alone the nature is unchangeable? And what is the worship 
of Him except the love of Him, by which we now desire to see Him, and we believe and hope that we shall 
see Him; and in proportion as we make progress, see now through a glass in an enigma, but then in 
clearness? For this is what the Apostle Paul means by "face to face. "(8) This is also what John says, 
"Beloved, now we are the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that, when 
He shall appear, we shall be like Him; for we shall see Him as He is. "(9) Discourse about these and the like 
subjects seems to me to be the discourse itself of wisdom. But to depart from evil, which Job says is 
knowledge, is without doubt of temporal things. Since it is in reference to time [and this world] that we are in 
evil, from which we ought to abstain that we may come to those good eternal things. And therefore, 
whatsoever we do prudently, boldly, temperately, and justly, belongs to that knowledge or discipline 
wherewith our action is conversant in avoiding evil and desiring good; and so also, whatsoever we gather 
by the knowledge that comes from inquiry, in the way of examples either to be guarded against or to be 
imitated, and in the way of necessary proofs respecting any subject, accommodated to our use. 

23. When a discourse then relates to these things, I hold it to be a discourse belonging to knowledge, and to 
be distinguished from a discourse belonging to wisdom, to which those things belong, which neither have 
been, nor shall be, but are; and on account of that eternity in which they are, are said to have been, and to 
be, and to be about to be, without any changeableness of times. For neither have they been in such way as 
that they should cease to be, nor are they about to be in such way as if they were not now; but they have 
always had and always will have that very absolute being. And they abide, but not as if fixed in some place 
as are bodies; but as intelligible things in incorporeal nature, they are so at hand to the glance of the mind, 
as things visible or tangible in place are to the sense of the body. And not only in the case of sensible things 
posited in place, there abide also intelligible and incorporeal reasons of them apart from local space; but 
also of motions that pass by in successive times, apart from any transit in time, there stand also like 
reasons, themselves certainly intelligible, and not sensible. And to attain to these with the eye of the mind is 
the lot of few; and when they are attained as much as they can be, he himself who attains to them does not 
abide in them, but is as it were repelled by the rebounding of the eye itself of the mind, and so there comes 
to be a transitory thought of a thing not transitory. And yet this transient thought is committed to the memory 
through the instructions by which the mind is taught; that the mind which is compelled to pass from thence, 
may be able to return thither again; although, if the thought should not return to the memory and find there 
what it had committed to it, it would be led thereto like an uninstructed person, as it had been led before, and 
would find it where it had first found it, that is to say, in that incorporeal truth, whence yet once more it may be 
as it were written down and fixed in the mind. For the thought of man, for example, does not so abide in that 
incorporeal and unchangeable reason of a square body, as that reason itself abides: if, to be sure, it could 
attain to it at all without the phantasy of local space. Or if one were to apprehend the rhythm of any artificial or 
musical sound, passing through certain intervals of time, as it rested without time in some secret and deep 
silence, it could at least be thought as long as that song could be heard; yet what the glance of the mind, 
transient though it was, caught from thence, and, absorbing as it were into a belly, so laid up in the memory, 
over this it will be able to rumiuate in some measure by recollection, and to transfer what it has thus learned 
into systematic knowledge. But if this has been blotted out by absolute forgetfulness, yet once again, Under 

the guidance of teaching, one wilt come to that which had altogether dropped away, and it will be found such 
as it was. 

CHAP. 15. -IN OPPOSITION TO THE REMINISCENCE OF PLATO AND PYTHAGORAS. 
PYTHAGORAS THE SAMIAN. OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN WISDOM AND 
KNOWLEDGE, AND OF SEEKING THE TRINITY IN THE KNOWLEDGE OF TEMPORAL 
THINGS. 

24. And hence that noble philosopher Plato endeavored to persuade us that the souls of men lived even 
before they bare these bodies; and that hence those things which are learnt are rather remembered, as 
having been known already, than taken into knowledge as things new. For he has told us that a boy, when 
questioned I know not what respecting geometry, replied as if he were perfectly skilled in that branch of 
learning. For being questioned step by step and skillfully, he saw what was to be seen, and said that which 
he saw.(1) But if this had been a recollecting of things previously known, then certainly every one, or almost 
every one, would not have been able so to answer when questioned. For not every one was a geometrician 
in the former life, since geometricians are so few among men that scarcely one can be found anywhere. But 
we ought rather to believe, that the intellectual mind is so formed in its nature as to see those things, which 
by the disposition of the Creator are subjoined to things intelligible in a natural order, by a sort of incorporeal 
light of an unique kind; as the eye of the flesh sees things adjacent to itself in this bodily light, of which light it 
is made to be receptive, and adapted to it. For none the more does this fleshly eye, too, distinguish black 
things from white without a teacher, because it had already known them before it was created in this flesh. 
Why, lastly, is it possible only in intelligible things that any one properly questioned should answer 
according to any branch of learning, although ignorant of it? Why can no one do this with things sensible, 
except those which he has seen in this his present body, or has believed the information of others who knew 
them, whether somebody's writings or words? For we must not acquiesce in their story, who assert that the 
Samian Pythagoras recollected some things of this kind, which he had" experienced when he was 
previously here in another body; and others tell yet of others, that they experienced something of the same 
sort in their minds: but it may be conjectured that these were untrue recollections, such as we commonly 
experience in sleep, when we fancy we remember, as though we had done or seen it, what we never did or 
saw at all; and that the minds of these persons, even though awake, were affected in this way at the 
suggestion of malignant and deceitful spirits, whose care it is to confirm or to sow some false belief 
concerning the changes of souls, in order to deceive men. This, I say, may be conjectured from this, that if 
they really remembered those things which they had seen here before, while occupying other bodies, the 
same thing would happen to many, nay to almost all; since they suppose that as the dead from the living, 
so, without cessation and continually, the living are coming into existence from the dead; as sleepers from 
those that are awake, and those that are awake from them that sleep. 

25. If therefore this is the right distinction between wisdom and knowledge, that the intellectual cognizance of 
eternal things belongs to wisdom, but the rational cognizance of temporal things to knowledge, it is not 
difficult to judge which is to be preferred or postponed to which. But if we must employ some other distinction 
by which to know these two apart, which without doubt the apostle teaches us are different, saying, "To one 
is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another the word of knowledge, by the same Spirit:" still the 
difference between those two which we have laid down is a most evident one, in that the intellectual 
cognizance of eternal things is one thing, the rational cognizance of temporal things another; and no one 
doubts but that the former is to be preferred to the latter. As then we leave behind those things which belong 
to the outer man, and desire to ascend within from those things which we have in common with beasts, 
before we come to the cognizance of things intelligible and supreme, which are eternal, the rational 
cognizance of temporal things presents itself. Let us then find a trinity in this also, if we can, as we found one 
in the senses of the body, and in those things which through them entered in the way of images into our soul 
or spirit; so that instead of corporeal things which we touch by corporeal sense, placed as they are without 
us, we might have resemblances of bodies impressed within on the memory from which thought might be 
formed, while the will as a third united them; just as the sight of the eyes was formed from without, which the 
will applied to the visible thing in order to produce vision, and united both, while itself also added itself 
thereto as a third. But this subject must not be compressed into this book; so that in that which follows, if God 
help, it may be suitably examined, and the conclusions to which we come may be unfolded. 

THE FIFTEEN BOOKS OF AURELIUS AUGUSTINUS, 
BISHOP OF HIPPO, ON THE TRINITY: BOOKXIII 

BOOK XIII. 

THE INQUIRY IS PROSECUTED RESPECTING KNOWLEDGE, IN WHICH, AS 
DISTINGUISHED FROM WISDOM, AUGUSTIN HAD BEGUN IN THE FORMER BOOKTO 
LOOK FOR A KIND OF TRINITY. AND OCCASION IS TAKEN OF COMMENDING CHRISTIAN 
FAITH, AND OF EXPLAINING HOW THE FAITH OF BELIEVERS IS ONE AND COMMON. 
NEXT, THAT ALL DESIRE BLESSEDNESS, YET THAT ALL HAVE NOT THE FAITH 
WHEREBY WE ARRIVE AT BLESSEDNESS; AND THAT THIS FAITH IS DEFINED IN 
CHRIST, WHO IN THE FLESH ROSE FROM THE DEAD; AND THAT NO ONE IS SET FREE 
FROM THE DOMINION OF THE DEVIL THROUGH FORGIVENESS OF SINS, SAVE 
THROUGH HIM. IT IS SHOWN ALSO AT LENGTH THAT IT WAS NEEDFULTHAT THE 
DEVIL SHOULD BE CONQUERED BY CHRIST, NOT BY POWER, BUT BY 
RIGHTEOUSNESS. FINALLY, THAT WHEN THE WORDS OF THIS FAITH ARE 
COMMITTED TO MEMORY, THERE IS IN THE MIND A KIND OF TRINITY, SINCE THERE 
ARE, FIRST, IN THE MEMORY THE SOUNDS OF THE WORDS, AND THIS EVEN WHEN 
THE MAN IS NOT THINKING OF THEM; AND NEXT, THE MIND'S EYE OF HIS 
RECOLLECTION IS FORMED THEREUPON WHEN HE THINKS OF THEM; AND, LASTLY, 
THE WILL, WHEN HE SO THINKS AND REMEMBERS, COMBINES BOTH. 

CHAP. 1.--THE ATTEMPT IS MADE TO DISTINGUISH OUT OF THE SCRIPTURES THE 
OFFICES OF WISDOM AND OF KNOWLEDGE. THAT IN THE BEGINNING OF JOHN SOME 
THINGS THAT ARE SAID BELONG TO WISDOM, SOME TO KNOWLEDGE. SOME THINGS 
THERE ARE ONLY KNOWN BY THE HELP OF FAITH. HOW WE SEE THE FAITH THAT IS 
IN US. IN THE SAME NARRATIVE OF JOHN, SOME THINGS ARE KNOWN BY THE SENSE 
OF THE BODY, OTHERS ONLY BY THE REASON OF THE MIND. 

1. IN the book before this, viz. the twelfth of this work, we have done enough to distinguish the office of the 
rational mind in temporal things, wherein not only our knowing but our action is concerned, from the more 
excellent office of the same mind, which is employed in contemplating eternal things, and is limited to 
knowing alone. But I think it more convenient that I should insert somewhat out of the Holy Scriptures, by 
which the two may more easily be distinguished. 

2. John the Evangelist has thus begun his Gospel: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with 
God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by Him; and 
without was Him not anything made that was made. In Him was life; and the life was the light of men. And the 
light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not. There was a man sent from God, whose 
name was John. The same came for a witness, to bear witness of the Light, that all men through Him might 
believe. He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light. That was the true Light, which 
lighteth every man that cometh into the world. He was in the world, and the world was made by Him, and the 
world knew Him not. He came unto His own, and His own received Him not. But as many as received Him, 
to them gave He power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on His name: which were 
born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. And the Word was made flesh, 
and dwelt among us (and we beheld His glory, the glory as of the only-begotten of the Father), full of grace 
and truth. "(1) This entire passage, which I have here taken from the Gospel, contains in its earlier portions 
what is immutable and eternal, the contemplation of which makes us blessed; but in those which follow, 
eternal things are mentioned in conjunction with temporal things. And hence some things there belong to 
knowledge, some to wisdom, according to our previous distinction in the twelfth book. For the words,-" In the 
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the 
beginning with God. All things were made by Him; and without Him was not anything made that was made. In 
Him was life; and the life was the light of men. And the light shineth in darkness, and the darkness 
comprehended it not: "-require a contemplative life, and must be discerned by the intellectual mind; and the 
more any one has profiled in this, the wiser without doubt will he become. But on account of the verse, "The 
light shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not," faith certainly was necessary, whereby 

that which was not seen might be believed. For by "darkness" he intended to signify the hearts of mortals 
turned away from light of this kind, and hardly able to behold it; for which reason he subjoins. "There was a 
man sent from God, whose name was John. The same came for a witness, to bear witness of the Light, that 
all men through Him might believe." But here we come to a thing that was done in time, and belongs to 
knowledge, which is comprised in the cognizance of facts. And we think of the man John under that phantasy 
which is impressed on our memory from the notion of human nature. And whether men believe or not, they 
think this in the same manner. For both alike know what man is, the outer part of whom, that is, his body, they 
have learned through the eyes of the body; but of the inner, that is, the soul, they possess the knowledge in 
themselves, because they also themselves are men, and through intercourse with men; so that they are 
able to think what is said, "There was a man, whose name was John," because they know the names also 
by interchange of speech. But that which is there also, viz. "sent from God," they who hold at all, hold by faith; 
and they who do not hold it by faith, either hesitate through doubt, or deride it through unbelief. Yet both, if 
they are not in the number of those over-foolish ones, who say in their heart "There is no God,"(1) when they, 
hear these words, think both things, viz. both what God is, and what it is to be sent from God; and if they do 
not do this as the things themselves really are, they do it at any rate as they can. 

3. Further, we know from other sources the faith itself which a man sees to be in his own heart, if he believes, 
or not to be there, if he does not believe: but not as we know bodies, which we see with the bodily eyes, and 
think of even when absent through the images of themselves which we retain in memory; nor yet as those 
things which we have not seen, and which we frame howsoever we can in thought from those which we have 
seen, and commit them to memory, that we may recur to them when we will, in order that therein we may 
similarly by recollection discern them, or rather discern the images of them, of what sort soever these are 
which we have fixed there; nor again as a living man, whose soul we do not indeed see, but conjecture from 
our own, and from corporeal motions gaze also in thought upon the living man, as we have learnt him by 
sight. Faith as not so seen in the heart in which it is, by him whose it is; but most certain knowledge holds it 
fast, and conscience proclaims it. Although therefore we are bidden to believe on this account, because we 
cannot see what we are bidden to believe; nevertheless we see faith itself in ourselves, when that faith is in 
us; because faith even in absent things is present, and faith in things which are without us is within, and faith 
in things which are not seen is itself seen, and itself none the less comes into the hearts of men in time; and if 
any cease to be faithful and become unbelievers, then it perishes from them. And sometimes faith is 
accommodated even to falsehoods; for we sometimes so speak as to say, I put faith in him, and he 
deceived me. And this kind of faith, if indeed it too is to be called faith, perishes from the heart without blame, 
when truth is found and expels it. But faith in things that are true, passes, as one should wish it to pass, into 
the things themselves. For we must not say that faith perishes, when those things which were believed are 
seen. For is it indeed still to be called faith, when faith, according to the definition in the Epistle to the 
Hebrews, is the evidence of things notseen?(2) 

4. In the words which follow next, "The same came for a witness, to hear witness of the Light, that all men 
through him might believe;" the action, as we have said, is one done in time. For to bear witness even to that 
which is eternal, as is that light that is intelligible, is a thing done in time. And of this it was that John came to 
bear witness who "was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light." For he adds "That was the 
true Light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world. He was in the world, and the world was made by 
Him, and the world knew Him not. He came unto His own, and His own received Him not." Now they who 
know the Latin language, understand all these words, from those things which they know: and of these, some 
have become known to us through the senses of the body, as man, as the world itself, of which the 
greatness is so evident to our sight; as again the sounds of the words themselves, for hearing also is a 
sense of the body; and some through the reason of the mind, as that which is said, "And His own received 
Him not;" for this means, that they did not believe in Him; and what belief is, we do not know by any sense of 
the body, but by the reason of the mind. We have learned, too, not the sounds, but the meanings of the 
words themselves, partly through the sense of the body, partly through the reason of the mind. Nor have we 
now heard those words for the first time, but they are words we had heard before. And we were retaining in 
our memory as things known, and we here recognized, not only the words themselves, but also what they 
meant. For when the bisyllabic word mundus is uttered, then something that is certainly corporeal, for it is a 
sound, has become known through the body, that is, through the ear. But that which it means also, has 
become known through the body, that is, through the eyes of the flesh. For so far as the world is known to us 
at all, it is known through sight. But the quadri-syllabic word crediderunt reaches us, so far as its sound, since 
that is a corporeal thing, through the ear of the flesh; but its meaning is discoverable by no sense of the 
body, but by the reason of the mind. For unless we knew through the mind what the word crediderunt meant, 
we should not understand what they did not do, of whom it is said, "And His own received Him not." The 
sound then of the word rings upon the ears of the body from without, and reaches the sense which is called 
hearing. The species also of man is both known to us in ourselves, and is presented to the senses of the 
body from without, in other men; to the eyes, when it is seen; to the ears, when it is heard; to the touch, when it 

is held and touched; and it has, too, its image in our memory, incorporeal indeed, but like the body. Lastly, 
the wonderful beauty of the world itself is at hand from without, both to our gaze, and to that sense which is 
called touch, if we come in contact with any of it: and this also has its image within in our memory, to which we 
revert, when we think of it either in the enclosure of a room, or again in darkness. But we have already 
sufficiently spoken in the eleventh book of these images of corporeal things; incorporeal indeed, yet having 
the likeness of bodies, and belonging to the life of the outer man. But we are treating now of the inner man, 
and of his knowledge, namely, that knowledge which is of things temporal and changeable; into the purpose 
and scope of which, when anything is assumed, even of things belonging to the outer man, it must be 
assumed for this end, that something may thence be taught which may help rational knowledge. And hence 
the rational use of those things which we have in common with irrational animals belongs to the inner man; 
neither can it rightly be said that this is common to us with the irrational animals. 

CHAP. 2. -FAITH A THING OF THE HEART, NOT OF THE BODY; HOW IT IS COMMON AND 
ONE AND THE SAME IN ALL BELIEVERS. THE FAITH OF BELIEVERS IS ONE, NO 
OTHERWISETHAN THE WILL OF THOSE WHO WILL IS ONE. 

5. But faith, of which we are compelled, by reason of the arrangement of our subject, to dispute somewhat 
more at length in this book: faith I say, which they who have are called the faithful, and they who have not, 
unbelievers, as were those who did not receive the Son of God coming to His own; although it is wrought in 
us by hearing, yet does not belong to that sense of the body which is called hearing, since it is not a sound; 
nor to the eyes of this our flesh, since it is neither color nor bodily form; nor to that which is called touch, since 
it has nothing of bulk; nor to any sense of the body at all, since it is a thing of the heart, not of the body; nor is 
it without apart from us, but deeply seated within us; nor does any man see it in another, but each one in 
himself. Lastly, it is a thing that can both be feigned by pretence, and be thought to be in him in whom it is not. 
Therefore every one sees his own faith in himself; but does not see, hut believes, that it is in another; and 
believes this the more firmly, the more he knows the fruits of it, which faith is wont to work by love.(1) And 
therefore this faith is common to all of whom the evangelist subjoins, "But as many as received Him, to them 
gave He power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on His name: which were born, not of 
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God;" common I say, not as any form of a bodily 
object is common, as regards sight, to the eyes of all to whom it is present, for in some way the gaze of all 
that behold it is informed by the same one form; but as the human countenance can be said to be common 
to all men; for this is so said that yet each certainly has his own. We say certainly with perfect truth, that the 
faith of believers is impressed from one doctrine upon the heart of each several person who believes the 
same thing. But that which is believed is a different thing from the faith by which it is believed. For the former 
is in things which are said either to be, or to have been or to be about to be; but the latter is in the mind of the 
believer, and is visible to him only whose it is; although not indeed itself but a faith like it, is also in others. 
For it is not one in number, but in kind; yet on account of the likeness, and the absence of all difference, we 
rather call it one than many. For when, too, we see two men exceedingly alike, we wonder, and say that both 
have one countenance. It is therefore more easily said that the souls were many,-a several soul, of course, 
for each several person-of whom we read in the Acts of the Apostles, that they were of one soul,(1)-than it 
is, where the apostle speaks of "one faith, "(2) for any one to venture to say that there are as many faiths as 
there are faithful. And yet He who says, "O woman, great is thy faith;"(3) and to another, "O thou of little faith, 
wherefore didst thou doubt?(4) intimates that each has his own faith. But the like faith of believers is said to 
be one, in the same way as a like will of those who will is said to be one; since in the case also of those who 
have the same will, the will of each is visible to himself, but that of the other is not visible, although he wills the 
same thing; and if it intimate itself by any signs, it is believed rather! than seen. But each being conscious of 
his own mind certainly does not believe, but manifestly sees outright, that this is his own will. 

CHAP. 3. --SOME DESIRES BEING THE SAME IN ALL, ARE KNOWN TO EACH. THE POET 
ENNIUS. 

6. There is, indeed, so closely conspiring a harmony in the same nature living and using reason, that 
although one knows not what the other wills, yet there are some wills of all which are also known to each; 
and although each man does not know what any other one man wills, yet in some things he may know what 
all will. And hence comes that story of the comic actor's witty joke, who promised that he would say in the 
theatre, in some other play, what all had in their minds, and what all willed; and when a still greater crowd 
had come together on the day appointed, with great expectation, all being in suspense and silent, is 
affirmed to have said: You will to buy cheap, and sell dear. And mean actor though he was, yet all in his 
words recognized what themselves were conscious of, and applauded him with wonderful goodwill, for 
saying before the eyes of all what was confessedly true, yet what no one looked for. And why was so great 

expectation raised by his promising that he would say what was the will of all, unless because no man 
knows the wills of other men ? But did not he know that will? Is there any one who does not know it? Yet why, 
unless because there are some things which not unfitly each conjectures from himself to be in others, 
through sympathy or agreement either in vice or virtue? But it is one thing to see one's own will; another to 
conjecture, however certainly, what is another's. For, in human affairs, I am as certain that Rome was built as 
that Constantinople was, although I have seen Rome with my eyes, but know nothing of the other city, except 
what I have believed on the testimony of others. And truly that comic actor believed it to be common to all to 
will to buy cheap and sell dear, either by observing himself or by making experiment also of others. But 
since such a will is in truth a fault, every one can attain the counter virtue, or run into the mischief of some 
other hull which is contrary to it, whereby to resist and conquer it. For I myself know a case where a 
manuscript was offered to a man for purchase, who perceived that the vendor was ignorant of its value, and 
was therefore asking something very small, and who thereupon gave him, though not expecting it, the just 
price, which was much more. Suppose even the case of a man possessed with wickedness so great as to 
sell cheap what his parents left to him, and to buy dear, in order to waste it on his own lusts? Such wanton 
extravagance, I fancy, is not incredible; and if such men are sought, they may be found, or even fail in one's 
way although not sought; who, by a wickedness more than that of the theatre, make a mock of the theatrical 
proposition or declaration, by buying dishonor at a great price, while selling lands at a small one. We have 
heard, too, of persons that, for the sake of distribution, have bought corn at a higher price, and sold it to their 
fellow-citizens at a lower one. And note also what the old poet Ennius has said: that "all mortals wish 
themselves to be praised;" wherein, doubtless, he conjectured what was in others, both by himself, and by 
those whom he knew by experience; and so seems to have declared what it is that all men will. Lastly, if that 
comic actor himself, too, had said, You all will to be praised, no one of you wills to be abused; he would 
have seemed in like manner to have expressed what all will. Yet there are some who hate their own faults, 
and do not desire to be praised by others for that for which they are displeased with themselves; and who 
thank the kindness of those who rebuke them, when the purpose of that rebuke is their own amendment. But 
if he had said, You all will to be blessed, you do not will to be wretched; he would have said something 
which there is no one that would not recognize in his own will. For whatever else a man may will secretly, he 
does not withdraw from that will, which is well known to all men, and well known to be in all men. 

CHAP. 4.--THE WILL TO POSSESS BLESSEDNESS IS ONE IN ALL, BUT THE VARIETY OF 
WILLS IS VERY GREAT CONCERNING THAT BLESSEDNESS ITSELF. 

7. It is wonderful, however, since the will to obtain and retain blessedness is one in all, whence comes, on 
the other hand, such a variety and diversity of wills concerning that blessedness itself; not that any one is 
unwilling to have it, but that all do not know it. For if all knew it, it would not be thought by some to be in 
goodness of mind; by others, in pleasure of body; by others, in both; and by some in one thing, by others in 
another. For as men find special delight in this thing or that, so have they placed in it their idea of a blessed 
life. How, then, do all love so warmly what not all know? Who can love what he does not know?-a subject 
which I have already discussed in the preceding books. (1) Why, therefore, is blessedness loved by all, 
when it is not known by all? Is it perhaps that all know what it is itself, but all do not know where it is to be 
found, and that the dispute arises from this?-as if, forsooth, the business was about some place in this 
world, where every one ought to will to live who wills to live blessedly; and as if the question where 
blessedness is were not implied in the question what it is. For certainly, if it is in the pleasure of the body, he 
is blessed who enjoys the pleasure of the body; if in goodness of mind, he has it who enjoys this; if in both, 
he who enjoys both. When, therefore, one says, to live blessedly is to enjoy the pleasure of the body; but 
another, to live blessedly is to enjoy goodness of mind; is it not, that either both know, or both do not know, 
what a blessed life is? How, then, do both love it, if no one can love what he does not know? Or is that 
perhaps false which we have assumed to be most true and most certain, viz. that all men will to live 
blessedly? For if to live blessedly is, for argument's sake, to live according to goodness of mind, how does 
he will to live blessedly who does not will this? Should we not say more truly, That man does not will to live 
blessedly, because he does not wish to live according to goodness, which alone is to live blessedly? 
Therefore all men do not will to live blessedly; on the contrary, few wish it; if to live blessedly is nothing else 
but to live according to goodness of mind, which many do not will to do. Shall we, then, hold that to be false 
of which the Academic Cicero himself did not doubt (although Academics doubt every thing), who, when he 
wanted in the dialogue Hortensius to find some certain thing, of which no one doubted, from which to start his 
argument, says, We certainly all will to be blessed? Far be it from me to say this is false. But what then? Are 
we to say that, although there is no other way of living blessedly than living according to goodness of mind, 
yet even he who does not will this, wills to live blessedly? This, indeed, seems too absurd. For it is much as 
if we should say, Even he who does not will to live blessedly, wills to live blessedly. Who could listen to, who 
could endure, such a contradiction? And yet necessity thrusts us into this strait, if it is both true that all will to 

live blessedly, and yet all do not will to live in that way in which alone one can live blessedly. 
CHAP. 5. --OF THE SAME THING. 

8. Or is, perhaps, the deliverance from our difficulties to be found in this, that, since we have said that every 
one places his idea of a blessed life in that which has most pleased him, as pleasure pleased Epicurus, 
and goodness Zeno, and something else pleased other people, we say that to live blessedly is nothing 
else but to live according to one's own pleasure: so that it is not false that all will to live blessedly, because 
all will that which pleases each? For if this, too, had been proclaimed to the people in the theatre, all would 
have found it in their own wills. But when Cicero, too, had propounded this in opposition to himself, he so 
refuted it as to make them blush who thought so. For he says: "But, behold! people who are not indeed 
philosophers, but who yet are prompt to dispute, say that all are blessed, whoever live as they will;" which is 
what we mean by, as pleases each. But by and by he has subjoined: "But this is indeed false. For to will 
what is not fitting, is itself most miserable; neither is it so miserable not to obtain what one wills, as to will to 
obtain what one ought not." Most excellently and altogether most truly does he speak. For who can be so 
blind in his mind, so alienated from all light of decency, and wrapped up in the darkness of indecency, as to 
call him blessed, because he lives as he will, who lives wickedly and disgracefully; and with no one 
restraining him, no one punishing, and no one daring even to blame him, nay more, too, with most people 
praising him, since, as divine Scripture says, "The wicked is praised in his heart's desire: and he who works 
iniquity is blessed, "(1) gratifies all his most criminal and flagitious desires; when, doubtless, although even 
so he would be wretched, yet he would be less wretched, if he could have had nothing of those things which 
he had wrongly willed? For every one is made wretched by a wicked will also, even though it stop short with 
will but more wretched by the power by which the longing of a wicked will is fulfilled. And, therefore, since it is 
true that all men will to be blessed, and that they seek for this one thing with the most ardent love, and on 
account of this seek everything which they do seek; nor can any one love that of which he does not know at 
all what or of what sort it is, nor can be ignorant what that is which he knows that he wills; it follows that all 
know a blessed life. But all that are blessed have what they will, although not all who have what they will are 
forewith blessed. But they are forewith wretched, who either have not what they will, or have that which they 
do not rightly will. Therefore he only is a blessed man, who both has all things which he wills, and wills 
nothing ill. 

CHAP. 6. -WHY, WHEN ALL WILL TO BE BLESSED, THAT IS RATHER CHOSEN BY WHICH 
ONE WITHDRAWS FROM BEING SO. 

9. Since, then, a blessed life consists of these two things, and is known to all, and dear to all; what can we 
think to be the cause why, when they cannot have both, men choose, out of these two, to have all things that 
they will, rather than to will all things well, even although they do not have them? Is it the depravity itself of the 
human race, in such wise that, while they are not unaware that neither is he blessed who has not what he 
wills, nor he who has what he wills wrongly, but he who both has whatsoever good things he wills, and wills 
no evil ones, yet, when both are not granted of those two things in which the blessed life consists, that is 
rather chosen by which one is withdrawn the more from a blessed life (since he certainly is further from it who 
obtains things which he wickedly desired, than he who only does not obtain the things which he desired); 
whereas the good will ought rather to be chosen, and to be preferred, even if it do not obtain the things which 
it seeks? For he comes near to being a blessed man, who wills well whatsoever he wills, and wills things, 
which when he obtains, he will be blessed. And certainly not bad things, but good, make men blessed, when 
they do so make them. And of good things he already has something, and that, too, a something not to be 
lightly esteemed,-namely, the very good will itself; who longs to rejoice in those good things of which human 
nature is capable, and not in the performance or the attainment of any evil; and who follows diligently, and 
attains as much as he can, with a prudent, temperate, courageous, and right mind, such good things as are 
possible in the present miserable life; so as to be good even in evils, and when all evils have been put an 
end to, and all good things fulfilled, then to be blessed. 

CHAP. 7. --FAITH IS NECESSARY, THAT MAN MAY AT SOME TIME BE BLESSED, WHICH 
HE WILL ONLY ATTAIN IN THE FUTURE LIFE. THE BLESSEDNESS OF PROUD 
PHILOSOPHERS RIDICULOUS AND PITIABLE. 

10. And on this account, faith, by which men believe in God, is above all things necessary in this mortal life, 
most full as it is of errors and hardships. For there are no good things whatever, and above all, not those by 
which any one is made good, or those by which he will become blessed, of which any other source can be 
found whence they come to man, and are added to man, unless it be from God. But when he who is good 

and faithful in these miseries shall have come from this life to the blessed life, then will truly come to pass 
what now is absolutely impossible, -namely, that a man may live as he will. (2) For he will not will to live badly 
in the midst of that felicity, nor will he will anything that will be wanting, nor will there be wanting anything which 
he shall have willed. Whatever shall be loved, will be present; nor will that be longed for, which shall not be 
present. Everything which will be there will be good, and the supreme God will be the supreme good and 
will be present for those to enjoy who love Him; and what altogether is most blessed, it will be certain that it 
will be so forever. But now, indeed, philosophers have made for themselves, according to the pleasure of 
each, their own ideals of a blessed life; that they might be able, as it were by their own power, to do that, 
which by the common conditions of mortals they were not able to do,-namely, to live as they would. For they 
felt that no one could be blessed otherwise than by having what he would, and by suffering nothing which he 
would not. And who would not will, that the life whatsoever it be, with which he is delighted, and which he 
therefore calls blessed, were so in his own power, that he could have it continually? And yet who is in this 
condition? Who wills to suffer troubles in order that he may endure them manfully, although he both wills and 
is able to endure them if he does suffer them? Who would will to live in torments, even although he is able to 
live laudably by holding fast to righteousness in the midst of them through patience? They who have 
endured these evils, either in wishing to have or in fearing to lose what they loved, whether wickedly or 
laudably, have thought of them as transitory. For many have stretched boldly through transitory evils to 
good things which will last. And these, doubtless, are blessed through hope, even while actually suffering 
such transitory evils, through which they arrive at good things which will not be transitory. But he who is 
blessed through hope is not yet blessed: for he expects, through patience, a blessedness which he does 
not yet grasp. Whereas he, on the other hand, who is tormented without any such hope, without any such 
reward, let him use as much endurance as he pleases, is not truly blessed, but bravely miserable. For he is 
not on that account not miserable, because he would be more so if he also bore misery impatiently. Further, 
even if he does not suffer those things which he would not will to suffer in his own body, not even then is he to 
be esteemed blessed, inasmuch as he does not live as he wills. For to omit other things, which, while the 
body remains unhurt, belong to those annoyances of the mind, without which we should will to live, and which 
are innumerable; he would will, at any rate, if he were able, so to have his body safe and sound, and so to 
suffer no inconveniences from it, as to have it within his own control, or even to have it with an 
imperishableness of the body itself; and because he does not possess this, and hangs in doubt about it, he 
certainly does not live as he wills. For although he may be ready from fortitude to accept, and bear with an 
equal mind, whatever adversities may happen to him, yet he had rather they should not happen, and 
prevents them if he is able; and he is in such way ready for both alternatives, that, as much as is in him, he 
wishes for the one and shuns the other; and if he have fallen into that which he shuns, he therefore bears it 
willingly, because that could not happen which he willed. He bears it, therefore, in order that he may not be 
crushed; but he would not willingly be even burdened. How, then, does he live as he wills? Is it because he 
is willingly strong to bear what he would not will to be put upon him? Then he only wills what he can, because 
he cannot have what he wills. And here is the sum-total of the blessedness of proud mortals, I know not 
whether to be laughed at, or not rather to be pitied, who boast that they live as they will, because they 
willingly bear • patiently what they are unwilling should happen to them. For this, they say, is like Terence's 
wise saying, - 

"Since that cannot be which you will, will that which thou canst."(1) 

That this is aptly said, who denies? But it is advice given to the miserable man, that he may not be more 
miserable. And it is not rightly or truly said to the blessed man, such as all wish themselves to be, That 
cannot be which you will. For if he is blessed, whatever he wills can be; since he does not will that which 
cannot be. But such a life is not for this mortal state, neither will it come to pass unless when immortality also 
shall come to pass. And if this could not be given at all to man, blessedness too would be sought in vain, 
since it cannot be without immortality. 

CHAP. 8. --BLESSEDNESS CANNOT EXIST WITHOUT IMMORTALITY. 

1 1 . As, therefore, all men will to be blessed, certainly, if they will truly, they will also to be immortal; for 
otherwise they could not be blessed. And further, if questioned also concerning immortality, as before 
concerning blessedness, all reply that they will it. But blessedness of what quality soever, such as is not so, 
but rather is so called, is sought, nay indeed is feigned in this life, whilst immortality is despaired of, without 
which true blessedness cannot be. Since he lives blessedly, as we have already said before, and have 
sufficiently proved and concluded, who lives as he wills, and wills nothing wrongly. But no one wrongly wills 
immortality, if human nature is by God's gift capable of it; and if it is not capable of it, it is not capable of 
blessedness. For, that a man may live blessedly, he must needs live. And if life quits him by his dying, how 
can a blessed life remain with him? And when it quits him, without doubt it either quits him unwilling, or willing, 
or neither. If unwilling, how is the life blessed which is so within his will as not to be within his power? And 

whereas no one is blessed who wills something that he does not have, how much less is he blessed who is 
quitted against his will, not by honor, nor by possessions, nor by any other thing, but by the blessed life itself, 
since he will have no life at all? And hence, although no feeling is left for his life to be thereby miserable (for 
the blessed life quits him, because life altogether quits him), yet he is wretched as long as he feels, 
because he knows that against his will that is being destroyed for the sake of which he loves all else, and 
which he loves beyond all else. A life therefore cannot both be blessed, and yet quit a man against his will, 
since no one becomes blessed against his will; and hence how much more does it make a man miserable 
by quitting him against his will, when it would make him miserable if he had it against his will! But if it quit him 
with his will, even so how was that a blessed life, which he who had it willed should perish? It remains then for 
them to say, that neither of these is in the mind of the blessed man; that is, that he is neither unwilling nor 
willing to be quitted by a blessed life, when through, death life quits him altogether; for that he stands firm with 
an even heart, prepared alike for either alternative. But neither is that a blessed life which is such as to be 
unworthy of his love whom it makes blessed. For how is that a blessed life which the blessed man does not 
love? Or how is that loved, of which it is received indifferently, whether it is to flourish or to perish? Unless 
perhaps the virtues, which we love in this way on account of blessedness alone, venture to persuade us that 
we do not love blessedness itself. Yet if they did this, we should certainly leave off loving the virtues 
themselves, when we do not love that on account of which alone we loved them. And further, how will that 
opinion be true, which has been so tried, and sifted, and thoroughly strained, and is so certain, viz. that all 
men will to be blessed, if they themselves who are already blessed neither will nor do not will to be 
blessed? Or if they will it, as truth proclaims, as nature constrains, in which indeed the supremely good and 
unchangeably blessed Creator has implanted that will: if, I say, they will to be blessed who are blessed, 
certainly they do no will to be not blessed. But if they do not will not to be blessed, without doubt they do not 
will to be annihilated and perish in regard to their blessedness. But they cannot be blessed except they are 
alive; therefore they do not will so to perish in regard to their life. Therefore, whoever are either truly blessed 
or desire to be so, will to be immortal. But he does not live blessedly who has not that which he wills. 
Therefore it follows that in no way can life be truly blessed unless it be eternal. 

CHAP. 9. -WE SAY THAT FUTURE BLESSEDNESS IS TRULY ETERNAL, NOT THROUGH 
HUMAN REASONINGS, BUT BY THE HELP OF FAITH. THE IMMORTALITY OF 
BLESSEDNESS BECOMES CREDIBLE FROM THE Incarnation OF THE SON OF GOD. 

12. Whether human nature can receive this, which yet it confesses to be desirable, is no small question. But 
if faith be present, which is in those to whom Jesus has given power to become the sons of God, then there 
is no question. Assuredly, of those who endeavor to discover it from human reasonings, scarcely a few, and 
they endued with great abilities, and abounding in leisure, and learned with the most subtle learning, have 
been able to attain to the investigation of the immortality of the soul alone. And even for the soul they have 
not found a blessed life that is stable, that is, true; since they have said that it returns to the miseries of this 
life even after blessedness. And they among them who are ashamed of this opinion, and have thought that 
the purified soul is to be placed in eternal happiness without a body, hold such opinions concerning the past 
eternity of tim world, as to confute this opinion of theirs concerning the soul; a thing which here it is too long to 
demonstrate; but it has been, as I think, sufficiently explained by us in the twelfth book of the City of God. (1) 
But that faith promises, not by human reasoning, but by divine authority, that the whole man, who certainly 
consists of soul and body, shall be immortal, and on this account truly blessed. And so, when it had been 
said in the Gospel, that Jesus has given "power to become the sons of God to them who received Him;" 
and what it is to have received Him had been shortly explained by saying, "To them that believe on His 
name;" and it was further added in what way they are to become sons of God, viz., "Which were born not of 
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, butof God;"-lest that infirmity of men which we all see 
and bear should despair of attaining so great excellence, it is added in the same place, "And the Word was 
made flesh, and dwelt among us;"(1) that, on the contrary, men might be convinced of that which seemed 
incredible. For if He who is by nature the Son of God was made the Son of man through mercy for the sake 
of the sons of men,-forthis is what is meant by "The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us" men,-how 
much more credible is it that the sons of men by nature should be made the sons of God by the grace of 
God, and should dwell in God, in whom alone and from whom alone the blessed can be made partakers of 
that immortality; of which that we might be convinced, the Son of God was made partaker of our mortality? 

CHAP. 10. -THERE WAS NO OTHER MORE SUITABLE WAY OF FREEING MAN FROM THE 
MISERY OF MORTALITY THAN THE, INCARNATION OF THE WORD. THE MERITS WHICH 
ARE CALLED OURS ARE THE GIFTS OF GOD. 

13. Those then who say, What, had God no other way by which He might free men from the misery of this 

mortality, that He should will the only-begotten Son, God co-eternal with Himself, to become man, by putting 
on a human soul and flesh, and being made mortal to endure death?-these, I say, it is not enough so to 
refute, as to assert that that mode by which God deigns to free us through the Mediator of God and men, the 
man Christ Jesus, is good and suitable to the dignity of God; but we must show also, not indeed that no other 
mode was possible to God, to whose power all things are equally subject, but that there neither was nor 
need have been any other mode more appropriate for curing our misery. For what was so necessary for the 
building up of our hope, and for the freeing the minds of mortals cast down by the condition of mortality itself, 
from despair of immortality, than that it should be demonstrated to us at how great a price God, rated us, and 
how greatly He loved us? But what is more manifest and evident in this so great proof hereof, than that the 
Son of God, unchangeably good, remaining what He was in Himself, and receiving from us and for us what 
He was not, apart from any loss of His own nature, and deigning to enter into the fellowship of ours, should 
first, without any evil desert of His own, bear our evils; and so with unobligated munificence should bestow 
His own gifts upon us, who now believe how much God loves us, and who now hope that of which we used to 
despair, without any good deserts of our own, nay, with our evil deserts too going before? 

14. Since those also which are called our deserts, are His gifts. For, that faith may work by love, (2) "the love 
of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us. "(3) And He was then given, 
when Jesus was glorified by the resurrection. For then He promised that He Himself would send Him, and 
He sent Him;(4) because then, as it was written and foretold of Him, "He ascended up on high, He led 
captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. "(5) These gifts constitute our deserts, by which we arrive at the 
chief good of an immortal blessedness. "But God," says the apostle, "commendeth His love towards as, in 
that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. Much more, then, being now justified by His blood, we shall 
be saved from wrath through Him." To this he goes on to add, "For if, when we were enemies, we were 
reconciled to God by the death of His Son; much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by His life." 
Those whom he first calls sinners he afterwards calls the enemies of God; and those whom he first speaks 
of as justified by His blood, he afterwards speaks of as reconciled by the death of the Son of God; and 
those whom he speaks of first as saved from wrath through Him, he afterwards speaks of as saved by His 
life. We were not, therefore, before that grace merely anyhow sinners, but in such sins that we were enemies 
of God. But the same apostle calls us above several times by two appellations, viz. sinners and enemies of 
God,-one as if the most mild, the other plainly the most harsh, -saying, "For if when we were yet weak, in due 
time Christ died for the ungodly. "(6) Those whom he called weak, the same he called ungodly. Weakness 
seems something slight; but sometimes it is such as to be called impiety. Yet except it were weakness, it 
would not need a physician, who is in the Hebrew Jesus, in the Greek <greek>Swthr</greek>, but in our 
speech Saviour. And this word the Latin language had not previously, but could have seeing that it could 
have it when it wanted it. And this foregoing sentence of the apostle, where he says, "For when we were yet 
weak, in due time He died for the ungodly," coheres with those two following sentences; in the one of which 
he spoke of sinners, in the other of enemies of God, as though he referred each severally to each, viz. 
sinners to the weak, the enemies of God to the ungodly. 

CHAP. 11. -A DIFFICULTY, HOW WE ARE JUSTITIFIED IN THE BLOOD OF THE SON OF 
GOD. 

15. But what is meant by "justified in His blood?" What power is there in this blood, I beseech you, that they 
who believe should be justified in it? And what is meant by "being reconciled by the death of His Son?" Was 
it indeed so, that when God the Father was wroth with us, He saw the death of His Son for us, and was 
appeased towards us? Was then His Son already so far appeased towards us, that He even deigned to 
die for us; while the Father was still so far wroth, that except His Son died for us, He would not be appeased? 
And what, then, is that which the same teacher of the Gentiles himself says in another place: "What shall we 
then say to these things? If God be for us, who can be against us? He that spared not His own Son, but 
delivered Him up for us all; how has He not with Him also freely given us all things?"(1) Pray, unless the 
Father had been already appeased, would He have delivered up His own Son, not sparing Him for us? 
Does not this opinion seem to be as it were contrary to that? In the one, the Son dies for us, and the Father is 
reconciled to us by His death; in the other, as though the Father first loved us, He Himself on our account 
does not spare the Son, He Himself for us delivers Him up to death. But I see that the Father loved us also 
before, not only before the Son died for us, but before He created the world; the apostle himself being 
witness, who says, "According as He hath chosen us in Him before the foundation of the world. "(2) Nor was 
the Son delivered up for us as it were unwillingly, the Father Himself not sparing Him; for it is said also 
concerning Him, "Who loved me, and delivered up Himself for me. "3 Therefore together both the Father 
and the Son, and the Spirit of both, work all things equally and harmoniously; yet we are justified in the blood 
of Christ, and we are reconciled to God by the death of His Son. And I will explain, as I shall be able, here 
also, how this was done, as much as may seem sufficient. 

CHAP. 12. -ALL, ON ACCOUNT OF THE SIN OF ADAM, WERE DELIVERED INTO THE 
POWER OF THE DEVIL. 

16. By the justice of God in some sense, the human race was delivered into the power of the devil; the sin of 
the first man passing over originally into all of both sexes in their birth through conjugal union, and the debt of 
our first parents binding their whole posterity. This delivering up is first signified in Genesis, where, when it 
had been said to the serpent, "Dust shalt thou eat," it was said to the man, "Dust thou art, and unto dust thou 
shall return. "(4) In the words, "Unto dust shalt thou return," the death of the body is fore-announced, because 
he would not have experienced that either, if he had continued to the end upright as he was made; but in that 
it is said to him whilst still living, "Dust thou art," it is shown that the whole man was changed for the worse. For 
"Dust thou art" is much the same as, "My spirit shall not always remain in these men, for that they also are 
flesh. "(5) Therefore it was at that time shown, that he was delivered to him, in that it had been said to him, 
"Dust shall thou eat." But the apostle declares this more clearly, where he says: "And you who were dead in 
trespasses and sins, wherein in time past ye walked according to the course of this world, according to the 
prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now worketh in the children of unfaithfulness; among whom we 
also had. our conversation in times past, in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the 
mind; and were by nature the children of wrath, even as others. "(6) The "children of unfaithfulness" are the 
unbelievers; and who is not this before he becomes a believer? And therefore all men are originally under 
the prince of the power of the air, "who worketh in the children of unfaithfulness." And that which I have 
expressed by "originally" is the same that the apostle expresses when he speaks of themselves who "by 
nature" were as others; viz. by nature as it has been depraved by sin, not as it was created upright from the 
beginning. But the way in which man was thus delivered into the power of the devil, ought not to be so 
understood as if God did this, or commanded it to be done; but that He only permitted it, yet that justly. For 
when He abandoned the sinner, the author of the sin immediately entered. Yet God did not certainly so 
abandon His own creature as not to show Himself to him as God creating and quickening, and among 
penal evils bestowing also many good things upon the evil. For He hath not in anger shut up His tender 
mercies. (1) Nor did He dismiss man from the law of His own power, when He permitted him to be in the 
power of the devil; since even the devil himself is not separated from the power of the Omnipotent, as 
neither from His goodness. For whence do even the evil angels subsist in whatever manner of life they 
have, except through Him who quickens all things? If, therefore, the commission of sins through the just 
anger of God subjected man to the devil, doubtless the remission of sins through the merciful reconciliation 
of God rescues man from the devil. 

CHAP. 13. --MAN WAS TO BE RESCUED FROM THE POWER OF THE DEVIL, NOT BY 
POWER, BUT BY RIGHTEOUSNESS. 

17. But the devil was to be overcome, not by the power of God, but by His righteousness. For what is more 
powerful than the Omnipotent? Or what creature is there of which the power can be compared to the power of 
the Creator? But since the devil, by the fault of his own perversity, was made a lover of power, and a 
forsaker and assailant of righteousness, -for thus also men imitate him so much the more in proportion as 
they set their hearts on power, to the neglect or even hatred of righteousness, and as they either rejoice in 
the attainment of power, or are inflamed by the lust of it,— it pleased God, that in order to the rescuing of man 
from the grasp of the devil, the devil should be conquered, not by power, but by righteousness; and that so 
also men, imitating Christ, should seek to conquer the devil by righteousness, not by: power. Not that power 
is to be shunned as as though it were something evil; but the order must be preserved, whereby 
righteousness is before it. For how great can be the power of mortals? Therefore let mortals cleave to 
righteousness; power will be given to immortals. And compared to this, the power, how great soever, of 
those men who are called powerful on earth, is found to be ridiculous weakness, and a pitfall is dug there for 
the sinner, where the wicked seem to be most powerful. And the righteous man says in his song, "Blessed is 
the man whom Thou chasteneth, O Lord, and teachest him out of Thy law: that Thou mayest give him rest 
from the days of adversity, until the pit be digged for the wicked. For the Lord will not cast off His people, 
neither will He forsake His inheritance, until righteousness return unto judgment, and all who follow it are 
upright in heart."(2) At this present time, then, in which the might of the people of God is delayed, "the Lord 
will not cast off His. people, neither will He forsake His inheritance," how bitter and unworthy things so-ever it 
may suffer in its humility and weakness; " until the righteousness," which the weakness of the pious now 
possesses, "shall return to judgment," that is, shall receive the power of judging; which is preserved in the 
end for the righteous when power in its due order shall have followed after righteousness going before. For 
power joined to righteousness, or righteousness added to power, constitutes a judicial authority. But 
righteousness belongs to a good will; whence it was said by the angels when Christ was born: "Glory to God 

in the highest, and on earth peace to men of good will, "(3) But power ought to follow righteousness, not to go 
before it; and accordingly it is placed in "second," that is, prosperous fortune; and this is called "second, "(4) 
from "following." For whereas two things make a man blessed, as we have argued above, to will well, and to 
be able to do what one wills, people ought not to be so perverse, as has been noted in the same 
discussion, as that a man should choose from the two things which make him blessed, the being able to do 
what he wills, and should neglect to will what he ought; whereas he ought first to have a good will, but great 
power afterwards. Further, a good will must be purged from vices, by which if a man is overcome, he is in 
such wise overcome as that he wills evil; and then how will his will be still good? It is to be wished, then, that 
power may now be given, but power against vices, to conquer which men do not wish to be powerful, while 
they wish to be so in order to conquer men; and why is this, unless that, being in truth conquered, they 
feignedly conquer, and are conquerors not in truth, but in opinion? Let a man will to be prudent, will to be 
strong, will to he temperate, will to be just; and that he may be able to have these things truly, let him certainly 
desire power, and seek to be powerful in himself, and (strange though it be) against himself for himself. But 
all the other things which he wills rightly, and yet is not able to have, as, for instance, immortality and true and 
full felicity, let him not cease to long for, and let him patiently expect. 

CHAP. 14.--THE UNOBLIGATED DEATH OF CHRIST HAS FREED THOSE WHO WERE 
LIABLE TO DEATH, 

18. What, then, is the righteousness by which the devil was conquered? What, except the righteousness of 
Jesus Christ? And how was he conquered? Because, when he found in Him nothing worthy of death, yet he 
slew Him. And certainly it is just, that we whom he held as debtors, should be dismissed free by believing in 
Him whom he slew without any debt. In this way it is that we are said to be justified in the blood of Christ.(1) 
For so that innocent blood was shed for the remission of our sins. Whence He calls Himself in the Psalms, 
"Free among the dead. "(2) For he only that is dead is free from the debt of death. Hence also in another 
psalm He says, "Then I restored that which I seized not;"(3) meaning sin by the thing seized, because sin is 
laid hold of against what is lawful. Whence also He says, by the mouth of His own Flesh, as is read in the 
Gospel: "For the prince of this world cometh, and hath nothing in me," that is, no sin; but "that the world may 
know," He says, "that I do the commandment of the Father; arise, let us go hence. "(4) And hence He 
proceeds to His passion, that He might pay for us debtors that which He Himself did not owe. Would then 
the devil be conquered by this most just right, if Christ had willed to deal with him by power, not by 
righteousness? But He held back what was possible to Him, in order that He might first do what was fitting. 
And hence it was necessary that He should be both man and God. For unless He had been man, He could 
not have been slain; unless He had been God. men would not have believed that He would not do what He 
could, but that He could not do what He would; nor should we have thought that righteousness was preferred 
by Him to power, but that He lacked power. But now He suffered for us things belonging to man, because 
He was man; but if He had been unwilling, it would have been in His power to not so to suffer, because He 
was also God. And righteousness was therefore made more acceptable in humility, because so great 
power as was in His Divinity, if He had been unwilling, would have been able not to suffer humility; and thus 
by Him who died, being thus powerful, both righteousness was commended, and power promised, to us, 
weak mortals. For He did one of these two things by dying, the other by rising again. For what is more 
righteous, than to come even to the death of the cross for righteousness? And what more powerful, than to 
rise from the dead, and to ascend into heaven with that very flesh in which He was slain? And therefore He 
conquered the devil first by righteousness, and afterwards by power: namely, by righteousness, because 
He had no sin, and was slain by him most unjustly; but by power, because having been dead He lived 
again, never afterwards to die. (5) But He would have conquered the devil by power, even though He could 
not have been slain by him: although it belongs to a greater power to conquer death itself also by rising 
again, than to avoid it by living. But the reason is really a different one, why we are justified in the blood of 
Christ, when we are rescued from the power of the devil through the remission of sins: it pertains to this, that 
the devil is conquered by Christ by righteousness, not by power. For Christ was crucified, not through 
immortal power, but through the weakness which He took upon Him in mortal flesh; of which weakness 
nevertheless the apostle says, "that the weakness of God is stronger than men. "(6) 

CHAP. 15 -OF THE SAME SUBJECT. 

19. It is not then difficult to see that the devil was conquered, when he who was slain by Him rose again. It is 
something more, and more profound of comprehension, to see that the devil was conquered when he 
thought himself to have conquered, that is, when Christ was slain. For then that blood, since it was His who 
had no sin at all, was poured out for the remission of our sins; that, because the devil deservedly held those 
whom, as guilty of sin, he bound by the condition of death, he might deservedly loose them through Him, 

whom, as guilty of no sin, the punishment of death undeservedly affected. The strong man was conquered 
by this righteousness, and bound with this chain, that his vessels might be spoiled, (7) which with himself and 
his angels had been vessels of wrath while with him, and might be turned into vessels of mercy. (8) For the 
Apostle Paul tells us, that these words of our Lord Jesus Christ Himself were spoken from heaven to him 
when he was first called. For among the other things which he heard, he speaks also of this as said to him 
thus: "For I have appeared unto thee for this purpose, to make thee a minister and a witness both of these 
things which thou hast seen from me, and of those things in the which I will appear unto thee; delivering thee 
from the people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom now I send thee,to open the eyes of the blind, and to turn 
them from darkness [to light], and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of 
sins, and inheritance among them which are sanctified, and faith that is in me."(1) And hence the same 
apostle also, exhorting believers to the giving of thanks to God the Father, says: "Who hath delivered us 
from the power of darkness and hath translated us into the kingdom of His dear Son: in whom we have 
redemption, even the forgiveness of sins. "(2) In this redemption, the blood of Christ was given, as it were, as 
a price for us, by accepting which the devil was not enriched, but bound:(3) that we might be loosened from 
his bonds, and that he might not with himself involve in the meshes of sins, and so deliver to the destruction 
of the second and eternal death, (4) any one of those whom Christ, free from all debt, had redeemed by 
pouring out His own blood unindebtedly; but that they who belong to the grace of Christ, foreknown, and 
predestinated, and elected before the foundation of the world? should only so far die as Christ Himself died 
for them, i.e. only by the death of the flesh, not of the spirit. 

CHAP. 16. -THE REMAINS OF DEATH AND THE EVIL THINGS OF THE WORLD TURN TO 
GOOD FOR THE ELECT. HOW FITLY THE DEATH OF CHRIST WAS CHOSEN, THAT WE 
MIGHT BE JUSTIFIED IN Hl$ BLOOD. WHAT THE ANGER OF GOD IS. 

20. For although the death, too, of the flesh itself came originally from the sin of the first man, yet the good 
use of it has made most glorious martyrs. And so not only that death itself, bat all the evils of this world, and 
the griefs and labors of men, although they come from the deserts of sins, and especially of original sin, 
whence life itself too became bound by the bond of death, yet have fitly remained, even when sin is 
forgiven; that man might have wherewith to contend for truth, and whereby the goodness of the faithful might 
be exercised; in order that the new man through the new covenant might be made ready among the evils of 
this world for a new world, by bearing wisely the misery which this condemned life deserved, and by 
rejoicing soberly because it will be finished, but expecting faithfully and patiently the blessedness which the 
future life, being set free, will have for ever. For the devil being cast forth from his dominion, and from the 
hearts of the faithful, in the condemnation and faithlessness of whom he, although himself also condemned, 
yet reigned, is only so far permitted to be an adversary according to the condition of this mortality, as God 
knows to be expedient for them: concerning which the sacred writings speak through the mouth of the 
apostle: "God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will with the 
temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it."(6) And those evils which the faithful 
endure piously, are of profit either for the correction of sins, or for the exercising and proving of 
righteousness, or to manifest the misery of this life, that the life where will be that true and perpetual 
blessedness may be desired more ardently, and sought out more earnestly. But it is on their account that 
these evils are still kept in being, of whom the apostle says: "For we know that all things work together for 
good to them that love God, to them who are called to be holy according to His purpose. For whom He did 
foreknow, He also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of His Son, that He might be the first-born 
among many brethren. Moreover, whom He did predestinate, them He also called; and whom He called, 
them He also justified; and whom He justified, them He also glorified." It is of these who are predestinated, 
that not one shall perish with the devil; not one shall remain even to death under the power of the devil. And 
then follows what I have already cited above:(7) "What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, 
who can be against us? He that spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all; how has He not with 
Him also freely given us all things ?"(8) 

21 . Why then should the death of Christ not have come to pass? Nay, rather, why should not that death itself 
have been chosen above all else to be brought to pass, to the passing by of the other innumerable ways 
which He who is omnipotent could have employed to free us; that death, I say, wherein neither was anything 
diminished or changed from His divinity, and so great benefit was conferred upon men, from the humanity 
which He took upon Him, that a temporal death, which was not due, was rendered by the eternal Son of God, 
who was also the Son of man, whereby He might free them from an eternal death which was due? The devil 
was holding fast our sins, and through them was fixing us deservedly in death. He discharged them, who 
had none of His own, and who was led by him to death undeservedly. That blood was of such price, that he 
who even slew Christ for a time by a death which was not due, can as his due detain no one, who has put on 
Christ, in the eternal death which was due. Therefore "God commendeth His love towards us, in that, while 

we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. Much more then, being now justified in His blood, we shall be saved 
from wrath through Him." Justified, he says, in His blood, -justified plainly, in that we are freed from all sin; 
and freed from all sin, because the Son of God, who knew no sin, was slain for us. Therefore "we shall be 
saved from wrath through Him;" from the wrath certainly of God, which is nothing else but just retribution. For 
the wrath of God is not, as is that of man, a perturbation of the mind; but it is the wrath of Him to whom Holy 
Scripture says in another place, "But Thou, O Lord, mastering Thy power, judgest with calmness. "(1) If, 
therefore, the just retribution of God has received such a name, what can be the right understanding also of 
the reconciliation of God, unless that then such wrath, comes to an end? Neither were we enemies to God, 
except as sins are enemies to righteousness; which being forgiven, suchenmities come to an end, and they 
whom He Himself justifies are reconciled to the Just One. And yet certainly He loved them even while still 
enemies, since "He spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all," when we were still enemies. 
And therefore the apostle has rightly added.: "For if, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by 
the death of His Son," by which that remission of sins was made, "much more, being reconciled, we shall be 
saved in His life." Saved in life, who were reconciled by death. For who can doubt that He will give His life 
for His friends, for whom, when enemies, He gave His death? "And not only so," he says, "but we also joy in 
God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement." "Not only," he says, 
"shall we be saved," but "we also joy;" and not in ourselves, but "in God;" nor through ourselves, "but 
through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement," as we have argued above. 
Then the apostle adds, "Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so 
death passed upon all men, in whom all have sinned;"(2) etc.: in which he disputes at some length 
concerning the two men; the one the first Adam, through whose sin and death we, his descendants, are 
bound by, as it were, hereditary evils; and the other the second Adam, who is not only man, but also God, by 
whose payment for us of what He owed not, we are freed from the debts both of our first father and of 
ourselves. Further, since on account of that one the devil held all who were begotten through his corrupted 
carnal concupiscence, it is just that on account of this one he should loose all who are regenerated through 
His immaculate spiritual grace. 

CHAP. 17. -OTHER ADVANTAGES OF THE INCARNATION. 

22. There are many other things also in the incarnation of Christ, displeasing as it is to the proud, that are to 
be observed and thought of advantageously. And one of them is, that it has been demonstrated to man 
what place he has in the things which God has created; since human nature could so be joined to God, that 
one person could be made of two substances, and thereby indeed of three-God, soul, and flesh: so that 
those proud malignant spirits, who interpose themselves as mediators to deceive, although as if to help, do 
not therefore dare to place themselves above man because they have not flesh; and chiefly because the 
Son of God deigned to die also in the same flesh, lest they, because they seem to be immortal, should 
therefore succeed in getting themselves worshipped as gods. Further, that the grace of God might be 
commended to us in the man Christ without any precedent merits; because not even He Himself obtained 
by any precedent merits that He should be joined in such great unity with the true God, and should become 
the Son of God, one Person with Him; but from the time when He began to be man, from that time He is also 
God; whence it is said, "The Word was made flesh. "(3) Then, again, there is this, that the pride of man, which 
is the chief hindrance against his cleaving to God, can be confuted and healed through such great humility 
of God. Man learns also how far he has gone away from God; and what it is worth to him as a pain to cure 
him, when he returns through such a Mediator, who both as God assists men by His divinity, and as man 
agrees with men by His weakness. For what greater example of obedience could be given to us, who had 
perished through disobedience, than God the Son obedient to God the Father, even to the death of the 
cross?(1) Nay, wherein could the reward of obedience itself be better shown, than in the flesh of so great a 
Mediator, which rose again to eternal life? It belonged also to the justice and goodness of the Creator, that 
the devil should be conquered by the same rational creature which he rejoiced to have conquered, and by 
one that came from that same race which, by the corruption of its origin through one, he held altogether. 

CHAP. 18. -WHY THE SON OF GOD TOOK MAN UPON HIMSELF FROM THE RACE OF 
ADAM, AND FROM A VIRGIN. 

23. For assuredly God could have taken upon Himself to be man, that in that manhood He might be the 
Mediator between God and men, from some other source, and not from the race of that Adam who bound 
the human race by his sin; as He did not create him whom He first created, of the race of some one else. 
Therefore He was able, either so, or in any other mode that He would, to create yet one other, by whom the 
conqueror of the first might be conquered. But God judged it better both to take upon Him man through 
whom to conquer the enemy of the human race, from the race itself that had been conquered; and yet to do 

this of a virgin, whose conception, not flesh but spirit, not lust but faith, preceded. (2) Nor did that 
concupiscence of the flesh intervene, by which the rest of men, who derive original sin, are propagated and 
conceived; but holy virginity became pregnant, not by conjugal intercourse, but by faith,— lust being utterly 
absent,-so that that which was born from the root of the first man might derive only the origin of race, not also 
of guilt. For there was born, not a nature corrupted by the contagion of transgression, but the one only 
remedy of all such corruptions. There was born, I say, a Man having nothing at all, and to have nothing at all, 
of sin; through whom they were to be born again so as to be freed from sin, who could not be born without 
sin. For although conjugal chastity makes a right use of the carnal concupiscence which is in our members; 
yet it is liable to motions not voluntary, by which it shows either that it could not have existed at all in paradise 
before sin, or if it did, that it was not then such as that sometimes it should resist the will. But now we feel it to 
be such, that in opposition to the law of the mind, and even if there is no question of begetting, it works in us 
the incitement of sexual intercourse; and if in this men yield to it, then it is satisfied by an act of sin; if they do 
not, then it is bridled by an act of refusal: which two things who could doubt to have been alien from paradise 
before sin? For neither did the chastity that then was do anything indecorous, nor did the pleasure that then 
was suffer anything unquiet. It was necessary, therefore, that this carnal concupiscence should be entirely 
absent, when the offspring of the Virgin was conceived; in whom the author of death was to find nothing 
worthy of death, and yet was to slay Him in order that he might be conquered by the death of the Author of 
life: the conqueror of the first Adam, who held fast the human race, conquered by the second Adam, and 
losing the Christian race, freed out of the human race from human guilt, through Him who was not in the guilt, 
although He was of the race; that that deceiver might be conquered by that race which he had conquered by 
guilt. And this was so done, in order that man may not be lifted up, but "that he that glorieth should glory in the 
Lord. "(3) For he who was conquered was only man; and he was therefore conquered, because he lusted 
proudly to be a god. But He who conquered was both man and God; and therefore He so conquered, being 
born of a virgin, because God in humility did not, as He governs other saints, so govern that Man, but bare 
Him [as a Son]. These so great gifts of God, and whatever else there are, which it is too long for us now 
upon this subject both to inquire and to discuss, could not exist unless the Word had been made flesh. 

CHAP. 19. -WHAT IN THE INCARNATE WORD BELONGS TO KNOWLEDGE, WHAT TO 
WISDOM. 

24. And all these things which the Word made flesh did and bare for us in time and place, belong, according 
to the distinction which we have undertaken to demonstrate, to knowledge, not to wisdom. And as the Word 
is without time and without place, it is co-eternal with the Father, and in its wholeness everywhere; and if any 
one can, and as much as he can, speak truly concerning this Word, then his discourse will pertain to 
wisdom. And hence the Word made flesh, which is Christ Jesus, has the treasures both of wisdom and of 
knowledge. For the apostle, writing to the Colossians, says: "For I would that ye knew what great conflict I 
have for you, and for them at Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my face in the flesh; that their 
hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of 
understanding, to the acknowledgment of the mystery of God which is Christ Jesus: in whom are hid all the 
treasures of wisdom and knowledge. "(1) To what extent the apostle knew all those treasures, how much of 
them he had penetrated, and in them to how great things he had reached, who can know? Yet, for my part, 
according to that which is written, "But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal; for 
to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit;"(2) if 
these two are in such way to be distinguished from each other, that wisdom is to be assigned to divine 
things, knowledge to human, I acknowledge both in Christ, and so with me do all His faithful ones. And when I 
read, "The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us," I understand by the Word the true Son of God, I 
acknowledge in the flesh the true Son of man, and both together joined into one Person of God and man, by 
an ineffable copiousness of grace. And on account of this, the apostle goes on to say, "And we beheld His 
glory, the glory as of the Only-begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth. "(3) If we refer grace to 
knowledge, and truth to wisdom, I think we shall not swerve from that distinction between these two things 
which we have commended. For in those things that have their origin in time, this is the highest grace, that 
man is joined with God in unity of person; but in things eternal the highest truth is rightly attributed to the Word 
of God. But that the same is Himself the Only-begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth,— this took place, 
in order that He Himself in things done for us in time should be the same for whom we are cleansed by the 
same faith, that we may contemplate Him steadfastly in things eternal. And those distinguished 
philosophers of the heathen who have been able to understand and discern the invisible things of God by 
those things which are made, have yet, as is said of them, "held down the truth in iniquity;"(4) because they 
philosophized without a Mediator, that is, without the man Christ, whom they neither believed to be about to 
come at the word of the prophets, nor to have come at that of the apostles. For, placed as they were in these 
lowest things, they could not but seek some media through which they might attain to those lofty things which 

they had understood; and so they fell upon deceitful spirits, through whom it came to pass, that "they 
changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and 
four-fooled beasts, and creeping things. "(5) For in such forms also they set up or worshipped idols. 
Therefore Christ is our knowledge, and the same Christ is also our wisdom. He Himself implants in us faith 
concerning temporal things, He Himself shows forth the truth concerning eternal things. Through Him we 
reach on to Himself: we stretch through knowledge to wisdom; yet we do not withdraw from one and the 
same Christ, "in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge." But now we speak of 
knowledge, and will hereafter speak of wisdom as much as He Himself shall grant. And let us not so take 
these two things, as if it were not allowable to speak either of the wisdom which is in human things, or of the 
knowledge which is in divine. For after a laxer custom of speech, both can be called wisdom, and both 
knowledge. Yet the apostle could not in any way have written," To one is given the word of wisdom, to 
another the word of knowledge," except also these several things had been properly called by the several 
names, of the distinction between which we are now treating. 

CHAP. 20. -WHAT HAS BEEN TREATED OF IN THIS BOOK. HOW WE HAVE REACHED BY 
STEPS TO A CERTAIN TRINITY, WHICH IS FOUND IN PRACTICAL KNOWLEDGE AND 
TRUE FAITH. 

25. Now, therefore, let us see what this prolix discourse has effected, what it has gathered, whereto it has 
reached. It belongs to all men to will to be blessed; yet all men have not faith, whereby the heart is cleansed, 
and so blessedness is reached. And thus it comes to pass, that by means of the faith which not all men will, 
we have to reach on to the blessedness which every one wills. All see in their own heart that they will to be 
blessed; and so great is the agreement of human nature on this subject, that the man is not deceived who 
conjectures this concerning another's mind, out of his own: in short, we know ourselves that all will this. But 
many despair of being immortal, although no otherwise can any one be that which all will, that is, blessed. 
Yet they will also to be immortal if they could; but through not believing that they can, they do not so live that 
they can. Therefore faith is necessary, that we may attain blessedness in all the good things of human 
nature, that is, of both soul and body. But that same faith requires that this faith be limited in Christ, who rose 
in the flesh from the dead, not to die any more; and that no one is freed from the dominion of the devil, 
through the forgiveness of sins, save by Him; and that in the abiding place of the devil, life must needs be at 
once miserable and never-ending, which ought rather to be called death than life. All which I have also 
argued, so far as space permitted, in this book, while I have already said much on the subject in the fourth 
book of this work as well;(1) but in that place for one purpose, here for another,-namely, there, that I might 
show why and how Christ was sent in the fullness of time by the Father,(2) on account of those who say that 
He who sent and He who was sent cannot be equal in nature; but here, in order to distinguish practical 
knowlege from contemplative wisdom. 

26. For we wished to ascend, as it were, by steps, and to seek in the inner man, both in knowledge and in 
wisdom, a sort of trinity of its own special kind, such as we sought before in the outer man; in order that we 
may come, with a mind more practised in these lower things, to the contemplation of that Trinity which is 
God, according to our little measure, if indeed, we can even do this, at least in a riddle and as through a 
glass. (3) If, then, any one have committed to memory the words of this faith in their sounds alone, not 
knowing what they mean, as they commonly who do not know Greek hold in memory Greek words, or 
similarly Latin ones, or those of any other language of which they are ignorant, has not he a sort of trinity in 
his mind? because, first, those sounds of words are in his memory, even when he does not think thereupon; 
and next, the mental vision (acies) of his act of recollection is formed thence when he conceives of them; 
and next, the will of him who remembers and thinks unites both. Yet we should by no means say that the man 
in so doing busies himself with a trinity of the interior man, but rather of the exterior; because he remembers, 
and when he wills, contemplates as much as he wills, that alone which belongs to the sense of the body, 
which is called hearing. Nor in such an act of thought does he do anything else than deal with images of 
corporeal things, that is, of sounds. But if he holds and recollects what those words signify, now indeed 
something of the inner man is brought into action; not yet, however, ought he to be said or thought to live 
according to a trinity of the tuner man, if he does not love those things which are there declared, enjoined, 
promised. For it is possible for him also to hold and conceive these things, supposing them to be false, in 
order that he may endeavor to disprove them. Therefore that will, which in this case unites those things 
which are held in the memory with those things which are thence impressed on the mind's eye in conception, 
completes, indeed, some kind of trinity, since itself is a third added to two others; but the man does not live 
according to this, when those things which are conceived are taken to be false, and are not accepted. But 
when those things are believed to be true, and those things which therein ought to be loved, are loved, then 
at last the man does live according to a trinity of the inner man; for every one lives according to that which he 
loves. But how can things be loved which are not known, but only believed? This question has been already 

treated of in former books;(4) and we found, that no one loves what he is wholly ignorant of, but that when 
things not known are said to be loved, they are loved from those things which are known. And now we so 
conclude this book, that we admonish the just to live by faith, (5) which faith worketh by love, (6) so that the 
virtues also themselves, by which one lives prudently, boldly, temperately, and justly, be all referred to the 
same faith; for not otherwise can they be true virtues. And yet these in this life are not of so great worth, as 
that the remission of sins, of some kind or other, is not sometimes necessary here; and this remission 
comes not to pass, except through Him, who by His own blood conquered the prince of sinners. 
Whatsoever ideas are in the mind of the faithful man from this faith, and from such a life, when they are 
contained in the memory, and are looked at by recollection, and please the will, set forth a kind of trinity of its 
own sort.? But the image of God, of which by His help we shall afterwards speak, is not yet in that trinity; a 
thing which will then be more apparent, when it shall have been shown where it is, which the reader may 
expect in a succeeding book. 

THE FIFTEEN BOOKS OF AURELIUS AUGUSTINUS, 
BISHOP OF HIPPO, ON THE TRINITY: BOOK XIV 

BOOK XIV. 

THE TRUE WISDOM OF MAN IS TREATED OF; AND IT IS SHOWN THAT THE IMAGE OF 
GOD, WHICH MAN IS IN RESPECT TO HIS MIND, IS NOT PLACED PROPERLY IN 
TRANSITORY THINGS, AS IN MEMORY, UNDERSTANDING, AND LOVE, WHETHER OF 
FAITH ITSELF AS EXISTING IN TIME, OR EVEN OF THE MIND AS BUSIED WITH ITSELF, 
BUT IN THINGS THAT ARE PERMANENT; AND THAT THIS WISDOM IS THEN 
PERFECTED, WHEN THE MIND IS RENEWED IN THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD, 
ACCORDING TO THE IMAGE OF HIM WHO CREATED MAN AFTER HIS OWN IMAGE, AND 
THUS ATTAINS TO WISDOM, WHEREIN THAT WHICH IS CONTEMPLATED IS ETERNAL. 

CHAP. 1.-WHAT THE WISDOM IS OF WHICH WE ARE HERE TO TREAT. WHENCE THE 
NAME OF PHILOSOPHER AROSE. WHAT HAS BEEN ALREADY SAID CONCERNING THE 
DISTINCTION OF KNOWLEDGE AND WISDOM. 

1 . We must now discourse concerning wisdom; not the wisdom of God, which without doubt is God, for His 
only-begotten Son is called the wisdom of God;(1) but we will speak of the wisdom of man, yet of true 
wisdom, which is according to God, and is His true and chief worship, which is called in Greek by one term, 
<greek>qeoseaeia</greek>. And this term, as we have already observed, when our own countrymen 
themselves also wished to interpret it by a single term, was by them rendered piety, whereas piety means 
more commonly what the Greeks call <greek>eusebeia</greek>. But because 

<greek>qeosebeia</greek> cannot be translated perfectly by any one word, it is better translated by two, 
so as to render it rather by "the worship of God." That this is the wisdom of man, as we have already laid 
down in the twelfth book(2) of this work, is shown by the authority of Holy Scripture, in the book of God's 
servant Job, where we read that the Wisdom of God said to man, "Behold piety, that is wisdom; and to 
depart from evil is knowledge;"(3) or, as some have translated the Greek word <greek>episuhmhn</greek>, 
"learning, "(4) which certainly takes its name from learning, (4) whence also it may be called knowledge. For 
everything is learned in order that it may be known. Although the same word, indeed, (5) is employed in a 
different sense, where any one suffers evils for his sins, that he may be corrected. Whence is that in the 
Epistle to the Hebrews, "For what son is he to whom the father giveth not discipline?" And this is still more 
apparent in the same epistle: "Now no chastening(6) for the present seemeth to be joyous, but grievous: 
nevertheless afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them which are exercised 
thereby. "(7) Therefore God Himself is the chiefest wisdom; but the worship of God is the wisdom of man, of 
which we now speak. For "the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. "(8) It is in respect to this wisdom, 
therefore, which is the worship of God, that Holy Scripture says, "The multitude of the wise is the welfare of 
the world."(9) 

2. But if to dispute of wisdom belongs to wise men, what shall we do? Shall we dare indeed to profess 
wisdom, test it should be mere impudence for ourselves to dispute about it? Shall we not be alarmed by the 
example of Pythagoras?-who dared not profess to be a wise man, but answer answered hat he was a to be 
a wise man, but philosopher, i.e., a lover of wisdom; whence arose the name, that became thenceforth so 
much the popular name, that no matter how great the learning wherein any one excelled, either in his own 
opinion or that of others, in things pertaining to wisdom, he was still called nothing more than philosopher. Or 
was it for this reason that no one, even of such as these, dared to profess himself a wise man,-because 
they imagined that a wise man was one without sin? But our Scriptures do not say this, which say, "Rebuke a 
wise man, and he will love thee."(1) For doubtless he who thinks a man ought to be rebuked, judges him to 
have sin. However, for my part, I dare not profess myself a wise man even in this sense; it is enough for me 
to assume, what they themselves cannot deny, that to dispute of wisdom belongs also to the philosopher, 
i.e., the lover of wisdom. For they have not given over so disputing who have professed to be lovers of 
wisdom rather than wise men. 

3. In disputing, then, about wisdom, they have defined it thus: Wisdom is the knowledge of things human and 
divine. And hence, in the last book, I have not withheld the admission, that the cognizance of both subjects, 
whether divine or human, may be called both knowledge and wisdom. (2) But according to the distinction 

made in the apostle's words, "To one is given the word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge, "(3) 
this definition is to be divided, so that the knowledge of things divine shall be called wisdom, and that of 
things human appropriate to itself the name of knowledge; and of the latter I have treated in the thirteenth 
book, not indeed so as to attribute to this knowledge everything whatever that can be known by man about 
things human, wherein there is exceeding much of empty vanity and mischievous curiosity, but only those 
things by which that most wholesome faith, which leads to true blessedness, is begotten, nourished, 
defended, strengthened; and in this knowledge most of the faithful are not strong, however exceeding strong 
in the faith itself. For it is one thing to know only what man ought to believe in order to attain to a blessed life, 
which must needs be an eternal one; but another to know in what way this belief itself may both help the 
pious, and be defended against the impious, which last the apostle seems to call by the special name of 
knowledge. And when I was speaking of this knowledge before, my especial business was to commend 
faith, first briefly distinguishing things eternal from things temporal, and there discoursing of things temporal; 
but while deferring things eternal to the present book, I showed also that faith respecting things eternal is 
itself a thing temporal, and dwells in time in the hearts of believers, and yet is necessary in order to attain the 
things eternal themselves. (4) I argued also, that faith respecting the things temporal which He that is eternal 
did and suffered for us as man, which manhood He bare in time and carried on to things eternal, is profitable 
also for the obtaining of things eternal; and that the virtues themselves, whereby in this temporal and mortal 
life men live prudently, bravely, temperately, and justly, are not true virtues, unless they are referred to that 
same faith, temporal though it is, which leads on nevertheless to things eternal. 

CHAP. 2. -THERE IS A KIND OF TRINITY IN THE HOLDING, CONTEMPLATING, AND 
LOVING OF FAITH TEMPORAL, BUT ONE THAT DOES NOT YET ATTAIN TO BEING 
PROPERLY AN IMAGE OF GOD. 

4. Wherefore since, as it is written, "While we are in the body, we are absent from the Lord; for we walk by 
faith, not by sight;"(5) undoubtedly, so long as the just man lives by faith, (6) howsoever he lives according to 
the inner man, although he aims at truth and reaches on to things eternal by this same temporal faith, 
nevertheless in the holding, contemplating, and loving this temporal faith, we have not yet reached such a 
trinity as is to be called an image of God; lest that should seem to be constituted in things temporal which 
ought to be so in things eternal. For when the human mind sees its own faith, whereby it believes what it 
does not see, it does not see a thing eternal. For that will not always exist, which certainly will not then exist, 
when this pilgrimage, whereby we are absent from God, in such way that we must needs walk by faith, shall 
be ended, and that sight shall have succeeded it whereby we shall see face to face;(7) just as now, 
because we believe although we do not see, we shall deserve to see, and shall rejoice at having been 
brought through faith to sight. For then it will be no longer faith, by which that is believed which is not seen; but 
sight, by which that is seen which is believed. And then, therefore, although we remember this past mortal 
life, and call to mind by recollection that we once believed what we did not see, yet that faith will be 
reckoned among things past and done with, not among things present and always continuing. And hence 
also that trinity which now consists in the remembering, contemplating, and loving this same faith while 
present and continuing, will then be found to be done with and past, and not still enduring. And hence it is to 
be gathered, that if that trinity is indeed an image of God, then this image itself would have to be reckoned, 
not among things that exist always, but among things transient. 

CHAP. 3. -A DIFFICULTY REMOVED, WHICH LIES IN THE WAY OF WHAT HAS JUST 
BEEN SAID. 

But far be it from us to think, that while the nature of the soul is immortal, and from the first beginning of its 
creation thenceforth never ceases to be, yet that that which is the best thing it has should not endure [or ever 
with its own immortality. Yet what is there in its nature as created; better than that it is made after the image of 
its Creator?(1) We must find then what may be fittingly called the image of God, not in the holding, 
contemplating, and loving that faith which will not exist always, but in that which will exist always. 

5. Shall we then scrutinize somewhat more carefully and deeply whether the case is really thus? For it may 
be said that this trinity does not perish even when faith itself shall have passed away; because, as now we 
both hold it by memory, and discern it by thought, and love it by will; so then also, when we shall both hold in 
memory, and shall recollect, that we once had it, and shall unite these two by the third, namely will, the same 
trinity will still continue. Since, if it have left in its passage as it were no trace in us, doubtless we shall not 
have ought of it even in our memory, whereto to recur when recollecting it as past, and by the third, viz. 
purpose, coupling both these, to wit, what was in our memory though we were not thinking about it, and what 
is formed thence by conception. But he who speaks thus, does not perceive, that when we hold, see, and 
love in ourselves our present faith, we are concerned with a different trinity as now existing, from that trinity 

which will exist, when we shall contemplate by recollection, not the faith itself, but as it were the imagined 
trace of it laid up in the memory, and shall unite by the will, as by a third, these two things, viz. that which was 
in the memory of him who retains, and that which is impressed thence upon the vision of the mind of him who 
recollects. And that we may understand this, let us take an example from things corporeal, of which we have 
sufficiently spoken in the eleventh book.(2) For as we ascend from lower to higher things, or pass inward 
from outer to inner things, we first find a trinity in the bodily object which is seen, and in the vision of the seer, 
which, when he sees it, is informed thereby, and in the purpose of the will which combines both. Let us 
assume a trinity like this, when the faith which is now in ourselves is so established in our memory as the 
bodily object we spoke of was in place, from which faith is formed the conception in recollection, as from that 
bodily object was formed the vision of the beholder; and to these two, to complete the trinity, will is to be 
reckoned as a third, which connects and combines the faith established in the memory, and a sort of effigy 
of that faith impressed upon the vision of recollection; just as in that trinity of corporeal vision, the form of the 
bodily object that is seen, and the corresponding form wrought in the vision of the beholder, are combined 
by the purpose of the will. Suppose, then, that this bodily object which was beheld was dissolved and had 
perished, and that nothing at all of it remained anywhere, to the vision of which the gaze might have 
recourse; are we then to say, that because the image of the bodily object thus now past and done with 
remains in the memory, whence to form the conception in recollecting, and to have the two united by will as a 
third, therefore it is the same trinity as that former one, when the appearance of the bodily object posited in 
place was seen? Certainly not, but altogether a different one: for, not to say that that was from without, while 
this is from within; the former certainly was produced by the appearance of a present bodily object, the latter 
by the image of that object now past. So, too, in the case of which we are now treating, to illustrate which we 
have thought good to adduce this example, the faith which is even now in our mind, as that bodily object was 
in place, while held, looked at, loved, produces a sort of trinity; but that trinity will exist no more, when this faith 
in the mind, like that bodily object in place, shall no longer exist. But that which will then exist, when we shall 
remember it to have been, but not now to be, in us, will doubtless be a different one. For that which now is, is 
wrought by the thing itself, actually present and attached to the mind of one who believes; but that which shall 
then be, will be wrought by the imagination of a past thing left in the memory of one who recollects. 

CHAP. 4.--THE IMAGE OF GOD IS TO BE SOUGHT IN THE IMMORTALITY OF THE 
RATIONAL SOUL, HOW A TRINITY IS DEMONSTRATED IN THE MIND. 

6. Therefore neither is that trinity an image of God, which is not now, nor is that other an image of God, which 
then will not be; but we must find in the soul of man, i.e., the rational or intellectual soul, that image of the 
Creator which is immortally implanted in its immortality. For as the immortality itself of the soul is spoken with 
a qualification; since the soul too has its proper death, when it lacks a blessed life, which is to be called the 
true life of the soul; but it is therefore called immortal, because it never ceases to live with some life or other, 
even when it is most miserable;-so, although reason or intellect is at one time torpid in it, at another appears 
small, and at another great, yet the human soul is never anything save rational or intellectual; and hence, if it 
is made after the image of God in respect to this, that it is able to use reason and intellect in order to 
understand and behold God, then from the moment when that nature so marvellous and so great began to 
be, whether this image be so worn out as to be almost none at all, or whether it be obscure and defaced, or 
bright and beautiful, certainly it always is. Further, too, pitying the defaced condition of its dignity, divine 
Scripture tells us, that "although man walks in an image, yet he disquieteth himself in vain; he heapeth up 
riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them. "(1) It would not therefore attribute vanity to the image of God, 
unless it perceived it to have been defaced. Yet it sufficiently shows that such defacing does not extend to 
the taking away its being an image, by saying, "Although man walks in an image." Wherefore in both ways 
that sentence can be truly enunciated; in that, as it is said, "Although man walketh in an image, yet he 
disquieteth himself in vain," so it may be said, "Although man disquieteth himself in vain, yet he walketh in an 
image." For although the nature of the soul is great, yet it can be corrupted, because it is not the highest; and 
although it can be corrupted, because it is not the highest, yet because it is capable and can be partaker of 
the highest nature, it is a great nature. Let us seek, then, in this image of God a certain trinity of a special 
kind, with the aid of Him who Himself made us after His own image. For no otherwise can we healthfully 
investigate this subject, or arrive at any result according to the wisdom which is from Him. But if the reader 
will either hold in remembrance and recollect what we have said of the human soul or mind in former books, 
and especially in the tenth, or will carefully re-peruse it in the passages wherein it is contained, he will not 
require here any more lengthy discourse respecting the inquiry into so great a thing. 

7. We said, then, among other things in the tenth book, that the mind of man knows itself. For the mind knows 
nothing so much as that which is close to itself; and nothing is more close to the mind than itself. We 
adduced also other evidences, as much as seemed sufficient, whereby this might be most certainly 
proved. 

CHAP. 5.-WHETHER THE MIND OF INFANTS KNOWS ITSELF. 

What, then, is to be said of the mind of an infant, which is still so small, and buried in such profound 
ignorance of things, that the mind of a man which knows anything shrinks from the darkness of it? Is that too 
to be believed to know itself; but that,: as being too intent upon those things which it has begun to perceive 
through the bodily senses, with the greater delight in proportion to their novelty, it is not able indeed to be 
ignorant of itself, but is also not able to think of itself? Moreover, how intently it is bent upon sensible things 
that are without it, may be conjectured from this one fact, that it is so greedy of sensible light, that if any one 
through carelessness, or ignorance of the possible consequences, place a light at nighttime where an infant 
is lying down, on that side to which the eyes of the child so lying down can be bent, but its neck cannot be 
turned, the gaze of that child will be so fixed in that direction, that we have known some to have come to 
squint by this means, in that the eyes retained that form which habit in some way impressed upon them while 
tender and soft. (2) In the case, too, of the other bodily senses, the souls of infants, as far as their age 
permits, so narrow themselves as it were, and are bent upon them, that they either vehemently detest or 
vehemently desire that only which offends or allures through the flesh, but do not think of their own inward 
self, nor can be made to do so by admonition; because they do not yet know the signs that express 
admonition, whereof words are the chief, of which as of other things they are wholly ignorant. And that it is 
one thing not to know oneself, another not to think of oneself, we have shown already in the same book.3 
8. But let us pass by the infantine age, since we cannot question it as to what goes on within itself, while we 
have ourselves pretty well forgotten it. Let it suffice only for us hence to be certain, that when man has come 
to be able to think of the nature of his own mind, and to find out what is the truth, he will find it nowhere else but 
in himself. And he will find, not what he did not know, but that of which he did not think. For what do we know, if 
we do not know what is in our own mind; when we can know nothing at all of what we do know, unless by the 
mind? 

CHAP. 6. -HOW A KIND OF TRINITY EXISTS IN THE MIND THINKING OF ITSELF. WHAT IS 
THE PART OF THOUGHT IN THIS TRINITY. 

The function of thought, however, is so great, that not even the mind itself can, so to say, place itself in its 
own sight, except when it thinks of itself; and hence it is so far the case, that nothing is in the sight of the mind, 
except that which is being thought of, that not even the mind itself, whereby we think whatever we do think, 
can be in its own sight otherwise than by thinking of itself. But in what way it is not in its own sight when it is not 
thinking of itself, while it can never be without itself, as though itself were one thing, and the sight of itself 
another, it is not in my power to discover. For this is not unreasonably said of the eye of the body; for the eye 
itself of the body is fixed in its own proper place in the body, but its sight extends to things external to itself, 
and reaches even to the stars. And the eye is not in its own sight, since it does not look at itself, unless by 
means of a mirror, as is said above;(1) a thing that certainly does not happen when the mind places itself in 
its own sight by thinking of itself. Does it then see one part of itself by means of another part of itself, when it 
looks at itself in thought, as we look at some of our members, which can be in our sight, with other also of our 
members, viz. with our eyes? What can be said or thought more absurd? For by what is the mind removed, 
except by itself? or where is it placed so as to be in its own sight, except before itself? Therefore it will not be 
there, where it was, when it was not in its own sight; because it has been put down in one place, after being 
taken away from another. But if it migrated in order to be beheld, where will it remain in order to behold? Is it 
as it were doubled, so as to be in this and in that place at the same time, viz. both where it can behold, and 
where it can be beheld; that in itself it may be beholding, and before itself beheld? If we ask the truth, it will 
tell us nothing of the sort since it is but feigned images of bodily objects of which we conceive when we 
conceive thus; and that the mind is not such, is very certain to the few minds by which the truth on such a 
subject can be inquired. It appears, therefore, that the beholding of the mind is something pertaining to its 
nature, and is recalled to that nature when it conceives of itself, not as if by moving through space, but by an 
incorporeal conversion; but when it is not conceiving of itself, it appears that it is not indeed in its own sight, 
nor is its own perception formed from it, but yet that it knows itself as though it were to itself a remembrance 
of itself. Like one who is skilled in many branches of learning: the things which he knows are contained in his 
memory, but nothing thereof is in the sight of his mind except that of which he is conceiving; while all the rest 
are stored up in a kind of secret knowledge, which is called memory. The trinity, then, which we were setting 
forth, was constituted in this way: first, we placed in the memory the object by which the perception of the 
percipient was formed; next, the conformation, or as it were the image which is impressed thereby; lastly, 
love or will as that which combines the two. When the mind, then, beholds itself in conception, it understands 
and cognizes itself; it begets, therefore, this its own understanding and cognition. For an incorporeal thing is 
understood when it is beheld, and is cognized when understood. Yet certainly the mind does not so beget 

this knowledge of itself, when it beholds itself as understood by conception, as though it had before been 
unknown to itself; but it was known to itself, in the way in which things are known which are contained in the 
memory, but of which one is not thinking; since we say that a man knows letters even when he is thinking of 
something else, and not of letters. And these two, the begetter and the begotten, are coupled together by 
love, as by a third, which is nothing else than will, seeking or holding fast the enjoyment of something. We 
held, therefore, that a trinity of the mind is to be intimated also by these three terms, memory, intelligence, 
will. 

9. But since the mind, as we said near the end of the same tenth book, always remembers itself, and always 
understands and loves itself, although it does not always think of itself as distinguished from those things 
which are not itself; we must inquire in what way understanding (intellectus) belongs to conception, while the 
notion (notitia) of each thing that is in the mind, even when one is not thinking of it, is said to belong only to the 
memory. For if this is so, then the mind had not these three things: viz. the remembrance, the understanding, 
and the love of itself; but it only remembered itself, and afterwards, when it began to think of itself, then it 
understood and loved itself. 

CHAP. 7. -THE THING IS MADE PLAIN BY AN EXAMPLE, IN WHAT WAY THE MATTER IS 
HANDLED IN ORDER TO HELP THE READER. 

Wherefore let us consider more carefully that example which we have adduced, wherein it was shown that 
not knowing a thing is different from not thinking [conceiving] of it; and that it may so happen that a man 
knows something of which he is not thinking, when he is thinking of something else, not of that. When any 
one, then, who is skilled in two or more branches of knowledge is thinking of one of them, though he is not 
thinking of the other or others, yet he knows them. But can we rightly say, This musician certainly knows 
music, but he does not now understand it, because he is not thinking of it; but he does now understand 
geometry, for of that he is now thinking? Such an assertion, as far as appears, is absurd. What, again, if we 
were to say, This musician certainly knows music, but he does not now love it, while he is not now thinking of 
it; but he does now love geometry, because of that he is nowthinking,-is not this similarly absurd? But we 
say quite correctly, This person whom you perceive disputing about geometry is also a perfect musician, 
for he both remembers music, and understands, and loves it; but although he both knows and loves it, he is 
not now thinking of it, since he is thinking of geometry, of which he is disputing. And hence we are warned 
that we have a kind of knowledge of certain things stored up in the recesses of the mind, and that this, when 
it is thought of, as it were, steps forth in public, and is placed as if openly in the sight of the mind; for then the 
mind itself finds that it both remembers, and understands, and loves itself, even although it was not thinking 
of itself, when it was thinking of something else. But in the case of that of which we have not thought for a long 
time, and cannot think of it unless reminded; that, if the phrase is allowable, in some wonderful way I know 
not how, we do not know that we know. In short, it is rightly said by him who reminds, to him whom he reminds, 
You know this, but you do not know that you know it; I will remind you, and you will find that you know what 
you had thought you did not know. Books, too, lead to the same results, viz. those that are written upon 
subjects which the reader under the guidance of reason finds to be true; not those subjects which he 
believes to be true on the faith of the narrator, as in the case of history; but those which he himself also finds 
to be true, either of himself, or in that truth itself which is the light of the mind. But he who cannot contemplate 
these things, even when reminded, is too deeply buried in the darkness of ignorance, through great 
blindness of heart and too wonderfully needs divine help, to be able to attain to true wisdom. 

10. For this reason I have wished to adduce some kind of proof, be it what it might, respecting the act of 
conceiving, such as might serve to show in what way, out of the things contained in the memory, the mind's 
eye is informed in recollecting, and some such thing is begotten, when a man conceives, as was already in 
him when, before he conceived, he remembered; because it is easier to distinguish things that take place at 
successive times, and where the parent precedes the offspring by an interval of time. For if we refer 
ourselves to the inner memory of the mind by which it remembers itself, and to the inner understanding by 
which it understands itself, and to the inner will by which it loves itself, where these three always are together, 
and always have been together since they began to be at all, whether they were being thought of or not; the 
image of this trinity will indeed appear to pertain even to the memory alone; but because in this case a word 
cannot be without a thought (for we think all that we say, even if it be said by that tuner word which belongs to 
no separate language), this image is rather to be discerned in these three things, viz. memory, intelligence, 
will. And I mean now by intelligence that by which we understand in thought, that is, when our thought is 
formed by the finding of those things, which had been at hand to the memory but were not being thought of; 
and I mean that will, or love, or preference which Combines this offspring and parent, and is in some way 
common to both. Hence it was that I tried also, viz. in the eleventh book, to lead on the slowness of readers 
by means of outward sensible things which are seen by the eyes of the flesh; and that I then proceeded to 
enter with them upon that power of the tuner man whereby he reasons of things temporal, deferring the 

consideration of that which dominates as the higher power, by which he, contemplates things eternal. And I 
discussed this in two books, distinguishing the two in the twelfth, the one of them being higher and the other 
lower, and that the lower ought to be subject to the higher; and in the thirteenth I discussed, with what truth 
and brevity I could, the office of the lower, in which the wholesome knowledge of things human is contained, 
in order that we may so act in this temporal life as to attain that which is eternal; since, indeed, I have 
cursorily included in a single book a subject so manifold and copious, and one so well known by the many 
and great arguments of many and great men, while manifesting that a trinity exists also in it, but not yet one 
that can be called an image of God. 

CHAP. 8. -THE TRINITY WHICH IS THE IMAGE OF GOD IS NOW TO BE SOUGHT IN THE 
NOBLEST PART OF THE MIND. 

1 1 . But we have come now to that argument in which we have undertaken to consider the noblest part of the 
human mind, by which it knows or can know God, in order that we may find in it the image of God. For 
although the human mind is not of the same nature with God, yet the image of that nature than which none is 
better, is to be sought and found in us, in that than which our nature also has nothing better. But the mind must 
first be considered as it is in itself, before it becomes partaker of God; and His image must be found in it. 
For, as we have said, although worn out and defaced by losing the participation of God, yet the image of 
God still remains. (1) For it is His image in this very point, that it is capable of Him, and can be partaker of 
Him; which so great good is only made possible by its being His image. Well, then, the mind remembers, 
understands, loves itself; if we discern this, we discern a trinity, not yet indeed God, but now at last an image 
of God. The memory does not receive from without that which it is to hold; nor does the understanding find 
without that which it is to regard, as the eye of the body does; nor has will joined these two from without, as it 
joins the form of the bodyily object and that which is thence wrought in the vision of the beholder; nor has 
conception, in being turned to it, found an image of a thing seen without, which has been somehow seized 
and laid up in the memory, whence the intuition of him that recollects has been formed, will as a third joining 
the two: as we showed to take place in those trinities which were discovered in things corporeal, or which 
were somehow drawn within from bodily objects by the bodily sense; of all which we have discoursed in the 
eleventh book. (2) Nor, again, as it took place, or appeared to do so, when we went on further to discuss that 
knowledge, which had its place now in the workings of the inner man, and which was to be distinguished 
from wisdom; of which knowledge the subject-matter was, as it were, adventitious to the mind, and either was 
brought thither by historical information, -as deeds and words, which are performed in time and pass away, 
or which again are established in the nature of things in their own times and places,-or arises in the man 
himself not being there before, whether on the information of others, or by his own thinking,-as faith, which we 
commended at length in the thirteenth book, or as the virtues, by which, if they are true, one so lives well in 
this mortality as to live blessedly in that immortality which God promises. These and other things of the kind 
have their proper order in time, and in that order we discerned more easily a trinity of memory, sight, and 
love. For some of such things anticipate the knowledge of learners. For they are knowable also before they 
are known, and beget in the learner a knowledge of themselves. And they either exist in their own proper 
places, or have happened in time past; although things that are past do not themselves exist, but only 
certain signs of them as past, the sight or hearing of which makes it known that they have been and have 
passed away. And these signs are either situate in the places themselves, as e.g. monuments of the dead 
or the like; or exist in written books worthy of credit, as is all history that is of weight and approved authority; 
or are in the minds of those who already know them; since what is already known to them is knowable 
certainly to others also, whose knowledge it has anticipated, and who are able to know it on the information 
of those who do know it. And all these things, when they, are learned, produce a certain kind of trinity, viz. by 
their own proper species, which was knowable also before it was known, and by the application to this of the 
knowledge of the learner, which then begins to exist when he learns them, and by will as a third which 
combines both; and when they are known, yet another trinity is produced in the recollecting of them, and this 
now inwardly in the mind itself, from those images which, when they were learned, were impressed upon the 
memory, and from the informing of the thought when the look has been turned upon these by recollection, 
and from the will which as a third combines these two. But those things which arise in the mind, not having 
been there before, as faith and other things of that kind, although they appear to be adventitious, since they 
are implanted by teaching, yet are not situate without or transacted without, as are those things which are 
believed; but began to be altogether within in the mind itself. For faith is not that which is believed, but that by 
which it is believed; and the former is believed, the latter seen. Nevertheless, because it began to be in the 
mind, which was a mind also before these things began to be in it, it seems to be somewhat adventitious, 
and will be reckoned among things past, when sight shall have succeeded, and itself shall have ceased to 
be. And it makes now by its presence, retained as it is, and beheld, and loved, a different trinity from that 
which it will then make by means of some trace of itself, which in passing it will have left in the memory: as 

has been already said above. 

CHAP. 9. -WHETHER JUSTICE AND THE OTHER VIRTUES CEASE TO EXIST IN THE 
FUTURE LIFE. 

12. There is, however, some question raised, whether the virtues likewise by which one lives well in this 
present mortality, seeing that they themselves begin also to be in the mind, which was a mind none the less 
when it existed before without them, cease also to exist at that time when they have brought us to things 
eternal. For some have thought that they will cease, and in the case of three-prudence, fortitude, 
temperance-such an assertion seems to have something in it; but justice is immortal, and will rather then be 
made perfect in us than cease to be. Yet Tullius, the great author of eloquence, when arguing in the 
dialogue Hortensius, says of all four: "If we were allowed, when we migrated from this life, to live forever in 
the islands of the blessed, as fables tell, what need were there of eloquence when there would be no trials, 
or what need, indeed, of the very virtues themselves? For we should not need fortitude when nothing of 
either toil or danger was proposed to us; nor justice, when there was nothing of anybody else's to be 
coveted; nor temperance, to govern lasts that would not exist; nor, indeed, should we need prudence, when 
there was no choice offered between good and evil. We should be blessed, therefore, solely by learning 
and knowing nature, by which alone also the life of the gods is praiseworthy. And hence we may perceive 
that everything else is a matter of necessity, but this is one of free choice." This great orator, then, when 
proclaiming the excellence of philosophy, going over again all that he had learned from philosophers, and 
excellently and pleasantly explaining it, has affirmed all four virtues to be necessary in this life only, which 
we see to be full of troubles and mistakes; but not one of them when we shall have migrated from this life, if 
we are permitted to live there where is a blessed life; but that blessed souls are blessed only in learning 
and knowing, i.e. in the contemplation of nature, than which nothing is better and more lovable. It is that 
nature which created and appointed all other natures. And if it belongs to justice to be subject to the 
government of this nature then justice is certainly immortal; nor will it cease to be in that blessedness, but will 
be such and so great that it cannot be more perfect or greater. Perhaps, too, the other three 
virtues-prudence although no longer with any risk of error, and fortitude without the vexation of bearing evils, 
and temperance without the thwarting of lust-will exist in that blessedness: so that it maybe the part of 
prudence to prefer or equal no good thing to God; and of fortitude, to cleave to Him most steadfastly; and of 
temperance, to be pleased by no harmful defect. But that which justice is now concerned with in helping the 
wretched, and prudence in guarding against treachery, and fortitude in bearing troubles patiently, and 
temperance in controlling evil pleasures, will not exist there, where there will be no evil at all. And hence 
those acts of the virtues which are necessary to this mortal life, like the faith to which they are to be referred, 
will be reckoned among things past; and they make now a different trinity, whilst we hold, look at, and love 
them as present, from that which they will then make, when we shall discover them not to be, but to have 
been, by certain traces of them which they will have left in passing in the memory; since then, too, there will 
be a trinity, when that trace, be it of what sort it may, shall be retained in the memory, and truly recognized, 
and then these two be joined by will as a third. 

CHAP. 10. -HOW A TRINITY IS PRODUCED BY THE MIND REMEMBERING, 
UNDERSTANDING, AND LOVING ITSELF. 

1 3. In the knowledge of all these temporal things which we have mentioned, there are some knowable things 
which precede the acquisition of the knowledge of them by an interval of time, as in the case of those 
sensible objects which were already real before they were known, or of all those things that are learned 
through history; but some things begin to be at the same time with the knowing of them-just as, if any visible 
object, which did not exist before at all, were to rise up before our eyes, certainly it does not precede our 
knowing it; or if there be any sound made where there is some one to hear, no doubt the sound and the 
hearing that sound begin and end simultaneously. Yet none the less, whether preceding in time or 
beginning to exist simultaneously, knowable things generate knowledge, and are not generated by 
knowledge. But when knowledge has come to pass, whenever the things known and laid up in memory are 
reviewed by recollection, who does not see that the retaining them in the memory is prior in time to the sight 
of them in recollection, and to the uniting of the two things by will as a third? In the mind, howver, it is not so. 
For the mind is not adventitious to itself, as though there came to itself already existing, that same self not 
already existing, from somewhere else, or did not indeed come from somewhere else, but that in the mind 
itself already existing, there was born that same mind not already existing; just as faith, which before was not, 
arises in the mind which already was. Nor does the mind see itself, as it were, set up in its own memory by 
recollection subsequently to the knowing of itself, as though it was not there before it knew itself; 
whereas,doubtless, from the time when it began to be, it has never ceased to remember, to understand, and 

to love itself, as we have already shown. And hence, when it is turned to itself by thought, there arises a 
trinity, in which now at length we can discern also a word; since it is formed from thought itself, will uniting 
both. Here, then, we may recognize, more than we have hitherto done, the image of which we are in search. 

CHAP. 11. -WHETHER MEMORY IS ALSO OF THINGS PRESENT. 

14. But some one will say, That is not memory by which the mind, which is ever present to itself, is affirmed to 
remember itself; for memory is of things past, not of things present. For there are some, and among them 
Cicero, who, in treating of the virtues, have divided prudence into these three-memory, understanding, 
forethought: to wit, assigning memory to things past, understanding to things present, forethought to things 
future; which last is certain only in the case of those who are prescient of the future; and this is no gift of men, 
unless it be granted from above, as to the prophets. And hence the book of Wisdom, speaking of men, "The 
thoughts of mortals," it says, "are fearful, and our forethought uncertain. "(1) But memory of things past, and 
understanding of things present, are certain: certain, I mean, respecting things incorporeal, which are 
present; for things corporeal are present to the sight of the corporeal eyes. But let any one who denies that 
there is any memory of things present, attend to the language used even in profane literature, where 
exactness of words was more looked for than truth of things. "Nor did Ulysses suffer such things, nor did, the 
Ithacan forget himself in so great a peril. "(2) For when Virgil said that Ulysses did not forget himself, what 
else did he mean, except that he remembered himself? And since he was present to himself, he could not 
possibly remember himself, unless memory pertained to things present. And, therefore, as that is called 
memory in things past which makes it possible to recall and remember them; so in a thing present, as the 
mind is to itself, that is not unreasonably to be called memory, i which makes the mind at hand to itself, so 
that it can be understood by its own thought, and then both be joined together by love of itself. 

CHAP. 12. -THE TRINITY IN THE MIND IS THE IMAGE OF GOD, IN THAT IT REMEMBERS, 
UNDERSTANDS, AND LOVES GOD, WHICH TO DO IS WISDOM. 

15. This trinity, then, of the mind is not therefore the image of God, because the mind remembers itself, and 
understands and loves itself; but because it can also remember, understand, and love Him by whom it was 
made. And in so doing it is made wise itself. But if it does not do so, even when it remembers, understands, 
and loves itself, then it is foolish. Let it then remember its God, after whose image it is made, and let it 
understand and love Him. Or to say the same thing more briefly, let it worship God, who is not made, by 
whom because itself was made, it is capable and can be partaker of Him; wherefore it is written, "Behold, 
the worship of God, that is wisdom. "(3) And then it will be wise, not by its own light, but by participation of that 
supreme Light; and wherein it is eternal, therein shall reign in blessedness. For this wisdom of man is so 
called, in that it is also of God. For then it is true wisdom; for if it is human, it is vain. Yet not so of God, as is 
that wherewith God is wise. For He is not wise by partaking of Himself, as the mind is by partaking of God. 
But as we call it the righteousness of God, not only when we speak of that by which He Himself is righteous, 
but also of that which He gives to man when He justifies the ungodly, which latter righteousness the apostle 
commending, says of some, that "not knowing the righteousness of God and going about to establish their 
own righteousness.they are not subject to the righteousness of God;"(4) so also it may be said of some, that 
not knowing the wisdom of God and going about to establish their own wisdom, they are not subject to the 
wisdom of God. 

16. There is, then, a nature not made, which made all other natures, great and small, and is without doubt 
more excellent than those which it has made, and therefore also than that of which we are speaking; viz. than 
the rational and intellectual nature, which is the mind of man, made after the image of Him who made it. And 
that nature, more excellent than the rest, is God. And indeed "He is not far from every one of us," as the 
apostle says, who adds, "For in Him we live, and are moved, and have our being. "(1) And if this were said in 
respect to the body, it might be understood even of this corporeal world; for in it too in respect to the body, 
we live, and are moved, and have our being. And therefore it ought to be taken in a more excellent way, and 
one that is spiritual, not visible, in respect to the mind, which is made after His image For what is there that is 
not in Him, of whom it is divinely written, "For of Him, and through Him, and in Him, are all things"?(2) If, then, 
all things are in Him, in whom can any possibly live that do live, or be moved that are moved, except in Him 
in whom they are? Yet all are not with Him in that way in which it is said to Him, "I am continually with 

Thee. "(3) Nor is He with all in that way in which we say, The Lord be with you. And so it is the especial 
wretchedness of man not to be with Him, without whom he cannot be. For, beyond a doubt, he is not without 
Him in whom he is; and yet if he does not remember, and understand, and love Him, he is not with Him. And 
when any one absolutely forgets a thing, certainly it is impossible even to remind him of it. 

CHAP. 13. -HOW ANY ONE CAN FORGET AND REMEMBER GOD. 

17. Let us take an instance for the purpose from visible things. Somebody whom you do not recognize, says 
to you, You know me; and in order to remind you, tells you where,when, and how he became known to you; 
and if, after the mention of every sign by which you might be recalled to remembrance, you still do not 
recognize him, then you have so come to forget, as that the whole of that knowledge is altogether blotted out 
of your mind; and nothing else remains, hut that you take his word for it who tells you that you once knew him; 
or do not even do that, if you do not think the person who speaks to you to be worthy of credit. But if you do 
remember him, then no doubt you return to your own memory, and find in it that which had not been 
altogether blotted out by forgetfulness. Let us return to that which led us to adduce this instance from the 
intercourse of men. Among other things.the 9th Psalm says, "The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the 
nations, that forget God;"(4) and again the 22d Psalm, "All the ends of the world shall be reminded, and 
turned unto the Lord. "(5) These nations, then, will not so have forgotten God as to be unable to remember 
Him when reminded of Him; yet, by forgetting God, as though forgetting their own life, they had been turned 
into death, i.e. into hell. (6) But when reminded they are turned to the Lord, as though, coming to life again by 
remembering their proper life which they had forgotten. It is read also in the 94th Psalm, "Perceive now, ye 
who are unwise among the people; and ye fools, when will ye be wise? He that planted the ear, shall He not 
hear?" etc.(7) For this is spoken to those, who said vain things concerning God through not understanding 
Him. 

CHAP. 14.-THE MIND LOVES GOD IN RIGHTLY LOVING ITSELF; AND IF IT LOVE NOT 
GOD, IT MUST BE SAID TO HATE ITSELF. EVEN A WEAK AND ERRING MIND IS ALWAYS 
STRONG IN REMEMBERING, UNDERSTANDING, AND LOVING ITSELF. LET IT BE 
TURNED TO GOD, THAT IT MAY BE BLESSED BY REMEMBERING, UNDERSTANDING, 
AND LOVING HIM. 

18. But there are yet more testimonies in the divine Scriptures concerning the love of God. For in it, those 
other two [namely, memory and understanding] are understood by consequence, inasmuch as no one 
loves that which he does not remember, or of which he is wholly ignorant. And hence is that well known and 
primary commandment, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God. "(8) The human mind, then, is so constituted, that 
at no time does it not remember, and understand, and love itself. But since he who hates any one is anxious 
to injure him, not undeservedly is the mind of man also said to hate itself when it injures itself. For it wills ill to 
itself through ignorance, in that it does not think that what it wills is prejudicial to it; but it none the less does 
will ill to itself, when it wills what would be prejudicial to it. And hence it is written, "He that loveth iniquity, 
hateth his own soul. "(9) He, therefore, who knows how to love himself, loves God; but he who does not love 
God, even if he does love himself, -a thing implanted in him by nature,-yet is not unsuitably said to hate 
himself, inasmuch as he does that which is adverse to himself, and assails himself as though he were his 
own enemy. And this is no doubt a terrible delusion, that whereas all will to profit themselves, many do 
nothing but that which is most pernicious to themselves. When the poet was describing a like disease of 
dumb animals, "May the gods," says he, "grant better things to the pious, and assign, that delusion to 
enemies. They were rending with bare teeth their own torn limbs. "(1) Since it was a disease of the body he 
was speaking of, why has he called it a delusion, unless because, while nature inclines every animal to take 
all the care it can of itself, that disease was such that those animals rent those very limbs of theirs which they 
desired should be safe and sound? But when the mind loves God, and by consequence, as has been said 
remembers and understands Him, then it is rightly enjoined also to love its neighbor as itself; for it has now 
come to love itself rightly and not perversely when it loves God, by partaking of whom that image not only 
exists, but is also renewed so as to be no longer old, and restored so as to be no longer defaced, and 
beatified so as to be no longer unhappy. For although it so love itself, that, supposing the alternative to be 
proposed to it, it would lose all things which it loves less than itself rather than perish; still, by abandoning 
Him who is above it, in dependence upon whom alone it could guard its own strength, and enjoy Him as its 
light, to whom it is sung in the Psalm, "I will guard my strength in dependence upon Thee, "(2) and again, 
"Draw near to Him, and be enlightened, "(3)— it has been made so weak and so dark, that it has fallen away 
unhappily from itself too, to those things that are not what itself is, and which are beneath itself, by affections 
that it cannot conquer, and delusions from which it sees no way to return. And hence, when by God's mercy 
now penitent, it cries out in the Psalms, "My strength faileth me; as for the light of mine eyes, it also is gone 
from me. "(4) 

19. Yet, in the midst of these evils of weakness and delusion, great as they are, it could not lose its natural 
memory, understanding and love of itself. And therefore what I quoted above(5) can be rightly said, 
"Although man walketh in an image, surely he is disquieted in vain: he heapeth up treasures, and knoweth 
not who shall gather them. "(6) For why does he heap up treasures, unless because his strength has 
deserted him, through which he would have God. and so lack nothing? And why cannot he tell for whom he 

shall gather them, unless because the light of his eyes is taken from him? And so he does not see what the 
Truth saith, "Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee. Then whose shall those things be which 
thou hast provided?"(7) Yet because even such a man walketh in an image, and the man's mind has 
remembrance, understanding, and love of itself; if it were made plain to it that it could not have both, while it 
was permitted to choose one and lose the other, viz. either the treasures it has heaped up, or the mind; who 
is so utterly without mind, as to prefer to have the treasures rather than the mind? i For treasures commonly 
are able to subvert the mind, but the mind that is not subverted by treasures can live more easily and 
unencumberedly without any treasures. But who will be able to possess treasures unless it be by means of 
the mind? For if an infant, born as rich as you please, although lord of everything that is rightfully his, yet 
possesses nothing if his mind be unconscious, how can any one possibly possess anything whose mind is 
wholly lost? But why say of treasures, that anybody, if the choice be given him, prefers going without them to 
going without a mind; when there is no one that prefers, nay, no one that compares them, to those lights of 
the body, by which not one man only here and there, as in the case of gold, but every man, possesses the 
very heaven? For every one possesses by the eyes of the body whatever he gladly sees. Who then is 
there, who, if he could not keep both, but must lose one, would not rather lose his treasures than his eyes? 
And yet if it were put to him on the same condition, whether he would rather lose eyes than mind, who is there 
with a mind that does not see that he would rather lose the former than the latter? For a mind without the eyes 
of the flesh is still human, but the eyes of the flesh without a mind are bestial. And who would not rather be a 
man, even though blind in fleshly sight, than a beast that can see? 

20. I have said thus much, that even those who are slower of understanding, to whose eyes or ears this book 
may come, might be admonished, however briefly, how greatly even a weak and erring mind loves itself, in 
wrongly loving and pursuing things beneath itself. Now it could not love itself if it were altogether ignorant of 
itself, i.e. if it did not remember itself, nor understand itself by which image of God within itself it has such 
power as to be able to cleave to Him whose image it is. For it is so reckoned in the order, not of place, but of 
natures, as that there is none above it save Him. When, finally, it shall altogether cleave to Him, then it will be 
one spirit, as the apostle testifies, saying, "But he who cleaves to the Lord is one spirit. "(1) And this by its 
drawing near to partake of His nature, truth, and blessedness, yet not by His increasing in His own nature, 
truth and blessedness. In that nature, then, when it happily has cleaved to it, it will live unchangeably, and will 
see as unchangeable all that it does see. Then, as divine Scripture promises, "His desire will be satisfied 
with good things, "(2) good things unchangeable,-the very Trinity itself, its own God, whose image it is. And 
that it may not ever thenceforward suffer wrong, it will be in the hidden place of His presence, (3) filled with so 
great fullness of Him, that sin thenceforth will never delight it. But now, when it sees itself, it sees something 
not unchangeable. 

CHAP. 15. -ALTHOUGH THE SOUL HOPES FOR BLESSEDNESS, YET IT DOES NOT 
REMEMBER LOST BLESSEDNESS, BUT REMEMBERS GOD AND THE RULES OF 
RIGHTEOUSNESS. THE UNCHANGEABLE RULES OF RIGHT LIVING ARE KNOWN EVEN 
TO THE UNGODLY. 

21 . And of this certainly it feels no doubt, that it is wretched, and longs to be blessed nor can it hope for the 
possibility of this on any other ground than its own changeableness for if it were not changeable, then, as it 
could not become wretched after being blessed, so neither could it become blessed after being wretched. 
And what could have made it wretched under an omnipotent and good God, except its own sin and the 
righteousness of its Lord? And what will make it blessed, unless its own merit, and its Lord's reward? But its 
merit, too, is His grace, whose reward will be its blessedness; for it cannot give itself the righteousness it has 
lost, and so has not. For this it received when man was created, and assuredly lost it by sinning. Therefore it 
receives righteousness, that on account of this it may deserve to receive blessedness; and hence the 
apostle truly says to it, when beginning to be proud as it were of its own good, "For what hast thou that thou 
didst not receive? Now if thou didst receive it, why dost thou glory as if thou hadst not received it?(4) But 
when it rightly remembers its own Lord, having received His Spirit, then, because it is so taught by an inward 
teaching, it feels wholly that it cannot rise save by His affection freely given, nor has been able to fall save 
by its own defection freely chosen. Certainly it does not remember its own blessedness; since that has 
been, but is not, and it has utterly forgotten it, and therefore cannot even be reminded of it.(5) But it believes 
what the trustworthy Scriptures of its God tell of that blessedness, which were written by His prophet, and tell 
of the blessedness of Paradise, and hand down to us historical information of that first both good and ill of 
man. And it remembers the Lord its God; for He always is, nor has been and is not, nor is but has not been; 
but as He never will not be, so He never was not. And He is whole everywhere. And hence it both lives, and 
is moved, and is in Him;(6) had so it can remember Him. Not because it recollects the having known Him in 
Adam or anywhere else before the life of this present body, or when it was first made in order to be 
implanted in this body; for it remembers nothing at all of all this. Whatever there is of this, it has been blotted 

out by forgetfulness. But it is reminded, that it may be turned to God, as though to that light by which it was in 
some way touched, even when turned away from Him. For hence it is that even the ungodly think of eternity, 
and rightly blame and rightly praise many things in the morals of men. And by what rules do they thus judge, 
except by those wherein they see how men ought to live, even though they themselves do not so live? And 
where do they see these rules? For they do not see them in their own [moral] nature; since no doubt these 
things are to be seen by the mind, and their minds are confessedly changeable, but these rules are seen as 
unchangeable by him who can see them at all; nor yet in the character of their own mind, since these rules 
are rules of righteousness, and their minds are confessedly unrighteous. Where indeed are these rules 
written, wherein even the unrighteous recognizes what is righteous, wherein he discerns that he ought to 
have what he himself has not? Where, then, are they written, unless in the book of that Light which is called 
Truth? whence every righteous law is copied and transferred (not by migrating to it, but by being as it were 
impressed upon it) to the heart of the man that worketh righteousness; as the impression from a ring passes 
into the wax, yet does not leave the ring. But he who worketh not, and yet sees how he ought to work, he is 
the man that is turned away from that light, which yet touches him. But he who does not even see how he 
ought to live, sins indeed with more excuse, because he is not a transgressor of a law that he knows; but 
even he too is just touched sometimes by the splendor of the everywhere present truth, when upon 
admonition he confesses. 

CHAP. 16. -HOW THE IMAGE OF GOD IS FORMED ANEW IN MAN. 

22. But those who, by being reminded, are turned to the Lord from that deformity whereby they were through 
worldly lusts conformed to this world, are formed anew from the world, when they hearken to the apostle, 
saying," Be not conformed to this world, but be ye formed again in the renewing of your mind;"(1) that that 
image may begin to be formed again by Him by whom it had been formed at first. For that image cannot 
form itself again, as it could deform itself. He says again elsewhere: "Be ye renewed in the spirit of your 
mind; and put ye on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness. "(2) That 
which is meant by "created after God," is expressed in another place by "after the image of God. "(3) But it 
lost righteousness and true holiness by sinning, through which that image became defaced and, tarnished; 
and this it recovers when it is formed again and renewed. But when he says, "In the spirit of your mind," he 
does not in: tend to be understood of two things, as though mind were one, and the spirit of the mind another; 
but he speaks thus, because all mind is spirit, but all spirit is not mind. For there is a Spirit also that is God, (4) 
which cannot be renewed, because it cannot grow old. And we speak also of a spirit in man distinct from the 
mind, to which spirit belong the images that are formed after the likeness of bodies; and of this the apostle 
speaks to the Corinthians, where he says, "But if I shall have prayed with a tongue, my spirit prayeth, but my 
understanding is unfruitful. "(5) For he speaks thus, when that which is said is not understood; since it cannot 
even be said, unless the images of the corporeal articulate sounds anticipate the oral sound by the thought 
of the spirit. The soul of man is also called spirit, whence are the words in the Gospel, " And He bowed His 
head, and gave up His spirit;"(6) by which the death of the body, through the spirit's leaving it, is signified. 
We speak also of the spirit of a beast, as it is expressly written in the book of Solomon called Ecclesiastes; 
"Who knoweth the spirit of man that goeth upward, and the spirit of the beast that goeth downward to the 
earth?"(7) It is written too in Genesis, where it is said that by the deluge all flesh died which "had in it the spirit 
of life. "(8) We speak also of the spirit, meaning the wind, a thing most manifestly corporeal; whence is that in 
the Psalms," Fire and hail, snow and ice, the spirit of the I storm. "(9) Since spirit, then, is a word of so many 
meanings, the apostle intended to express by "the spirit of the mind" that spirit which is called the mind. As 
the same apostle also, when he says, "In putting off the body of the flesh, "(10) certainly did not intend two 
things, as though flesh were one, and the body of the flesh another; but because body is the name of many 
things that have no flesh (for besides the flesh, there are many bodies celestial and bodies terrestrial), he 
expressed by the body of the flesh that body which is flesh. In like manner, therefore, by the spirit of the mind, 
that spirit which is mind. Elsewhere,too,he has even more plainly called it an image, while enforcing the 
same thing in other words. "Do you," he says, "putting off the old man with his deeds, put on the new man, 
which is renewed in the knowledge of God after the image of Him that created him."(1 1) Where the one 
passage reads, "Put ye on the new man, which is created after God," the other has, "Put ye on the new man, 
which is renewed after the image of Him that created him." In the one place he says, "After God;" in the other, 
"After the image of Him that created him." But instead of saying, as in the former passages" In righteousness 
and true holiness," he has put in the latter, "In the knowledge of God." This renewal, then, and forming again 
of the mind, is wrought either after God, or after the image of God. But it is said to be after God, in order that it 
may not be supposed to be after another creature; and to be after the image of God, in order that this 
renewing may be understood to take place in that wherein is the image of God, i.e. in the mind. Just as we 
say, that he who has departed from the body a faithful and righteous man, is dead after the body, not after 
the spirit. For what do we mean by dead after the body, unless as to the body or in the body, and not dead 

as to the soul or in the soul? Or if we want to say he is handsome after the body, or strong after the body, not 
after the mind; what else is this, than that he is handsome or strong in body, not in mind? And the same is the 
case with numberless other instances. Let us not therefore so understand the words, "After the image of Him 
that created him," as though it were a different image after which he is renewed, and not the very same which 
is itself renewed. 

CHAP. 17. -HOW THE IMAGE OF GOD IN THE MIND IS RENEWED UNTILTHE LIKENESS 
OF GOD IS PERFECTED IN IT IN BLESSEDNESS. 

23. Certainly this renewal does not take place in the single moment of conversion itself, as that renewal in 
baptism takes place in a single moment by the remission of all sins; for not one, be it ever so small, remains 
unremitted. But as it is one thing to be free from fever, and another to grow strong again from the infirmity 
which the fever produced; and one thing again to pluck out of the body a weapon thrust into it, and another to 
heal the wound thereby made by a prosperous cure; so the first cure is to remove the cause of infirmity, and 
this is wrought by the forgiving of all sins; but the second cure is to heal the infirmity itself, and this takes 
place gradually by making progress in the renewal of that image: which two things are plainly shown in the 
Psalm, where we read, "Who forgiveth all thine iniquities," which takes place in baptism; and then follows, 
"and healeth all thine infirmities;"(1) and this takes place by daily additions, while this image is being 
renewed. (2) And the apostle has spoken of this most expressly, saying, "And though our outward man 
perish, yet the inner man is renewed day by day. "(3) And "it is renewed in the knowledge of God, i.e. in 
righteousness and true holiness," according to the testimonies of the apostle cited a little before. He, then, 
who is day by day renewed by making progress in the knowledge of God, and in righteousness and true 
holiness, transfers his love from things temporal to things eternal, from things visible to things intelligible, 
from things carnal to things spiritual; and diligently perseveres in bridling and lessening his desire for the 
former, and in binding himself by love to the latter. And he does this in proportion as he is helped by God. 
For it is the sentence of God Himself, "Without me ye can do nothing. "(4) And when the last day of life shall 
have found any one holding fast faith in the Mediator in such progress and growth as this, he will be 
welcomed by the holy angels, to be led to God, whom he has worshipped, and to be made perfect by Him; 
and so will receive in the end of the world an incorruptible body, in order not to punishment, but to glory. For 
the likeness of God will then be perfected in this image, when the sight of God shall be perfected. And of this 
the Apostle Paul speaks: "Now we see through a glass, in an enigma, but then face to face. "(5) And again: 
"But we with open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image, 
from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the Lord. "(6) And this is what happens from day to day in those 
that make good progress. 

CHAP. 18. -WHETHER THE SENTENCE OF JOHN IS TO BE UNDERSTOOD OF OUR 
FUTURE LIKENESS WITH THE SON OF GOD IN THE IMMORTALITY ITSELF ALSO OF THE 
BODY. 

24. But the Apostle John says, "Beloved, now are we the sons of God; and it doth not yet appear what we 
shall be: but we know that, when He shall appear, we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is. "(7) 
Hence it appears, that the full likeness of God is to take place in that image of God at that time when it shall 
receive the full sight of God. And yet this may also possibly seem to be said by the Apostle John of the 
immortality of the body. For we shall be like to God in this too, but only to the Son, because He only in the 
Trinity, took a body, in which He died and rose again, and which He carried with Him to heaven above. For 
this, too, is called an image of the Son of God, in which we shall have, as He has, an immortal body, being 
conformed in this respect not to the image of the Father or of the Holy Spirit, but only of the Son, because of 
Him alone is it read and received by a sound faith, that "the Word was made flesh. "(8) And for this reason 
the apostle says, "Whom He did foreknow, He also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of His 
Son, that He might be the first-born among many brethren. "(9) "The first-born" certainly "from the dead, "(10) 
according to the same apostle; by which death His flesh was sown in dishonor, and rose again in glory. 
According to this image of the Son, to which we are conformed in the body by immortality, we also do that of 
which the same apostle speaks, "As we have borne the image of the earthy, so shall we also bear the 
image of the heavenly;"(1) to wit, that we who are mortal after Adam, may hold by a true faith, and a sure and 
certain hope, that we shall be immortal after Christ. For so can we now bear the same image, not yet in sight, 
but in faith; not yet in fact, but in hope. For the apostle, when he said this, was speaking of the resurrection of 
the body. 

CHAP. 19. -JOHN IS RATHER TO BE UNDERSTOOD OF OUR PERFECT LIKENESS WITH 
THE TRINITY IN LIFE ETERNAL. WISDOM IS PERFECTED IN HAPPINESS. 

25. But in respect to that image indeed, of which it is said, "Let us make man after our image and 
likeness, "(2) we believe, -and, after the utmost search we have been able to make, understand-that man 
was made after the image of the Trinity, because it is not said, After my, or After thy image. And therefore that 
place too of the Apostle John must be understood rather according to this image, when he says, "We shall 
be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is;" because he spoke too of Him of whom be had said, "We are 
the sons of God. "(3) And the immortality of the flesh will be perfected in that moment of the resurrection, of 
which the Apostle Paul says, "In the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump; and the dead shall be raised 
incorruptible, and we shall be changed. "(4) For in that very twinkling of an eye, before the judgment, the 
spiritual body shall rise again in power, in incorruption, in glory, which is now sown a natural body in 
weakness, in corruption, in dishonor. But the image which is renewed in the spirit of the mind in the 
knowledge of God, not outwardly, but inwardly, from day to day, shall be perfected by that sight itself; which 
then after the judgment shall be face to face, but now makes progress as through a glass in an enigma. (5) 
And we must understand it to be said on account of this perfection, that "we shall be like Him, for we shall 
see Him as He is." For this gift will be given to us at that time, when it shall have been said, "Come, ye 
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you. "(6) For then will the ungodly be taken away, so 
that he shall not see the glory of the Lord, (7) when those on the left hand shall go into eternal punishment, 
while those on the right go into life eternal. (8) But "this is eternal life," as the Truth tells us; "to know Thee," He 
says, "the one true God, and Jesus Christ whom Thou hast sent."(9) 

26. This contemplative wisdom, which I believe is properly called wisdom as distinct from knowledge in the 
sacred writings; but wisdom only of man, which yet man has not except from Him, by partaking of whom a 
rational and intellectual mind can be made truly wise;-this contemplative wisdom, I say, it is that Cicero 
commends, in the end of the dialogue Hortensius, when he says: "While, then, we consider these things 
night and day, and sharpen our understanding, which is the eye of the mind, taking care that it be not ever 
dulled, that is, while we live in philosophy; we, I say, in so doing, have great hope that, if, on the one hand, 
this sentiment and wisdom of ours is mortal and perishable, we shall still, when we have discharged our 
human offices, have a pleasant setting, and a not painful extinction, and as it were a rest from life: or if, on the 
other, as ancient philosophers thought,-and those, too, the greatest and far the most celebrated, -we have 
souls eternal and divine, then must we needs think, that the more these shall have always kept in their own 
proper course, i.e. in reason and in the desire of inquiry, and the less they shall have mixed and entangled 
themselves in the vices and errors of men, the more easy ascent and return they will have to heaven." And 
then he says, adding this short sentence, and finishing his discourse by repeating it: "Wherefore, to end my 
discourse at last, if we wish either for a tranquil extinction, after living in the pursuit of these subjects, or if to 
migrate without delay from this present home to another in no little measure better, we must bestow all our 
labor and care upon these pursuits." And here I marvel, that a man of such great ability should promise to 
men living in philosophy, which makes man blessed by contemplation of truth, "a pleasant setting after the 
discharge of human offices, if this our sentiment and wisdom is mortal and perishable;" as if that which we 
did not love, or rather which we fiercely hated, were then to die and come to nothing, so that its setting would 
be pleasant to us! But indeed he had not learned this from the philosophers, whom he extols with great 
praise; but this sentiment is redolent of that New Academy, wherein it pleased him to doubt of even the 
plainest things. But from the philosophers that were greatest and far most celebrated, as he himself 
confesses, he had learned that souls are eternal. For souls that are eternal are not unsuitably stirred up by 
the exhortation to be found in "their own proper course," when the end of this life shall have come, i.e. "in 
reason and in the desire of inquiry," and to mix and entangle themselves the less in the vices and errors of 
men, in order that they may have an easier return to God. But that course which consists in the love and 
investigation of truth does not suffice for the wretched, i.e. for all mortals who have only this kind of reason, 
and are. without faith in the Mediator; as I have, taken pains to prove, as much as I could, in former books of 
this work, especially in the fourth and thirteenth. 

THE FIFTEEN BOOKS OF AURELIUS AUGUSTINUS, 
BISHOP OF HIPPO, ON THE TRINITY: BOOK XV 

BOOK XV. 

BEGINS BY SETTING FORTH BRIEFLY AND IN SUM THE CONTENTS OF THE PREVIOUS 
FOURTEEN BOOKS. THE ARGUMENT IS THEN SHOWN TO HAVE REACHED SO FAR AS 
TO ALLOW OF OUR NOW INQUIRING CONCERNING THE TRINITY, WHICH IS GOD, IN 
THOSE ETERNAL, INCORPOREAL, AND UNCHANGEABLE THINGS THEMSELVES, IN 
THE PERFECT CONTEMPLATION OF WHICH A BLESSED LIFE IS PROMISED TO US. BUT 
THIS TRINITY, AS HE SHOWS, IS HERE SEEN BY US AS BY A MIRROR AND IN AN 
ENIGMA, IN THAT IT IS SEEM BY MEANS OF THE IMAGE OF GOD, WHICH WE ARE, AS IN 
A LIKENESS THAT IS OBSCURE AND HARD OF DISCERNMENT. IN LIKE MANNER, IT IS 
SHOWN, THAT SOME KIND OF CONJECTURE AND EXPLANATION MAY BE GATHERED 
RESPECTING THE GENERATION OF THE DIVINE WORD, FROM THE WORD OF OUR 
OWN MIND, BUT ONLY WITH DIFFICULTY, ON ACCOUNT OF THE EXCEEDING 
DISPARITY WHICH IS DISCERNIBLE BETWEEN THE TWO WORDS; AND, AGAIN, 
RESPECTING THE PROCESSION OF THE HOLY SPIRIT, FROM THE LOVE THAT IS 
JOINED THERETO BY THE WILL. 

CHAP. 1.--G0D IS ABOVE THE MIND. 

1 . DESIRING to exercise the reader in the things that are made, in order that he may know Him by whom 
they are made, we have now advanced so far as to His image, which is man, in that wherein he excels the 
other animals, i.e. in reason or intelligence, and whatever else can be said of the rational or intellectual soul 
that pertains to what is called the mind.(1) For by this name some Latin writers, after their own peculiar mode 
of speech, distinguish that which excels in man, and is not in the beast, from the soul, (2) which is in the beast 
as well. If, then, we seek anything that is above this nature, and seek truly, it is God,-namely, a nature not 
created, but creating. And whether this is the Trinity, it is now our business to demonstrate not only to 
believers, by authority of divine Scripture, but also to such as understand, by some kind of reason, if we can. 
And why I say, if we can, the thing itself will show better when we have begun to argue about it in our inquiry. 

CHAP. 2. --GOD, ALTHOUGH INCOMPREHENSIBLE, IS EVER TO BE SOUGHT. THE 
TRACES OF THE TRINITY ARE NOT VAINLY SOUGHT IN THE CREATURE. 

2. For God Himself, whom we seek, will, as I hope, help our labors, that they may not be unfruitful, and that we 
may understand how it is said in the holy Psalm, "Let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord. Seek the 
Lord, and be strengthened: seek His face evermore. "(3) For that which is always being sought seems as 
though it were never found; and how then will the heart of them that seek rejoice, and not rather be made 
sad, if they cannot find what they seek? For it is not said, The heart shall rejoice of them that find, but of them 
that seek, the Lord. And yet the prophet Isaiah testifies, that the Lord God can be found when He is sought, 
when he says: "Seek ye the Lord; and as soon as ye have found Him, call upon Him: and when He has 
drawn near to you, let the wicked man forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his thoughts. "(4) If, then, 
when sought, He can be found, why is it said, "Seek ye His face evermore?" Is He perhaps to be sought 
even when found? For things incomprehensible must so be investigated, as that no one may think he has 
found nothing, when he has been able to find how incomprehensible that is which he was seeking. Why then 
does he so seek, if he comprehends that which he seeks to be incomprehensible, unless because he may 
not give over seeking so long as he makes progress in the inquiry itself into things incomprehensible, and 
becomes ever better and better while seeking so great a good, which is both sought in order to be found, 
and found in order to be sought? For it is both sought in order that it may be found more sweetly, and found 
in order that it may be sought more eagerly. The words of Wisdom in the book of Ecclesiasticus may be 
taken in this meaning: "They who eat me shall still be hungry, and they who drink me shall still be thirsty. "(1) 
For they eat and drink because they find; and they still continue seeking because they are hungry and thirst. 
Faith seeks, understanding finds; whence the prophet says, "Unless ye believe, ye shall not understand. "(2) 
And yet, again, understanding still seeks Him, whom it finds for "God looked down upon the sons of men," 

as it is sung in the holy Psalm, "to see if there were any that would understand, and seek after God. "(3) And 
man, therefore, ought for this purpose to have understanding, that he may seek after God. 

3. We shall have tarried then long enough among those things that God has made, in order that by them He 
Himself may be known that made them. "For the invisible things of Him from the creation of the world are 
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made. "(4) And hence they are rebuked in the book of 
Wisdom, "who could not out of the good things that are seen know Him that is: neither by considering the 
works did they acknowledge the workmaster; but deemed either fire, or wind, or the swift air or the circle of 
the stars, or the violent water, or the lights of heaven, to be the gods which govern the world: with whose 
beauty if they, being delighted, took them to be gods, let them know how much better the Lord of them is; for 
the first Author of beauty hath created them. But if they were astonished at their power and virtue, let them 
understand by them how much mightier He is that made them. For by the greatness and beauty of the 
creatures proportionably the Maker of them is seen"(5) I have quoted these words from the book of Wisdom 
for this reason, that no one of the faithful may think me vainly and emptily to have sought first in the creature, 
step by step through certain trinities, each of their own appropriate kind, until I came at last to the mind of 
man, traces of that highest Trinity which we seek when we seek God. 

CHAP. 3. -A BRIEF RECAPITULATION OF ALL THE PREVIOUS BOOKS. 

4. But since the necessities of our discussion and argument have compelled us to say a great many things 
in the course of fourteen books, which we cannot view at once in one glance, so as to be able to refer them 
quickly in thought to that which we desire to grasp, I will attempt, by the help of God, to the best of my power, 
to put briefly together, without arguing, whatever I have established in the several books by argument as 
known, and to place, as it were, under one mental view, not the way in which we have been convinced of 
each point, but the points themselves of which we have been convinced; in order that what follows may not 
be so far separated from that which precedes, as that the perusal of the former shall produce forgetfulness 
of the latter; or at any rate, if it have produced such forgetfulness, that what has escaped the memory may 
be speedily recalled by re-perusal. 

5. In the first book, the unity and equality of that highest Trinity is shown from Holy Scripture. In the second, 
and third, and fourth, the same: but a careful handling of the question respecting the sending of the Son and 
of the Holy Spirit has resulted in three books; and we have demonstrated, that He who is sent is not 
therefore less than He who sends because the one sent, the other was sent; since the Trinity, which is in all 
things equal, being also equally in its own nature unchangeable, and invisible, and everywhere present, 
works indivisibly. In the fifth,— with a view to those who think that the substance of the Father and of the Son is 
therefore not the same, because they suppose everything that is predicated of God to be predicated 
according to substance, and therefore contend that to beget and to be begotten, or to be begotten and 
unbegotten, as being diverse, are diverse substances,-it is demonstrated that not everything that is 
predicated of God is predicated according to substance, as He is called good and great according to 
substance, or anything else that is predicated of Him in respect to Himself, but that some things also are 
predicated relatively, i.e. not m respect to Himself, but in respect to something which is not Himself; as He is 
called the Father in respect to the Son, or the Lord in respect to the creature that serves Him; and that here, if 
anything thus relatively predicated, i.e. predicated in respect to something that is not Himself, is predicated 
also as in time, as, e.g., "Lord, Thou hast become our refuge, "(1) then nothing happens to Him so as to work 
a change in Him, but He Himself continues altogether unchangeable in His own nature or essence. In the 
sixth, the question how Christ is called by the mouth of the apostle "the power of God and the wisdom of 
God, "(2) is so far argued that the more careful handling of that question is deferred, viz. whether He from 
whom Christ is begotten is not wisdom Himself, but only the father of His own wisdom, or whether wisdom 
begat wisdom. But be it which it may, the equality of the Trinity became apparent in this book also, and that 
God was not triple, but a Trinity; and that the Father and the Son are not, as it were, a double as opposed to 
the single Holy Spirit: for therein three are not anything more than one. We considered, too, how to 
understand the words of Bishop Hilary, "Eternity in the Father, form in the Image, use in the Gift." In the 
seventh, the question is explained which had been deferred: in what way that God who begat the Son is not 
only Father of His own power and wisdom, but is Himself also power and wisdom; so, too, the Holy Spirit; 
and yet that they are not three powers or three wisdoms, but one power and one wisdom, as one God and 
one essence. It was next inquired, in what way they are called one essence, three persons, or by some 
Greeks one essence, three substances; and we found that the words were so used through the needs of 
speech, that there might be one term by which to answer, when it is asked what the three are, whom we truly 
confess to be three, viz. Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit. In the eighth, it is made plain by reason also to 
those who understand, that not only the Father is not greater than the Son in the substance of truth, but that 
both together are not anything greater than the Holy Spirit alone, nor that any two at all in the same Trinity 
are anything greater than one, nor all three together anything greater than each severally. Next, I have 

pointed out, that by means of the truth, which is beheld by the understanding, and by means of the highest 
good, from which is all good, and by means of the righteousness for which a righteous mind is loved even 
by a mind not yet righteous, we might understand, so far as it is possible to understand, that not only 
incorporeal but also unchangeable nature which is God; and by means, too, of love, which in the Holy 
Scriptures is called God, (3) by which, first of all, those who have understanding begin also, however feebly, 
to discern the Trinity, to wit, one that loves, and that which is loved, and love. In the ninth, the argument 
advances as far as to the image of God, viz. man in respect to his mind; and in this we found a kind of trinity, 
i.e. the mind, and the knowledge whereby the mind knows itself, and the love whereby it loves both itself and 
its knowledge of itself; and these three are shown to be mutually equal, and of one essence. In the tenth, the 
same subject is more carefully and subtly handled, and is brought to this point, that we found in the mind a 
still more manifest trinity of the mind, viz. in memory, and understanding, and will. But since it turned out also, 
that the mind could never be in such a case as not to remember, understand, and love itself, although it did 
not always think of itself; but that when it did think of itself, it did not in the same act of thought distinguish itself 
from things corporeal; the argument respecting the Trinity, of which this is an image, was deferred, in order to 
find a trinity also in the things themselves that are seen with the body, and to exercise the reader's attention 
more distinctly in that. Accordingly, in the eleventh, we chose the sense of sight, wherein that which should 
have been there found to hold good might be recognized also in the other four bodily senses, although not 
expressly mentioned; and so a trinity of the outer man first showed itself in those things which are discerned 
from without, to wit, from the bodily object which is seen, and from the form which is thence impressed upon 
the eye of the beholder, and from the purpose of the will combining the two. But these three things, as was 
patent, were not mutually equal and of one substance. Next, we found yet another trinity in the mind itself, 
introduced into it, as it were, by the things perceived from without; wherein the same three things, as it 
appeared, were of one substance: the image of the bodily object which is in the memory, and the form 
thence impressed when the mind's eye of the thinker is turned to it, and the purpose of the will combining the 
two. But we found this trinity to pertain to the outer man, on this account, that it was introduced into the mind 
from bodily objects which are perceived from without. In the twelfth, we thought good to distinguish wisdom 
from knowledge, and to seek first, as being the lower of the two, a kind of appropriate and special trinity in 
that which is specially called knowledge; but that although we have got now in this to something pertaining to 
the inner man, yet it is not yet to be either called or thought an image of God. And this is discussed in the 
thirteenth book by the commendation of Christian faith. In the fourteenth we discuss the true wisdom of man, 
viz. that which is granted him by God's gift in the partaking of that very God Himself, which is distinct from 
knowledge; and the discussion reached this point, that a trinity is discovered in the image of God, which is 
man in respect to his mind, which mind is "renewed in the knowledge" of God," after the image of Him that 
created" man;(1) "after His own image;"(2) and so obtains wisdom, wherein is the contemplation of things 
eternal. 

CHAP. 4.-WHAT UNIVERSAL NATURE TEACHES US CONCERNING GOD. 

6. Let us, then, now seek the Trinity which is God, in the things themselves that are eternal, incorporeal, and 
unchangeable; in the perfect contemplation of which a blessed life is promised us, which cannot be other, 
than eternal. For not only does the authority of the divine books declare that God is; but the whole nature of 
the universe itself which surrounds us, and to which we also belong, proclaims that it has a most excellent 
Creator, who has given to us a mind and natural reason, whereby to see that things living are to be preferred 
to things that are not living; things that have sense to things that have not; things that have understanding to 
things that have not; things immortal to things mortal; things powerful to things impotent; things righteous to 
things unrighteous; things beautiful to things deformed: things good to things evil; things incorruptible to 
things corruptible; things changeable to things changeable; things invisible to things visible; things 
incorporeal to things corporeal; things blessed to things miserable. And hence, since without doubt we 
place the Creator above things created, we must needs confess that the Creator both lives in the highest 
sense, and perceives and understands all things, and that He cannot die, or suffer decay, or be changed; 
and that He is not a body, but a spirit, of all the most powerful, most righteous, most beautiful, most good, 
most blessed. 

CHAP. 5.--H0W DIFFICULT IT IS TO DEMONSTRATE THE TRINITY BY NATURAL 
REASON. 

7. But all that I have said, and whatever else seems to be worthily said of God after the like fashion of human 
speech, applies to the whole Trinity, which is one God, and to the several Persons in that Trinity. For who 
would dare to say either of the one God, which is the Trinity itself, or of the Father, or Son, or Holy Spirit, 
either that He is not living, or is without sense or intelligence; or that, in that nature in which they are affirmed 

to be mutually equal, any one of them is mortal, or corruptible, or changeable, or corporeal? Or is there any 
one who would deny that any one in the Trinity is most powerful, most righteous, most beautiful, most good, 
most blessed? If, then, these things, and all others of the kind, can be predicated both of the Trinity itself, and 
of each several one in that Trinity, where or how shall the Trinity manifest itself? Let us therefore first reduce 
these numerous predicates to some limited number. For that which is called life in God, is itself His essence 
and nature. God, therefore, does not live, unless by the life which He is to Himself. And this life is not such as 
that which is in a tree, wherein is neither understanding nor sense; nor such as is in a beast, for the life of a 
beast possesses the fivefold sense, but has no understanding. But the life which is God perceives and 
understands all things, and perceives by mind, not by body, because "God is a spirit."(3) And God does not 
perceive through a body, as animals do, which have bodies, for He does not consist of soul and body. And 
hence that single nature perceives as it understands, and understands as it perceives, and its sense and 
understanding are one and the same. Nor yet so, that at any time He should either cease or begin to be; for 
He is immortal. And it is not said of Him in vain, that "He only hath immortality. "(4) For immortality is true 
immortality in His case whose nature admits no change. That is also true eternity by which God is 
unchangeable, without beginning, without end; consequently also incorruptible. It is one and the same thing, 
therefore, to call God eternal, or immortal, or incorruptible, or unchangeable; and it is likewise one and the 
same thing to say that He is living, and that He is intelligent, that is, in truth, wise. For He did not receive 
wisdom whereby to be wise, but He is Himself wisdom. And this is life, and again is power or might, and yet 
again beauty, whereby He is called powerful and beautiful. For what is more powerful and more beautiful 
than wisdom, "which reaches from end to end mightily, and sweetly disposes all things"?(5) Or do 
goodness, again, and righteousness, differ from each other in the nature of God, as they differ in His works, 
as though they were two diverse qualities of God-goodness one, and righteousness another? Certainly not; 
but that which is righteousness is also itself goodness; and that which is goodness is also itself 
blessedness. And God is therefore called incorporeal, that He may be believed and understood to be a 
spirit, not a body. 

8. Further, if we say, Eternal, immortal incorruptible, unchangeable, living, wise, powerful, beautiful, righteous, 
good, blessed spirit; only the last of this list as it were seems to signify substance, but the rest to signify 
qualities of that substance; but it is not so in that ineffable and simple nature. For whatever seems to be 
predicated therein according to quality, is to be understood according to substance or essence For far be it 
from us to predicate spirit of God according to substance, and good according to quality; but both 
according to substance. (1) And so in like manner of all those we have mentioned, of which we have already 
spoken at length in the former books. Let us choose, then, one of the first four of those in our enumeration 
and arrangement, i.e. eternal, immortal, incorruptible, unchangeable; since these four, as I have argued 
already, have one meaning; in order that our aim may not be distracted by a multiplicity of objects. And let it 
be rather that which was placed first, viz. eternal. Let us follow the same course with the four that come next, 
viz. living, wise, powerful, beautiful. And since life of some sort belongs also to the beast, which has not 
wisdom; while the next two, viz. wisdom and might, are so compared to one another in the case of man, as 
that Scripture says, "Better is he that is wise than he that is strong;"(2) and beauty, again, is commonly 
attributed to bodily objects also: out of these four that we have chosen, let Wise be the one we take. 
Although these four are not to be called unequal in speaking of God; for they are four names, but one thing. 
But of the third and last four,-although it is the same thing in God to be righteous that it is to be good or to be 
blessed; and the same thing to be a spirit that it is to be righteous, and good, and blessed; yet, because in 
men there can be a spirit that is not blessed, and there can be one both righteous and good, but not yet 
blessed; but that which is blessed is doubtless both just, and good, and a spirit, — let us rather choose that 
one which cannot exist even in men without the three others, viz. blessed. 

CHAP. 6. -HOW THERE IS A TRINITY IN THE VERY SIMPLICITY OF GOD. WHETHER AND 
HOW THE TRINITY THAT IS GOD IS MANIFESTED FROM THE TRINITIES WHICH HAVE 
BEEN SHOWN TO BE IN MEN. 

9. When, then, we say, Eternal, wise, blessed, are these three the Trinity that is called God? We reduce, 
indeed, those twelve to this small number of three; but perhaps we can go further, and reduce these three 
also to one of them. For if wisdom and might, or life and wisdom, can be one and the same thing in the 
nature of God, why cannot eternity and wisdom, or blessedness and wisdom, be one and the same thing in 
the nature of God? And hence, as it made no difference whether we spoke of these twelve or of those three 
when we reduced the many to the small number; so does it make no difference whether we speak of those 
three, or of that one, to the singularity of which we have shown that the other two of the three may be reduced. 
What fashion, then, of argument, what possible force and might of understanding, what liveliness of reason, 
what sharp-sightedness of thought, will set forth how (to pass over now the others) this one thing, that God is 
called wisdom, is a trinity? For God does not receive wisdom from any one as we receive it from Him, but 

He is Himself His own wisdom; because His wisdom is not one thing, and His essence another, seeing that 
to Him to be wise is to be. Christ, indeed, is called in the Holy Scriptures, "the power of God, and the wisdom 
of God. "(3) But we have discussed in the seventh book how this is to be understood, so that the Son may not 
seem to. make the Father wise; and our explanation came to this, that the Son is wisdom of wisdom, in the 
same way as He is light of light, God of God. Nor could we find the Holy Spirit to be in any other way than 
that He. Himself also is wisdom, and altogether one wisdom, as one God, one essence. How, then, do we 
understand this wisdom, which is God, to be a trinity? I do not say, How do we believe this? For among the 
faithful this ought to admit no question. But supposing there is any way by which we can see with the 
understanding what we believe, what is that way? 

10. For if we recall where it was in these books that a trinity first began to show itself to our understanding, the 
eighth book is that which occurs to us; since it was there that to the best of our power we tried to raise the aim 
of the mind to understand that most excellent and unchangeable nature, which our mind is not. And we so 
contemplated this nature as to think of it as not far from us, and as above us, not in place, but by its own awful 
and wonderful excellence, and in such wise that it appeared to be with us by its own present light. Yet in this 
no trinity was yet manifest to us, because in that blaze of light we did not keep the eye of the mind 
steadfastly bent upon seeking it; only we discerned it in a sense, because there was no bulk wherein we 
must needs think the magnitude of two or three to be more than that of one. But when we came to treat of 
love, which in the Holy Scriptures is called God,(1) then a trinity began to dawn upon us a little, i.e. one that 
loves, and that which is loved, and love. But because that ineffable light beat back our gaze, and it became 
in some degree plain that the weakness of our mind could not as yet be tempered to it, we turned back in 
the midst of the course we had begun, and planned according to the (as it were) more familiar consideration 
of our own mind, according to which man is made after the image of God, (2) in order to relieve our 
overstrained attention; and thereupon we dwelt from the ninth to the fourteenth book upon the consideration 
of the creature, which we are, that we might the able to understand and behold the invisible things of God by 
those things which are made. And now that we have exercised the understanding, as far as was needful, or 
perhaps more than was needful, in lower things, lo! we wish, but have not strength, to raise ourselves to 
behold that highest Trinity which is God. For in such manner as we see most undoubted trinities, whether 
those which are wrought from without by corporeal things, or when these same things are thought of which 
were perceived from without; or when those things which take their rise in the mind, and do not pertain to the 
senses of the body, as faith, or as the virtues which comprise the art of living, are discerned by manifest 
reason, and, held fast by knowledge; or when the mind itself, by which we know whatever we truly say that 
we know, is known to itself, or thinks of itself; or when that mind beholds anything eternal and unchangeable, 
which itself is not;-in such way, then, I say, as we see in all these instances most undoubted trinities, 
because they are wrought in ourselves, or are in ourselves, when we remember, look at, or desire these 
things;-do we, I say, in such manner also see the Trinity that is God; because there also, by the 
understanding, we behold both Him as it were speaking, and His Word, i.e. the Father and the Son; and 
then, proceeding thence, the love common to both, namely, the Holy Spirit? These trinities that pertain to our 
senses or to our mind, do we rather see than believe them, but rather believe than see that God is a trinity? 
But if this is so, then doubtless we either do not at all understand and behold the invisible things of God by 
those things that are made, or if we behold them at all, we do not behold the Trinity in them; and there is 
therein somewhat to behold, and somewhat also which we ought to believe, even though not beheld. And 
as the eighth book showed that we behold the unchangeable good which we are not, so the fourteenth 
reminded us thereof, when we spoke of the wisdom that man has from God. Why, then, do we not recognize 
the Trinity therein? Does that wisdom which God is said to be, not perceive itself, and not love itself? Who 
would say this? Or who is there that does not see, that where there is no knowledge, there in no way is there 
wisdom? Or are we, in truth, to think that the Wisdom which is God knows other things, and does not know 
itself; or loves other things, and does not love itself? But if this is a foolish and impious thing to say or 
believe, then behold we have a trinity,— to wit, wisdom, and the knowledge wisdom has of itself, and its love 
of itself. For so, too, we find a trinity in man also, i.e. mind, and the knowledge wherewith mind knows itself, 
and the love wherewith it loves itself. 

CHAP. 7. -THAT IT IS NOT EASY TO DISCOVER THE TRINITY THAT IS GOD FROM THE 
TRINITIES WE HAVE SPOKEN OF. 

1 1 . But these three are in such way in man, that they are not themselves man. For man, as the ancients 
defined him, is a rational mortal animal. These things, therefore, are the chief things in man, but are not man 
themselves. And any one person, i.e. each individual man, has these three things in his mind. But if, again, 
we were so to define man as to say, Man is a rational substance consisting of mind and body, then without 
doubt man has a soul that is not body, and a body that is not soul. And hence these three things are not 
man, but belong to man, or are in man. If, again, we put aside the body, and think of the soul by itself, the 

mind is somewhat belonging to the soul, as though its head, or eye, or countenance; but these things are not 
to be regarded as bodies. It is not then the soul, but that which is chief in the soul, that is called the mind. But 
can we say that the Trinity is in such way in God, as to be somewhat belonging to God, and not itself God? 
And hence each individual man, who is called the image of God, not according to all things that pertain to 
his nature, but according to his mind alone, is one person, and is an image of the Trinity in his mind. But that 
Trinity of which he is the image is nothing else in its totality than God, is nothing else in its totality than the 
Trinity. Nor does anything pertain to the nature of God so as not to pertain to that Trinity; and the Three 
Persons are of one essence, not as each individual man is one person. 

12. There is, again, a wide difference in this point likewise, that whether we speak of the mind in a man, and 
of its knowledge and love; or of memory, understanding, will,— we remember nothing of the mind except by 
memory, nor understand anything except by understanding, nor love anything except by will. But in that 
Trinity, who would dare to say that the Father understands neither Himself, nor the Son, nor the Holy Spirit, 
except by the Son, or loves them except by the Holy Spirit; and that He remembers only by Himself either 
Himself, or the Son, or the Holy Spirit; and in the same way that the Son remembers neither Himself nor the 
Father, except by the Father, nor loves them except by the Holy Spirit; but that by Himself He only 
understands both the Father and Son and Holy Spirit: and in like manner, that the Holy Spirit by the Father 
remembers both the Father and the Son and Himself, and by the Son understands both the Father and the 
Son and Himself; but by Himself only loves both Himself and the Father and the Son;-as though the Father 
were both His own memory, and that of the Son and of the Holy Spirit; and the Son were the understanding 
of both Himself, and the Father and the Holy Spirit; but the Holy Spirit were the love both of Himself, and of 
the Father and of the Son? Who would presume to think or affirm this of that Trinity? For if therein the Son 
alone understands both for Himself and for the Father and for the Holy Spirit, we have returned to the old 
absurdity, that the Father is not wise from Himself, but from the Son, and that wisdom has not begotten 
wisdom, but that the Father is said to be wise by that wisdom which He begat. For where there is no 
understanding there can be no wisdom; and hence, if the Father does not understand Himself for Himself, 
but the Son understands for the Father, assuredly the Son makes the Father wise. But if to God to be is to be 
wise, and essence is to Him the same as wisdom, then it is not the Son that has His essence from the 
Father, which is the truth, but rather the Father from the Son, which is a most absurd falsehood. And this 
absurdity, beyond all doubt, we have discussed, disproved, and rejected, in the seventh book. Therefore 
God the Father is wise by that wisdom by which He is His own wisdom, and the Son is the wisdom of the 
Father from the wisdom which is the Father, from whom the Son is begotten; whence it follows that the Father 
understands also by that understanding by which He is His own understanding (for he could not be Wise 
that did not understand); and that the Son is the understanding of the Father, begotten of the understanding 
which is the Father. And this same may not be unfitly said of memory also. For how is he wise, that 
remembers nothing, or does not remember himself? Accordingly, since the Father is wisdom, and the Son is 
wisdom, therefore, as the Father remembers Himself, so does the Son also remember Himself; and as the 
Father remembers both Himself and the Son, not by the memory of the Son, but by His own, so does the 
Son remember both Himself and the Father, not by the memory of the Father, but by His own. Where, again, 
there is no love, who would say there was any wisdom? And hence we must infer that the Father is in such 
way His own love, as He is His own understanding and memory. And therefore these three, i.e. memory, 
understanding, love or will in that highest and unchangeable essence which is God, are, we see, not the 
Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, but the Father alone. And because the Son too is wisdom begotten 
of wisdom, as neither the Father nor the Holy Spirit understands for Him, but He understands for Himself; so 
neither does the Father remember for Him, nor the Holy Spirit love for Him, but He remembers and loves for 
Himself: for He is Himself also His own memory, His own understanding, and His own love. But that He is so 
comes to Him from the Father, of whom He is born. And because the Holy Spirit also is wisdom proceeding 
from wisdom, He too has not the Father for a memory, and the Son for an understanding, and Himself for 
love: for He would not be wisdom if another remembered for Him, and yet another understood for Him, and 
He only loved for Himself; but Himself has all three things, and has them in such way that they are Himself. 
But that He is so comes to Him thence, whence He proceeds. 

13. What man, then, is there who can comprehend that wisdom by which God knows all things, in such wise 
that neither what we call things past are past therein, nor what we call things future are therein waited for as 
coming, as though they were absent, but both past and future with things present are all present; nor yet are 
things thought severally, so that thought passes from one to another, but all things simultaneously are at 
hand in one glance;-what man, I say, is there that comprehends that wisdom, and the like prudence, and the 
like knowledge, since in truth even our own wisdom is beyond our comprehension? For somehow we are 
able to behold the things that are present to our senses or to our understanding; but the things that are 
absent, and yet have once been present, we know by memory, if we have not forgotten them. And we 
conjecture, too, not the past from the future, but the future from the past, yet by all unstable knowledge. For 
there are some of our thoughts to which, although future, we, as it were, look onward with greater plainness 

and certainty as being very near; and we do this by the means of memory when we are able to do it, as 
much as we ever are able, although memory seems to belong not to the future, but to the past. And this may 
be tried in the case of any words or songs, the due order of which we are rendering by memory; for we 
certainly should not utter each in succession, unless we foresaw in thought what came next. And yet it is not 
foresight, but memory, that enables us to foresee it; for up to the very end of the words or the song, nothing is 
uttered except as foreseen and looked forward to. And yet in doing this, we are not said to speak or sing by 
foresight, but by memory; and if any one is more than commonly capable of uttering many pieces in this 
way, he is usually praised, not for his foresight, but for his memory. We know, and are absolutely certain, that 
all this takes place in our mind or by our mind; but how it takes place, the more attentively we desire to 
scrutinize, the more do both our very words breakdown, and our purpose itself fails, when by our 
understanding, if not our tongue, we would reach to something of clearness. And do such as we are, think, 
that in so great infirmity of mind we can comprehend whether the foresight of God is the same as His 
memory and His understanding, who does not regard in thought each several thing, but embraces all that 
He knows in one eternal and unchangeable and ineffable vision? In this difficulty, then, and strait, we may 
well cry out to the living God, "Such knowledge is too wonderful for me: it is high, I cannot attain unto it."(1) For 
I understand by myself how wonderful and incomprehensible is Thy knowledge, by which Thou madest me, 
when I cannot even comprehend myself whom Thou hast made! And yet, "while I was musing, the fire 
burned, "(2) so that "I seek Thy face evermore. "(3) 

CHAP. 8. -HOW THE APOSTLE SAYS THAT GOD IS NOW SEEN BY US THROUGH A 
GLASS. 

14. 1 know that wisdom is an incorporeal substance, and that it is the light by which those things are seen that 
are not seen by carnal eyes; and yet a man so great and so spiritual [as Paul] says, "We see now through a 
glass, in an enigma, but then face to face. "(4) If we ask what and of what sort is this "glass," this assuredly 
occurs to our minds, that in a glass nothing is discerned but an image. We have endeavored, then, so to do; 
in order that we might see in some ;way or other by this image which we are, Him by whom we are made, as 
by a glass. And this is intimated also in the words of the same apostle: "But we with open face, beholding as 
in a glass the glory of the Lord, are transformed into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the 
Spirit of the Lord. "(5) "Beholding as in a glass, "(6) he has said, i.e. seeing by means of a glass, not looking 
from a watch-tower: an ambiguity that does not exist in the Greek language, whence the apostolic epistles 
have been rendered into Latin. For in Greek, a glass, (7) in which the images of things are visible, is wholly 
distinct in the sound of the word also from a watch-tower,(8) from the height of which we command a more 
distant view. And it is quite plain that the apostle, in using the word "speculantes" in respect to the glory of 
the Lord, meant it to come from "speculum," not from "specula." But where he says, "We are transformed 
into the same image," he assuredly means to speak of the image of God; and by calling it "the same," he 
means that very image which we see in the glass, because that same image is also the glory of the Lord; as 
he says elsewhere, "For a man indeed ought not to cover his head, forasmuch as he is the image and glory 
of God,"(9)-a text already discussed in the twelfth book. He means, then, by "We are transformed," that we 
are changed from one form to another, and that we pass from a form that is obscure to a form that is bright: 
since the obscure form, too, is the image of God; and if an image, then assuredly also "glory," in which we 
are created as men, being better than the other animals. For it is said of human nature in itself, "The man 
ought not to cover his head, because he is the image and glory of God." And this nature, being the most 
excellent among things created, is transformed from a form that is defaced into a form that is beautiful, when 
it is justified by its own Creator from ungodliness. Since even in ungodliness itself, the more the faultiness is 
to be condemned, the more certainly is the nature to be praised. And therefore he has added, "from glory to 
glory:" from the glory of creation to the glory of justification. Although these words, "from glory to glory," may 
be understood also in other ways;-from the glory of faith to the glory of sight, from the glory whereby we are 
sons of God to the glory whereby we shall be like Him, because "we shall see Him as He is."(1) But in that 
he has added "as from the Spirit of the Lord," he declares that the blessing of so desirable a transformation 
is conferred upon us by the grace of God. 

CHAP. 9. --OF THE TERM "ENIGMA," AND OF TROPICAL MODES OF SPEECH, 

15. What has been said relates to the words of the apostle, that "we see now through a glass;" but whereas 
he has added, "in an enigma," the meaning of this addition is unknown to any who are unacquainted with the 
books that contain the doctrine of those modes of speech, which the Greeks call Tropes, which Greek word 
we also use in Latin. For as we more commonly speak of schemata than of figures, so we more commonly 
speak of tropes than of modes. And it is a very difficult and uncommon thing to express the names of the 
several modes or tropes in Latin, so as to refer its appropriate name to each. And hence some Latin 

translators, through unwillingness to employ a Greek word, where the apostle says," Which things are an 
allegory, "(2) have rendered it by a circumlocution-Which things signify one thing by another. But there are 
several species of this kind of trope that is called allegory, and one of them is that which is called enigma. 
Now the definition of the generic term must necessarily embrace also all its species; and hence, as every 
horse is an animal, but not every animal is a horse, so every enigma is an allegory, but every allegory is not 
an enigma. What then is an allegory, but a trope wherein one thing is understood from another? as in the 
Epistle to the Thessalonians, "Let us not therefore sleep, as do others; but let us watch and be sober: for 
they who sleep, sleep in the night; and they who are drunken, are drunken in the night: but let us who are of 
the day, be sober."(3) But this allegory is not an enigma, for here the meaning is patent to all but the very 
dull; but an enigma is, to explain it briefly, an obscure allegory, as, e.g., "The horseleech had three 
daughters, "(4) and other like instances. But when the apostle spoke of an allegory, he does not find it in the 
words, but in the fact; since he has shown that the two Testaments are to be understood by the two sons of 
Abraham, one by a bondmaid, and the other by a free woman, which was a thing not said, but also done. 
And before this was explained, it was obscure; and accordingly such an allegory, which is the generic 
name, could be specifically called an enigma. 

16. But because it is not only those that are ignorant of the books that contain the doctrine Of tropes, who 
inquire the apostle's meaning, when he said that we "see now in an enigma, but those, too, who are 
acquainted with the doctrine, but yet desire to know what that enigma is in which "we now see;" we must find 
a single meaning for the two phrases, viz. for that which says, "we see now through a glass," and for that 
which adds, "in an enigma." For it makes but one sentence, when the whole is so uttered, "We see now 
through a glass in an enigma." Accordingly, as far as my judgment goes, as by the word glass he meant to 
signify an image, so by that of enigma any likeness you will, but yet one obscure, and difficult to see through. 
While, therefore, any likenesses whatever may be understood as signified by the apostle when he speaks 
of a glass and an enigma, so that they are adapted to the understanding of God, in such way as He can be 
understood; yet nothing is better adapted to this purpose than that which is not vainly called His image. Let 
no one, then, wonder, that we labor to see in any way at all, even in that fashion of seeing which is granted to 
us in this life, viz. through a glass, in an enigma. For we should not hear of an enigma in this place if sight 
were easy. And this is a yet greater enigma, that we do not see what we cannot but see. For who does not 
See his own thought? And yet who does see his own thought, I do not say with the eye of the flesh, but with 
the inner sight itself? Who does not see it, and who does see it? Since thought is a kind of sight of the mind; 
whether those things are present which are seen also by the bodily eyes, or perceived by the other senses; 
or whether they are not present, but their likenesses are discerned by thought; or whether neither of these is 
the case, but things are thought Of that are neither bodily things nor likenesses of bodily things, as the 
virtues and vices; or as, indeed, thought itself is thought of; or whether it be those things which are the 
subjects of instruction and of liberal sciences; or whether the higher causes and reasons themselves of all 
these things in the unchangeable nature are thought of; or whether it be even evil, and vain, and false things 
that we are thinking of, with either the sense not consenting, or erring in its consent. 

CHAP. 10. --CONCERNING THE WORD OF THE MIND, IN WHICH WE SEE THE WORD OF 
GOD, AS IN A GLASS AND AN ENIGMA. 

17. But let us now speak of those things of which we think as known, and have in our knowledge even if we 
do not think of them; whether they belong to the contemplative knowledge, which, as I have argued, is 
properly to be called wisdom, or to the active which is properly to be called knowledge. For both together 
belong to one mind, and are one image of God. But when we treat of the lower of the two distinctly and 
separately, then it is not to be called an image of God, although even then, too, some likeness of that Trinity 
may be found in it; as we showed in the thirteenth book. We speak now, therefore, of the entire knowledge of 
man altogether, in which whatever is known to us is known; that, at any rate, which is true; otherwise it would 
not be known. For no one knows what is false, except when he knows it to be false; and if he knows this, then 
he knows what is true: for it is true that that is false. We treat, therefore, now of those things which we think as 
known, and which are known to us even if they are not being thought of But certainly, if we would utter them in 
words, we can only do so by thinking them. For although there were no words spoken, at any rate, he who 
thinks speaks in his heart. And hence that passage in the book of Wisdom: "They said within themselves, 
thinking not aright. "(1) For the words, "They said within themselves," are explained by the addition of 
"thinking." A like passage to this is that in the Gospel, -that certain scribes, when they heard the Lord's words 
to the paralytic man, "Be of good cheer, my son, thy sins are forgiven thee," said within themselves, "This 
man blasphemeth." For how did they "say within themselves," except by thinking? Then follows, "And when 
Jesus saw their thoughts, He said, Why think ye evil in your thoughts?"(2) So far Matthew. But Luke narrates 
the same thing thus: "The scribes and Pharisees began to think, saying, Who is this that speaketh 
blasphemies? Who can forgive sins but God alone? But when Jesus perceived their thoughts, He, 

answering, said unto them, What think ye in your hearts?"(3) That which in the book of Wisdom is, "They 
said, thinking," is the same here with, "They thought, saying." For both there and here it is declared, that they 
spake within themselves, and in their own heart, i.e. spake by thinking. For they "spake within themselves," 
and it was said to them, "What think ye?" And the Lord Himself says of that rich man whose ground brought 
forth plentifully, "And he thought within himself, saying. "(4) 

18. Some thoughts, then, are speeches of the heart, wherein the Lord also shows that there is a mouth, when 
He says, "Not that which entereth into the mouth defileth a man; but that which proceedeth out of the mouth, 
that defileth a man." In one sentence He has comprised two diverse mouths of the man, one of the body, 
one of the heart. For assuredly, that from which they thought the man to be defiled, enters into the mouth of 
the body; but that from which the Lord said the man was defiled, proceedeth out of the mouth of the heart. So 
certainly He Himself explained what He had said. For a little after, He says also to His disciples concerning 
the same thing: "Are ye also yet without understanding? Do ye not understand, that whatsoever entereth in at 
the mouth goeth into the belly, and is east out into the draught?" Here He most certainly pointed to the mouth 
of the body. But in that which follows He plainly speaks of the mouth of the heart, where He says, "But those 
things which proceed out of the mouth come forth from the heart; and they defile the man. For out of the heart 
proceed evil thoughts, "(5) etc. What is clearer than this explanation? And yet, when we call thoughts 
speeches of the heart, it does not follow that they are not also acts of sight, arising from the sight of 
knowledge, when they are true. For when these things are done outwardly by means of the body, then 
speech and sight are different things; but when we think inwardly, the two are one,-just as sight and hearing 
are two things mutually distinct in the bodily senses, but to see and hear are the same thing in the mind; and 
hence, while speech is not seen but rather heard outwardly, yet the inward speeches, i.e. thoughts, are said 
by the holy Gospel to have been seen, not heard, by the Lord. "They said within themselves, This man 
blasphemeth," says the Gospel; and then subjoined, "And when Jesus saw their thoughts." Therefore He 
saw, what they said. For by His own thought He saw their thoughts, which they supposed no one saw but 
themselves. 

19. Whoever, then, is able to understand a word, not only before it is uttered in sound, but also before the 
images of its sounds are considered in thought,-for this it is which belongs to no tongue, to wit, of those 
which are called the tongues of nations, of which our Latin tongue is one;-whoever, I say, is able to 
understand this, is able now to see through this glass and in this enigma some likeness of that Word of 
whom it is said, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God."(1) For 
of necessity, when we speak what is true, i.e. speak what we know, there is born from the knowledge itself 
which the memory retains, a word that is altogether of the same kind with that knowledge from which it is 
born. For the thought that is formed by the thing which we know, is the word which we speak in the heart: 
which word is neither Greek nor Latin, nor of any other tongue. But when it is needful to convey this to the 
knowledge of those to whom we speak, then some sign is assumed whereby to signify it. And generally a 
sound, sometimes a nod, is exhibited, the former to the ears, the latter to the eyes, that the word which we 
bear in our mind may become known also by bodily signs to the bodily senses. For what is to nod or 
beckon, except to speak in some way to the sight? And Holy Scripture gives its testimony to this; for we read 
in the Gospel according to John: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me. Then the 
disciples looked one upon another, doubting of whom He spake. Now there was leaning on Jesus' breast 
one of His disciples whom Jesus loved. Simon Peter therefore beckons to him, and says to him, Who is it of 
whom He speaks?"(2) Here he spoke by beckoning what he did not venture to speak by sounds. But 
whereas we exhibit these and the like bodily signs either to ears or eyes of persons present to whom we 
speak, letters have been invented that we might be able to converse also with the absent; but these are 
signs of words, as words themselves are signs in our conversation of those things which we think. 

CHAP. 11. -THE LIKENESS OF THE DIVINE WORD, SUCH AS IT IS, IS TO BE SOUGHT, 
NOT IN OUR OWN OUTER AND SENSIBLE WORD, BUT IN THE INNER AND MENTAL 
ONE. THERE IS THE GREATEST POSSIBLE UNLIKENESS BETWEEN OUR WORD AND 
KNOWLEDGE AND THE DIVINE WORD AND KNOWLEDGE. 

20. Accordingly, the word that sounds outwardly is the sign of the word that gives light inwardly; which latter 
has the greater claim to be called a word. For that which is uttered with the mouth of the flesh, is the articulate 
sound of a word; and is itself also called a word, on account of that to make which outwardly apparent it is 
itself assumed. For our word is so made in some way into an articulate sound of the body, by assuming that 
articulate sound by which it may be manifested to men's senses, as the Word of God was made flesh, by 
assuming that flesh in which itself also might be manifested to men's senses. And as our word becomes an 
articulate sound, yet is not changed into one; so the Word of God became flesh, but far be it from us to say 
He was changed into flesh, For both that word of ours became an articulate sound, and that other Word 
became flesh, by assuming it, not by consuming itself so as to be changed into it. And therefore whoever 

desires to arrive at any likeness, be it of what sort it may, of the Word of God, however in many respects 
unlike, must not regard the word of ours that, sounds in the ears, either when it is uttered in an articulate 
sound or when it is silently thought. For the words of all tongues that are uttered in sound are also silently 
thought, and the mind runs over verses while the bodily mouth is silent. And not only the numbers of 
syllables, but the tunes also of songs, since they are corporeal, and pertain to that sense of the body which 
is called hearing, are at hand by certain incorporeal images appropriate to them, to those who think of them, 
and who silently revolve all these things. But we must pass by this, in order to arrive at that word of man, by 
the likeness of which, be it of what sort it may, the Word of God may be somehow seen as in an enigma. Not 
that word which was spoken to this or that prophet, and of which it is said, "Now the word of God grew and 
multiplied;"(3) and again, "Faith then cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of Christ;"(1) and again, 
"When ye received the word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word of men but, as it is in 
truth, the word of God"(2) (and there are countless other like sayings in the Scriptures respecting the word of 
God, which is disseminated in the sounds of many and diverse languages through the hearts and mouths of 
men; and which is therefore called the word of God, because the doctrine thai is delivered is not human, but 
divine);-but we are now seeking to see, in whatsoever way we can, by means of this likeness, that Word of 
God of which it is said, "The Word was God;" of which it is said, "All things were made by Him;" of which it is 
said, "The Word became flesh;" of which it is said "The Word of God on high is the fountain of wisdom. "(3) 
We must go on, then, to that word of man, to the word of the rational animal, to the word of that image of God, 
that is not born of God, but made by God; which is neither utterable in sound nor capable of being thought 
under the likeness of sound such as must needs be with the word of any tongue; but which precedes all the 
signs by which it is signified, and is begotten from the knowledge that continues in the mind, when that same 
knowledge is spoken inwardly according as it really is. For the sight of thinking is exceedingly like the sight 
of knowledge. For when it is uttered by sound, or by any bodily sign, it is not uttered according as it really is, 
but as it can be seen or heard by the body. When, therefore, that is in the word which is in the knowledge, 
then there is a true word, and truth, such as is looked for from man; such that what is in the knowledge is also 
in the word, and what is not in the knowledge is also not in the word. Here may be recognized, "Yea, yea; 
nay, nay. "(4) And so this likeness of the image that is made, approaches as nearly as is possible to that 
likeness of the image that is born, by which God the Son is declared to be in all things like in substance to 
the Father. We must notice in this enigma also another likeness of the word of God; viz. that, as it is said of 
that Word, "All things were made by Him," where God is declared to have made the universe by His 
only-begotten Son, so there are no works of man that are not first spoken in his heart: whence it is written, "A 
word is the beginning of every work."(5) But here also, it is when the word is true, that then it is the beginning 
of a good work. And a word is true when it is begotten from the knowledge of working good works, so that 
there too may be preserved the "yea yea, nay nay;" in order that whatever is in that knowledge by which we 
are to live, may be also in the word by which we are to work, and whatever is not in the one may not be in the 
other. Otherwise such a word will be a lie, not truth; and what comes thence will be a sin, and not a good 
work. There is yet this other likeness of the Word of God in this likeness of our word, that there can be a word 
of ours with no work following it, but there cannot be any work unless a word precedes; just as the Word of 
God could have existed though no creature existed, but no creature could exist unless by that Word by 
which all things are made. And therefore not God the Father, not the Holy Spirit, not the Trinity itself, but the 
Son only, which is the Word of God, was made flesh; although the Trinity was the maker: in order that we 
might live rightly through our word following and imitating His example, i.e. by having no lie in either the 
thought or the work of our word. But this perfection of this image is one to be at some time hereafter. In order 
to attain this it is that the good master teaches us by Christian faith, and by pious doctrine, that "with face 
unveiled" from the veil of the law, which is the shadow of things to come, "beholding as in a glass the glory of 
the Lord," i.e. gazing at it through a glass, "we may be transformed into the same image from glory to glory, 
as by the Spirit of the Lord;"(6) as we explained above. 

21 . When, therefore, this image shall have been renewed to perfection by this transformation, then we shall 
be like God, because we shall see Him, not through a glass, but "as He is;"(7) which the Apostle Paul 
expresses by "face to face. "(8) But now, who can explain how great is the unlikeness also, in this glass, in 
this enigma, in this likeness such as it is? Yet I will touch upon some points, as I can, by which to indicate it. 

CHAP. 12. -THE ACADEMIC PHILOSOPHY. 

First, of what sort and how great is the very knowledge itself that a man can attain, be he ever so skillful and 
learned, by which our thought is formed with truth, when we speak what we know? For to pass by those 
things that come into the mind from the bodily senses, among which so many are otherwise than they seem 
to be, that he who is overmuch pressed down by their resemblance to truth, seems sane to himself, but 
really is not sane;-whence it is that the Academic(1) philosophy has so prevailed as to be still more 
wretchedly insane by doubting all things;-passing by, then, those things that come into the mind by the 

bodily senses, how large a proportion is left of things which we know in such manner as we know that we 
live? In regard to this, indeed, we are absolutely without any fear lest perchance we are being deceived by 
some resemblance of the truth; since it is certain, that he who is deceived, yet lives. And this again is not 
reckoned among those objects of sight that are presented from without, so that the eye may be deceived in 
it; in such way as it is when an oar in the water looks bent, and towers seem to move as you sail past them, 
and a thousand other things that are otherwise than they seem to be: for this is not a thing that is discerned 
by the eye of the flesh. The knowledge by which we know that we live is the most inward of all knowledge, of 
which even the Academic cannot insinuate: Perhaps you are asleep, and do not know it, and you see things 
in your sleep. For who does not know that what people see in dreams is precisely like what they see when 
awake? But he who is certain of the knowledge of his own life, does not therein say, I know I am awake, but, I 
know I am alive; therefore, whether he be asleep or awake, he is alive. Nor can he be deceived in that 
knowledge by dreams; since it belongs to a living man both to sleep and to see in sleep. Nor can the 
Academic again say, in confutation of this knowledge: Perhaps you are mad, and do not know it: for what 
madmen see is precisely like what they also see who are sane; but he who is mad is alive. Nor does he 
answer the Academic by saying, I know I am not mad, but, I know I am alive. Therefore he who says he 
knows he is alive, can neither be deceived nor lie. Let a thousand kinds, then, of deceitful objects of sight be 
presented to him who says, I know I am alive; yet he will fear none of them, for he who is deceived yet is 
alive. But if such things alone pertain to human knowledge, they are very few indeed; unless that they can be 
so multiplied in each kind, as not only not to be few, but to reach in the result to infinity. For he who says, I 
know I am alive, says that he knows one single thing. Further, if he says, I know that I know I am alive, now 
there are two; but that he knows these two is a third thing to know. And so he can add a fourth and a fifth, and 
innumerable others, if he holds out. But since he cannot either comprehend an innumerable number by 
additions of units, or say a thing innumerable times, he comprehends this at least, and with perfect certainty, 
viz. that this is both true and so innumerable that he cannot truly comprehend and say its infinite number. 
This same thing may be noticed also in the case of a will that is certain. For it would be an impudent answer 
to make to any one who should say, I will to be happy, that perhaps you are deceived. And if he should say, 
I know that I will this, and I know that I know it, he can add yet a third to these two, viz. that he knows these two; 
and a fourth, that he knows that he knows these two; and so on ad infinitum. Likewise, if any one were to say, 
I will not to be mistaken; will it not be true, whether he is mistaken or whether he is not, that nevertheless he 
does will not to be mistaken? Would it not be most impudent to say to him, Perhaps you are deceived? 
when beyond doubt, whereinsoever he may be deceived, he is nevertheless not deceived in thinking that 
he wills not to be deceived. And if he says he knows this, he adds any number he choses of things known, 
and perceives that number to be infinite. For he who says, I will not to be deceived, and I know that I will not 
to be so, and I know that I know it, is able now to set forth an infinite number here also, however awkward 
may be the expression of it. And other things too are to be found capable of refuting the Academics, who 
contend that man can know nothing. But we must restrict ourselves, especially as this is not the subject we 
have undertaken in the present work. There are three books of ours on that subject,(2) written in the early 
time of our conversion, which he who can and will read, and who understands them, will doubtless not be 
much moved by any of the many arguments which they have found out against the discovery of truth. For 
whereas there are two kinds of knowable things,-one, of those things which the mind perceives by the 
bodily senses; the other, of those which it perceives by itself, -these philosophers have babbled much 
against the bodily senses, but have never been able to throw doubt upon those most certain perceptions of 
things true, which the mind knows by itself, such as is that which I have mentioned, I know that I am alive. But 
far be it from us to doubt the truth of what we have learned by the bodily senses; since by them we have 
learned to know the heaven and the earth, and those things in them which are known to us, so far as He who 
created both us and them has willed them to be within our knowledge. Far be it from us too to deny, that we 
know what we have learned by the testimony of others: otherwise we know not that there is an ocean; we 
know not that the lands and cities exist which most copious report commends to us; we know not that those 
men were, and their works, which we have learned by reading history; we know not the news that is daily 
brought us from this quarter or that, and confirmed by consistent and conspiring evidence; lastly, we know 
not at what place or from whom we have been born: since in all these things we have believed the testimony 
of others. And if it is most absurd to say this, then we must confess, that not only our own senses, but those of 
other persons also, have added very much indeed to our knowledge. 

22. All these things, then, both those which the human mind knows by itself, and those which it knows by the 
bodily senses, and those which it has received and knows by the testimony of others, are laid up and 
retained in the storehouse of the memory; and from these is begotten a word that is true when we speak 
what we know, but a word that is before all sound, before all thought of a sound. For the word is then most 
like to the thing known, from which also its image is begotten, since the sight of thinking arises from the sight 
of knowledge; when it is a word belonging to no tongue, but is a true word concerning a true thing, having 
nothing of its own, but wholly derived from that knowledge from which it is born. Nor does it signify when he 

learned it, who speaks what he knows; for sometimes he says it immediately upon learning it; provided only 
that the word is true, i.e. sprung from things that are known. 

CHAP. 13. -STILL FURTHER OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE KNOWLEDGE AND 
WORD OF OUR MIND, AND THE KNOWLEDGE AND WORD OF GOD. 

But is it so, that God the Father, from whom is born the Word that is God of God,-is it so, then, that God the 
Father, in respect to that wisdom which He is to Himself, has learned some things by His bodily senses, and 
others by Himself? Who could say this, who thinks of God, not as a rational animal, but as One above the 
rational soul? So far at least as He can be thought of, by those who place Him above all animals and all 
souls, although they see Him by conjecture through a glass and in an enigma, not yet face to face as He is. 
Is it that God the Father has learned those very things which He knows, not by the body, for He has none, but 
by Himself, from elsewhere from some one? or has stood in need of messengers or witnesses that He 
might know them? Certainly not; since His own perfection enables Him to know all things that He knows. No 
doubt He has messengers, viz. the angels; but not to announce to Him things that He knows not, for there is 
nothing He does not know. But their good lies in consulting the truth about their own works. And This it is 
which is meant by saying that they bring Him word of some things, not that He may learn of them, but they of 
Him by His word without bodily sound. They bring Him word, too, of that which He wills, being sent by Him to 
whomever He wills, and hearing all from Him by that word of His, i.e. finding in His truth what themselves are 
to do: what, to whom, and when, they are to bring word. For we too pray to Him, yet do not inform Him what 
our necessities are. "For your Father knoweth," says His Word, "what things ye have need of, before you 
ask Him."(1) Nor did He become acquainted with them, so as to know them, at any definite time; but He 
knew beforehand, without any beginning, all things to come in time, and among them also both what we 
should ask of Him, and when; and to whom He would either listen or not listen, and on what subjects. And 
with respect to all His creatures, both spiritual and corporeal, He does not know them because they are, but 
they are because He knows them. For He was not ignorant of what He was about to create; therefore He 
created because He knew; He did not know because He created. Nor did He know them when created in 
any other way than He knew them when still to be created, for nothing accrued to His wisdom from them; but 
that wisdom remained as it was, while they came into existence as it was fitting and when it was fitting. So, 
too, it is written in the book of Ecclesiasticus: "All things are known to Him ere ever they were created: so 
also after they were perfected. "(2) "So," he says, not otherwise; so were they known to Him, both ere ever 
they were created, and after they were perfected. This knowledge, therefore, is far unlike our knowledge. 
And the knowledge of God is itself also His wisdom, and His wisdom is itself His essence or substance. 
Because in the marvellous simplicity of that nature, it is not one thing to be wise and another to be, but to be 
wise is to be; as we have often said already also in the earlier books. But our knowledge is in most things 
capable both of being lost and of being recovered, because to us to be is not the same as to know or to be 
wise; since it is possible for us to be, even although we know not, neither are wise in that which we have 
learned from elsewhere. Therefore, as our knowledge is unlike that knowledge of God, so is our word also, 
which is born from our knowledge, unlike that Word of God which is born from the essence of the Father. And 
this is as if I should say, born from the Father's knowledge, from the Father's wisdom; or still more exactly, 
from the Father who is knowledge, from the Father who is wisdom. 

CHAP. 14.-THE WORD OF GOD IS IN ALL THINGS EQUAL TO THE FATHER, FROM 
WHOM IT IS. 

23. The Word of God, then, the only-begotten Son of the Father, in all things like and equal to the Father, 
God of God, Light of Light, Wisdom of Wisdom, Essence of Essence, is altogether that which the Father is, 
yet is not the Father, because the one is Son, the other is Father. And hence He knows all that the Father 
knows; but to Him to know, as to be, is from the Father, for to know and to be is there one. And therefore, as 
to be is not to the Father from the Son, so neither is to know. Accordingly, as though uttering Himself, the 
Father begat the Word equal to Himself in all things; for He would not have uttered Himself wholly and 
perfectly, if there were in His Word anything more or less than in Himself. And here that is recognized in the 
highest sense, "Yea, yea; nay, nay."(1) And therefore this Word is truly truth, since whatever is in that 
knowledge from which it is born is also in itself and whatever is not in that knowledge is not in the Word. And 
this Word can never have anything false, because it is unchangeable, as He is from whom it is. For "the Son 
can do nothing of Himself, but what He seeth the Father do. "(2) Through power He cannot do this; nor is it 
infirmity, but strength, by which truth cannot be false. Therefore God the Father knows all things in Himself, 
knows all things in the Son; but in Himself as though Himself, in the Son as though His own Word which Word 
is spoken concerning all those things that are in Himself. Similarly the Son knows all things, viz. in Himself, 
as things which are born of those which the Father knows in Himself, and in the Father, as those of which they 

are born, which the Son Himself knows in Himself. The Father then, and the Son know mutually; but the one 
by begetting, the other by being born. And each of them sees simultaneously all things that are in their 
knowledge, in their wisdom, in their essence: not by parts or singly, as though by alternately looking from 
this side to that, and from that side to this, and again from this or that object to this or that object, so as not to 
be able to see some things without at the same time not seeing others; but, as I said, sees all things 
simultaneously, whereof there is not one that He does not always see. 

24. And that word, then, of ours which has neither sound nor thought of sound, but is of that thing in seeing 
which we speak inwardly, and which therefore belongs to no tongue; and hence is in some sort like, in this 
enigma, to that Word of God which is also God; since this too is born of our knowledge, in such manner as 
that also is born of the knowledge of the Father: such a word, I say, of ours, which we find to be in some way 
like that Word, let us not be slow to consider how unlike also it is, as it may be in our power to utter it. 

CHAP. 15.-H0W GREAT IS THE UNLIKENESS BETWEEN OUR WORD AND THE DIVINE 
WORD. OUR WORD CANNOT BE OR BE CALLED ETERNAL. 

Is our word, then, born of our knowledge only? Do we not say many things also that we do not know? And 
say them not with doubt, but thinking them to be true; while if perchance they are true in respect to the things 
themselves of which we speak, they are yet not true in respect to our word, because a word is not true 
unless it is born of a thing that is known. In this sense, then, our word is false, not when we lie, but when we 
are deceived. And when we doubt, our word us not yet of the thing of which we doubt, but it is a word 
concerning the doubt itself. For although we do not know whether that is true of which we doubt, yet we do 
know that we doubt; and hence, when we say we doubt, we say a word that is true, for we say what we know. 
And what, too, of its being possible for us to lie? And when we do, certainly we both willingly and knowingly 
have a word that is false, wherein there is a word that is true, viz. that we lie, for this we know. And when we 
confess that we have lied, we speak that which is true; for we say what we know, for we know that we lied. But 
that Word which is God, and can do more than we, cannot do this. For it "can do nothing except what it sees 
the Father do;" and it "speaks not of itself," but it has from the Father all that it speaks, since the Father 
speaks it in a special way; and the great might of that Word is that it cannot lie, because there cannot be 
there "yea and nay,"(1) but "yea yea, nay nay." Well, but that is not even to be called a word, which is not 
true. I willingly assent, if so it be. What, then, if our word is true and therefore is rightly called a word? Is it the 
case that, as we can speak of sight of sight, and knowledge of knowledge, so we can speak of essence of 
essence, as that Word of God is especially spoken of, and is especially to be spoken of? Why so? 
Because to us, to be is not the same as to know; since we know many things which in some sense live by 
memory, and so in some sense die by being forgotten: and so, when those things are no longer in our 
knowledge, yet we still are: and while our knowledge has slipped away and perished out of our mind, we 
are still alive. 

25. In respect to those things also which are so known that they can never escape the memory, because 
they are present, and belong to the nature of the mind itself, -as, e.g., the knowing that we are alive (for this 
continues so long as the mind continues; and because the mind continues always, this also continues 
always);-l say, in respect to this and to any other like instances, in which we are the rather to contemplate 
the image of God, it is difficult to make out in what way, although they are always known, yet because they 
are not always also thought of, an eternal word can be spoken respecting them, when our word is spoken in 
our thought. For it is eternal to the soul to live; it is eternal to know that it lives. Yet it is not eternal to it to be 
thinking of its own life, or to bethinking of its own knowledge of its own life; since, in entering upon this or that 
occupation, it will cease to think of this, although it does not cease from knowing it. And hence it comes to 
pass, that if there can be in the mind any knowledge that is eternal, while the thought of that knowledge 
cannot be eternal, and any inner and true word of ours is only said by our thought, then God alone can be 
understood to have a Word that is eternal, and co-eternal with Himself. Unless, perhaps, we are to say that 
the very possibility of thought-since that which is known is capable of being truly thought, even at the time 
when it is not being thought-constitutes a word as perpetual as the knowledge itself is perpetual. But how is 
that a word which is not yet formed in the vision of the thought? How will it be like the knowledge of which it is 
born, if it has not the form of that knowledge, and is only now called a word because it can have it? For it is 
much as if one were to say that a word is to be so called because it can be a word. But what is this that can 
be a word, and is therefore already held worthy of the name of a word? What, I say, is this thing that is 
formable, but not yet formed, except a something in our mind, which we toss to and fro by revolving it this 
way or that, while we think of first one thing and then another, according as they are found by or occur to us? 
And the true word then comes into being, when, as I said, that which we toss to and fro by revolving it arrives 
at that which we know, and is formed by that, in taking its entire likeness; so that in what manner each thing is 
known, in that manner also it is thought, i.e. is said in this manner in the heart, without articulate sound, without 
thought of articulate sound, such as no doubt belongs to some particular tongue. And hence if we even 

admit, in order not to dispute laboriously about a name, that this something of our mind, which can be formed 
from our knowledge, is to be already called a word, even before it is so formed, because it is, so to say, 
already formable, who would not see how great would be the unlikeness between it and that Word of God, 
which is so in the form of God, as not to have been formable before it was formed, or to have been capable 
at any time of being formless, but is a simple form, and simply equal to Him from whom it is, and with whom it 
is wonderfully co-eternal? 

CHAP. 16. -OUR WORD IS NEVER TO BE EQUALLED TO THE DIVINE WORD, NOT EVEN 
WHEN WE SHALL BE LIKE GOD. 

Wherefore that Word of God is in such wise so called, as not to be called a thought of God, lest we believe 
that there is anything in God which can be revolved, so that it at one time receives and at another recovers a 
form, so as to be a word, and again can lose that form and be revolved in some sense formlessly. Certainly 
that excellent master of speech knew well the force of words, and had looked into the nature of thought, who 
said in his poem, "And revolves with himself the varying issues of war,"(2) i.e. thinks of them. That Son of 
God, then, is not called the Thought of God, but the Word of God. For our own thought, attaining to what we 
know, and formed thereby, is our true word. And so the Word of God ought to be understood without any 
thought on the part of God, so that it be understood as the simple form itself, but containing nothing formable 
that can be also unformed. There are, indeed, passages of Holy Scripture that speak of God's thoughts; but 
this is after the same mode of speech by which the forgetfulness of God is also there spoken of, whereas in 
strict propriety of language there is in Him certainly no forgetfulness. 

26. Wherefore, since we have found now in this enigma so great an unlikeness to God and the Word of God, 
wherein yet there was found before some likeness, this, too, must be admitted, that even when we shall be 
like Him, when "we shall see Him as He is"(1) (and certainly he who said this was aware beyond doubt of 
our present unlikeness), not even then shall we be equal to Him in nature For that nature which is made is 
ever less than that which makes. And at that time our word will not indeed be false, because we shall neither 
lie nor be deceived. Perhaps, too, our thoughts will no longer revolve by passing and repassing from one 
thing to an other, but we shall see all our knowledge at once, and at one glance. Still, when even this shall 
have come to pass, if indeed it shall come to pass, the creature which was formable will indeed have been 
formed, so that nothing will be wanting of that form to which it ought to attain; yet nevertheless it will not be to 
be equalled to that simplicity wherein there is not anything formable, which has been formed or reformed, 
but only form; and which being neither formless nor formed, itself is eternal and unchangeable substance. 

CHAP. 17. -HOW THE HOLY SPIRIT IS CALLED LOVE, AND WHETHER HE ALONE IS SO 
CALLED. THAT THE HOLY SPIRIT IS IN THE SCRIPTURES PROPERLY CALLED BY THE 
NAME OF LOVE. 

27. We have sufficiently spoken of the Father and of the Son, so far as was possible for us to see through 
this glass and in this enigma. We must now treat of the Holy Spirit, so far as by God's gift it is permitted to 
see Him. And the Holy Spirit, according to the Holy Scriptures, is neither of the Father alone, nor of the Son 
alone, but of both; and so intimates to us a mutual love, wherewith the Father and the Son reciprocally love 
one another. But the language of the Word of God, in order to exercise us, has caused those things to be 
sought into with the greater zeal, which do not lie on the surface, but are to be scrutinized in hidden depths, 
and to be drawn out from thence. The Scriptures, accordingly, have not said, The Holy Spirit is Love. If they 
had said so, they would have done away with no small part of this inquiry. But they have said, "God is 
love;"(2) so that it is uncertain and remains to be inquired whether God the Father is love, or God the Son, or 
God the Holy Ghost, or the Trinity itself which is God. For we are not going to say that God is called Love 
because love itself is a substance worthy of the name of God, but because it is a gift of God, as it is said to 
God, "Thou art my patience. "(3) For this is not said because our patience is God's substance, but in that He 
Himself gives it to us; as it is elsewhere read, "Since from Him is my patience. "(4) For the usage of words 
itself in Scripture sufficiently refutes this interpretation; for "Thou art my patience" is of the same kind as 
"Thou, Lord, art my hope, "(5) and "The Lord my God is my mercy, "(6) and many like texts. And it is not said, 
O Lord my love, or, Thou art my love, or, God my love; but it is said thus, "God is love," as it is said, "God is 

a Spirit."(7) And he who does not discern this, must ask understanding from the Lord, not an explanation from 
us; for we cannot say anything more clearly. 

28. "God," then, "is love;" but the question is, whether the Father, or the Son, or the Holy Spirit, or the Trinity 
itself: because the Trinity is not three Gods, but one God. But I have already argued above in this book, that 
the Trinity, which is God, is not so to be understood from those three things which have been set forth in the 
trinity of our mind, as that the Father should be the memory of all three, and the Son the understanding of all 
three, and the Holy Spirit the love of all three; as though the Father should neither understand nor love for 

Himself, but the Son should understand for Him, and the Holy Spirit love for Him, but He Himself should 
remember only both for Himself and for them; nor the Son remember nor love for Himself, but the Father 
should remember for Him, and the Holy Spirit love for Him, but He Himself understand only both for Himself 
and them; nor likewise that the Holy Spirit should neither remember nor understand for Himself, but the 
Father should remember for Him, and the Son understand for Him, while He Himself should love only both 
for Himself and for them; but rather in this way, that both all and each have all three each in His own nature. 
Nor that these things should differ in them, as in us memory is one thing, understanding another, love or 
charity another, but should be some one thing that is equivalent to all, as wisdom itself; and should be so 
contained in the nature of each, as that He who has it is that which He has, as being an unchangeable and 
simple substance. If all this, then, has been understood, and so far as is granted to us to see or conjecture in 
things so great, has been made patently true, know not why both the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit 
should not be called Love, and all together one love, just as both the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit 
is called Wisdom, and all together not three, but one wisdom. For so also both the Father is God, and the 
Son God, and the Holy Ghost God, and all three together one God. 

29. And yet it is not to no purpose that in this Trinity the Son and none other is called the Word of God, and 
the Holy Spirit and none other the Gift of God, and God the Father alone is He from whom the Word is born, 
and from whom the Holy Spirit principally proceeds. And therefore I have added the word principally, 
because we find that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Son also. But the Father gave Him this too, not as to 
one already existing, and not yet having it; but whatever He gave to the only-begotten Word, He gave by 
begetting Him. Therefore He so begat Him as that the common Gift should proceed from Him also, and the 
Holy Spirit should be the Spirit of both. This distinction, then, of the inseparable Trinity is not to be merely 
accepted in passing, but to be carefully considered; for hence it was that the Word of God was specially 
called also the Wisdom of God, although both Father and Holy Spirit are wisdom. If, then, any one of the 
three is to be specially called Love, what more fitting than that it should be the Holy Spirit?-namely, that in 
that simple and highest nature, substance should not be one thing and love another, but that substance itself 
should be love, and love itself should be substance, whether in the Father, or in the Son, or in the Holy Spirit; 
and yet that the Holy Spirit should be specially called Love. 

30. Just as sometimes all the utterances of the Old Testament together in the Holy Scriptures are signified 
by the name of the Law. For the apostle, in citing a text from the prophet Isaiah, where he says, "With divers 
tongues and with divers lips will I speak to this people," yet prefaced it by, "It is written in the Law."(1) And the 
Lord Himself says, "It is written in their Law, They hated me without a cause, "(2) whereas this is read in the 
Psalm. (3) And sometimes that which was given by Moses is specially called the Law: as it is said, "The Law 
and the Prophets were until John;"(4) and, "On these two commandments hang all the Law and the 
Prophets. "(5) Here, certainly, that is specially called the Law which was from Mount Sinai. And the Psalms, 
too, are signified under the name of the Prophets; and yet in another place the Saviour Himself says, "All 
things must needs be fulfilled, which are written in the Law, and the Prophets, and the Psalms concerning 
me. "(6) Here, on the other side, He meant the name of Prophets to be taken as not including the Psalms. 
Therefore the Law with the Prophets and the Psalms taken together is called the Law universally, and the 
Law is also specially so called which was given by Moses. Likewise the Prophets are so called in common 
together with the Psalms, and they are also specially so called exclusive of the Psalms. And man), other 
instances might be adduced to teach us, that many names of things are both put universally, and also 
specially applied to particular things, were it not that a long discourse is to be avoided in a plain case. I 
have said so much, lest any one should think that it was therefore unsuitable for us to call the Holy Spirit 
Love, because both God the Father and God t.he Son can be called Love. 

31 . As, then, we call the only Word of God specially by the name of Wisdom, although universally both the 
Holy Spirit and the Father Himself is wisdom; so the Holy Spirit is specially called by the name of Love, 
although universally both the Father and the Son are love. But the Word of God, i.e. the only-begotten Son of 
God, is expressly called the Wisdom of God by the mouth of the apostle, where he says, "Christ the power 
of God, and the wisdom of God. "(7) But where the Holy Spirit is called Love, is to be found by careful scrutiny 
of the language of John the apostle, who, after saying, "Beloved, let us love one another, for love is of God," 
has gone on to say, "And every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God. He that loveth not, 
knoweth not God; for God is love." Here, manifestly, he has called that love God, which he said was of God; 
therefore God of God is love. But because both the Son is born of God the Father, and the Holy Spirit 
proceeds from God the Father, it is rightly asked which of them we ought here to think is the rather called the 
love that is God. For the Father only is so God as not to be of God; and hence the love that is so God as to 
be of God, is either the Son or the Holy Spirit. But when, in what follows, the apostle had mentioned the love 
of God, not that by which we love Him, but that by which He "loved us, and sent His Son to be a propitiator 
for our sins,"(1) and thereupon had exhorted us also to love one another, and that so God would abide in 
us, -because, namely, he had called God Love; immediately, in his wish to speak yet more expressly on the 
subject, "Hereby," he says, "know we that we dwell in Him, and He in us, because He hath given us of His 

Spirit." Therefore the Holy Spirit, of whom He hath given us, makes us to abide in God, and Him in us; and 
this it is that love does. Therefore He is the God that is love. Lastly, a little after, when he had repeated the 
same thing, and had said "God is love," he immediately subjoined, "And he who abideth in love, abideth in 
God, and God abideth in him;" whence he had said above, "Hereby we know that we abide in Him, and He 
in us, because He hath given us of His Spirit." He therefore is signified, where we read that God is love. 
Therefore God the Holy Spirit, who proceedeth from the Father, when He has been given to man, inflames 
him to the love of God and of his neighbor, and is Himself love. For man has not whence to love God, unless 
from God; and therefore he says a little after, "Let us love Him, because He first loved us. "(2) The Apostle 
Paul, too, says, "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us. "(3) 

CHAP. 18. -NO GIFT OF GOD IS MORE EXCELLENT THAN LOVE. 

32. There is no gift of God more excellent than this. It alone distinguishes the sons of the eternal kingdom 
and the sons of eternal perdition. Other gifts, too, are given by the Holy Spirit; but without love they profit 
nothing. Unless, therefore, the Holy Spirit is so far imparted to each, as to make him one who loves God and 
his neighbor, he is not removed from the left hand to the right. Nor is the Spirit specially called the Gift, unless 
on account of love. And he who has not this love, "though he speak with the tongues of men and angels, is 
sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal; and though he have the gift of prophecy, and know all mysteries and 
all knowledge, and though he have all faith, so that he can remove mountains, he is nothing; and though he 
bestow all his goods to feed the poor, and though he give his body to be burned, it profiteth him nothing. "(4) 
How great a good, then, is that without which goods so great bring no one to eternal life! But love or charity 
itself, -for they are two names for one thing, — if he have it that does not speak with tongues, nor has the gift of 
prophecy, nor knows all mysteries and all knowledge, nor gives all his goods to the poor, either because 
he has none to give or because some necessity hinders, nor delivers his body to be burned, if no trial of 
such a suffering overtakes him, brings that man to the kingdom, so that faith itself is only rendered profitable 
by love, since faith without love can indeed exist, but cannot profit. And therefore also the Apostle Paul says, 
"In Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, but faith that worketh by love:"(5) 
so distinguishing it from that faith by which even "the devils believe and tremble. "(6) Love, therefore, which is 
of God and is God, is specially the Holy Spirit, by whom the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, by 
which love the whole Trinity dwells in us. And therefore most rightly is the Holy Spirit, although He is God, 
called also the gift of God. (7) And by that gift what else can properly be understood except love, which 
brings to God, and without which any other gift of God whatsoever does not bring to God? 

CHAP. 19. -THE HOLY SPIRIT IS CALLED THE GIFT OF GOD IN THE SCRIPTURES. BY 
ThE GIFT OF THE HOLY SPIRIT IS MEANT THE GIFT WHICH IS THE HOLY SPIRIT. THE 
HOLY SPIRIT IS SPECIALLY CALLED LOVE, ALTHOUGH NOT ONLY THE HOLY SPIRIT IN 
THE TRINITY IS LOVE. 

33. Is this too to be proved, that the Holy Spirit is called in the sacred books the gift of God ? If people look 
for this too, we have in the Gospel according to John the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, who says, " If any 
one thirst, let him come to me and drink: he that believeth on me, as the Scripture saith, out of his belly shall 
flow rivers of living water." And the evangelist has gone on further to add, "And this He spake of the Spirit, 
which they should receive who believe in Him." a And hence Paul the apostle also says, "And we have all 
been made to drink into one Spirit."(9) The question then is, whether that water is called the gift of God which 
is the Holy Spirit. But as we find here that this water is the Holy Spirit, so we find elsewhere in the Gospel 
itself that this water is called the gift of God. For when the same Lord was talking with the woman of Samaria 
at the well, to whom He had said, "Give me to drink," and she had answered that the Jews "have no 
dealings" with the Samaritans, Jesus answered and said unto her, "If thou hadst known the gift of God, and 
who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of Him, and He would have given 
thee living water. The woman saith unto Him, Sir, thou hast nothing to draw with, and the well is deep: whence 
then hast thou this living water, etc.? Jesus answered and said unto her, Every one that drinketh of this water 
shall thirst again; but whose shall drink of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst; but the water that I 
shall give him, shall be in him a fountain of water springing up unto eternal life."(1) Because this living water, 
then, as the evangelist has explained to us, is the Holy Spirit, without doubt the Spirit is the gift of God, of 
which the Lord says here, "If thou hadst known the gift of God, and who it is that saith unto thee, Give me to 
drink, thou wouldest have asked of Him, and He would have given thee living water." For that which is in the 
one passage, "Out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water," is in the other, "shall be in him a fountain of 
water springing up unto eternal life." 

34. Paul the apostle also says, "To each of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ;" 
and then, that he might show that by the gift of Christ he meant the Holy Spirit, he has gone on to add, 

"Wherefore He saith, He hath ascended up on high, He hath led captivity captive, and hath given gifts to 
men. "(2) And every one knows that the Lord Jesus, when He had ascended into heaven after the 
resurrection from the dead, gave the Holy Spirit, with whom they who believed were filled, and spake with 
the tongues of all nations. And let no one object that he says gifts, not gift: for he quoted the text from the 
Psalm. And in the Psalm it is read thus, "Thou hast ascended up on high, Thou hast led captivity captive, 
Thou hast received gifts in men. "(3) For so it stands in many Mss., especially in the Greek Mss., and so we 
have it translated from the Hebrew. The apostle therefore said gifts, as the prophet did, not gift. But whereas 
the prophet said, "Thou hast received gifts in men," the apostle has preferred saying, "He gave gifts to 
men:" and this in order that the fullest sense may be gathered from both expressions, the one prophetic, the 
other apostolic; because both possess the authority of a divine utterance. For both are true, as well that He 
gave to men, as that He received in men. He gave to men, as the head to His own members: He Himself 
that gave, received in men, no doubt as in His own members; on account of which, namely, His own 
members, He cried from heaven, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?"(4) And of which, namely, His own 
members, He says, "Since ye have done it to one of the least of these that are mine, ye have done it unto 
me. "(5) Christ Himself, therefore, both gave from heaven and received on earth. And further, both prophet 
and apostle have said gifts for this reason, because many gifts, which are proper to each, are divided in 
common to all the members of Christ, by the Gift, which is the Holy Spirit. For each severally has not all, but 
some have these and some have those; although all have the Gift itself by which that which is proper to 
each is divided to Him, i.e. the Holy Spirit. For elsewhere also, when he had mentioned many gifts, "All 
these," he says, "worketh that one and the self-same Spirit, dividing to each severally as He will. "(6) And this 
word is found also in the Epistle to the Hebrews, where it is written, "God also bearing witness both with 
signs and wonders, and with divers miracles, and gifts(7) of the Holy Ghost. "(8) And so here, when he had 
said, "He ascended up on high, He led captivity captive, He gave gifts to men," he says further, "But that He 
ascended, what is it but that He also first descended into the lower parts of the earth? He who descended is 
the same also that ascended up far above all heavens, that He might fill all things. And He gave some 
apostles, some prophets, and some evangelists, and some pastors and doctors." (This we see is the 
reason why gifts are spoken of; because, as he says elsewhere, "Are all apostles? are all prophets?"(9) 
etc.) And here he has added, "For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the building up 
of the body of Christ."(9) This is the house which, as the Psalm sings, is built up after the captivity;(1 1) since 
the house of Christ, which house is called His Church, is built up of those who have been rescued from the 
devil, by whom they were held captive. But He Himself led this captivity captive, who conquered the devil. 
And that he might not draw with him into eternal punishment those who were to become the members of the 
Holy Head, He bound him first by the bonds of righteousness, and then by those of might. The devil himself, 
therefore, is called captivity, which He led captive who ascended up on high, and gave gifts to men, or 
received gifts in men. 

35. And Peter the apostle, as we read in that canonical book, wherein the Acts of the Apostles are 
recorded, -when the hearts of the Jews were troubled as he spake of Christ, and they said, "Brethren, what 
shall we do? tell us, "-said to them, "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins: and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit."(1) And we read 
likewise in the same book, that Simon Magus desired to give money to the apostles, that he might receive 
power from them, whereby the Holy Spirit might be given by the laying on of his hands. And the same Peter 
said to him, "Thy money perish with thee: because thou hast thought to purchase for money the gift of 
God. "(2) And in another place of the same book, when Peter was speaking to Cornelius, and to those who 
were with him, and was announcing and preaching Christ, the Scripture says, "While Peter was still speaking 
these words, the Holy Spirit fell upon all them that heard the word; and they of the circumcision that believed, 
as many as came with Peter, were astonished, because that upon the Gentiles also the gift of the Holy Spirit 
was poured out. For they heard them speak with tongues, and magnify God. "(3) And when Peter afterwards 
was giving an account to the brethren that were at Jerusalem of this act of his, that he had baptized those 
who were not circumcised, because the Holy Spirit, to cut the knot of the question, had come upon them 
before they were baptized, and the brethren at Jerusalem were moved when they heard it, he says, after the 
rest of his words, "And when I began to speak to them, the Holy Spirit fell upon them, as upon us in the 
beginning. And I remembered the word of the Lord, how He said, that John indeed baptized with water, but 
ye shall be baptized with the Holy Spirit. If, therefore, He gave a like gift to them, as also to us who believed 
in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I, that I could hinder God from giving to them the Holy Spirit?"(4) And there 
are many other testimonies of the Scriptures, which unanimously attest that the Holy Spirit is the gift of God, 
in so far as He is given to those who by Him love God. But it is too long a task to collect them all. And what is 
enough to satisfy those who are not satisfied with those we have alleged? 

36. Certainly they must be warned, since they now see that the Holy Spirit is called the gift of God, that when 
they hear of "the gift of the Holy Spirit," they should recognize therein that mode of speech which is found in 
the words, "In the spoiling of the body of the flesh. "(5) For as the body of the flesh is nothing else but the 

flesh, so the gift of the Holy Spirit is nothing else but the Holy Spirit. He is then the gift of God, so far as He is 
given to those to whom He is given. But in Himself He is God, although He were given to no one, because 
He was God co-eternal with the Father and the Son before He was given to any one. Nor is He less than 
they, because they give, and He is given. For He is given as a gift of God in such way that He Himself also 
gives Himself as being God. For He cannot be said not to be in His own power, of whom it is said, "The 
Spirit bloweth where it listeth;"(6) and the apostle says, as I have already mentioned above, "All these things 
worketh that selfsame Spirit, dividing to every man severally as He will." We have not here the creating of 
Him that is given, and the rule of them that give, but the concord of the given and the givers. 

37. Wherefore, if Holy Scripture proclaims that God is love, and that love is of God, and works this in us that 
we abide in God and He m us, and that hereby we know this, because He has given us of His Spirit, then the 
Spirit Himself is God, who is love. Next, if there [be among the gifts of God none greater than love, and there 
is no greater gift of God than the Holy Spirit, what follows more naturally than that He is Himself love, who is 
called both God and of God? And if the love by which the Father loves the Son, and the Son loves the 
Father, ineffably demonstrates the communion of both, what is more suitable than that He should be 
specially called love, who is the Spirit common to both? For this is the sounder thing both to believe and to 
understand, that the Holy Spirit is not alone love in that Trinity, yet is not specially called love to no purpose, 
for the reasons we have alleged; just as He is not alone in that Trinity either a Spirit or holy, since both the 
Father is a Spirit, and the Son is a Spirit; and both the Father is holy, and the Son is holy,-as piety doubts 
not. And yet it is not to no purpose that He is specially called the Holy Spirit; for because He is common to 
both, He is specially called that which both are in common. Otherwise, if in that Trinity the Holy Spirit alone is 
love, then doubtless the Son too turns out to be the Son, not of the Father only, but also of the Holy Spirit. For 
He is both said and read in countless places to be so,-the only-begotten Son of God the Father; as that 
what the apostle says of God the Father is true too: "Who hath delivered us from the power of darkness .and 
hath translated us into the kingdom of the Son of His own love."(1) He did not say, "of His own Son." If He 
had so said, He would have said it most truly, just as He did say it most truly, because He has often said it; 
but He says, "the Son of His own love." Therefore He is the Son also of the Holy Spirit, if there is in that 
Trinity no love in God except the Holy Spirit. And if this is most absurd, it remains that the Holy Spirit is not 
alone therein love, but is specially so called for the reasons I have sufficiently set forth; and that the words, 
"Son of His own love," mean nothing else than His own beloved Son, -the Son, in short, of His own 
substance. For the love in the Father, which is in His ineffably simple nature, is nothing else than His very 
nature and substance itself,-as we have already often said, and are not ashamed of often repeating. And 
hence the "Son of His love," is none other than He who is born of His substance. 

CHAP. 20. -AGAINST EUNOMIUS, SAYING THAT THE SON OF GOD IS THE SON, NOT OF 
HIS NATURE, BUT OF HIS WILL. EPILOGUE TO WHAT HAS BEEN SAID ALREADY. 

38. Wherefore the logic of Eunomius, from whom the Eunomian heretics sprang, is ridiculous. For when he 
could not understand, and would not believe, that the only-begotten Word of God, by which all things were 
made is the Son of God by nature,-i.e. born of the substance of the Father,-he alleged that He was not the 
Son of His own nature or substance or essence, but the Son of the will of God; so as to mean to assert that 
the will by which he begot the Son was something accidental [and optional] to God,-to wit, in that way that 
we ourselves sometimes will something which before we did not will, as though it was not for these very 
things that our nature is perceived to be changeable, -a thing which far be it from us to believe of God. For it 
is written, "Many are the thoughts in the heart of man, but the counsel of the Lord abideth for ever,"(2) for no 
other reason except that we may understand or believe that as God is eternal, so is His counsel for eternity, 
and therefore unchangeable, as He himself is. And what is said of thoughts can most truly be said also of 
the will: there are many wills in the heart of man, but the will of the Lord abideth for ever. Some, again, to 
escape saying that the only-begotten Word is the Son of the counsel or will of God, have affirmed the same 
Word to be the counsel or will itself of the Father. But it is better in my judgment to say counsel of counsel, 
and will of will, as substance of substance, wisdom of wisdom, that we may not be led into that absurdity, 
which we have refuted already, and say that the Son makes the Father wise or willing, if the Father has not in 
His own substance either counsel or will. It was certainly a sharp answer that somebody gave to the heretic, 
who most subtly asked him whether God begat the Son willingly or unwillingly, in order that if he said 
unwillingly, it would follow most absurdly that God was miserable; but if willingly, he would forthwith infer, as 
though by an invincible reason, that at which he was aiming, viz. that He was the Son, not of His nature, but of 
His will. But that other, with great wakefulness, demanded of him in turn, whether God the Father was God 
willingly or unwillingly; in order that if he answered unwillingly, that misery would follow, which to believe of 
God is sheer madness; and if he said willingly, it would be replied to him, Then He is God too by His own 
will, not by His nature. What remained, then, except that he should hold his peace, and discern that he was 
himself bound by his own question in an insoluble bond? But if any person in the Trinity is also to be 

specially called the will of God, this name, like love, is better suited to the Holy Spirit; for what else is love, 
except will? 

39. I see that my argument in this book respecting the Holy Spirit, according to the Holy Scripture, is quite 
enough for faithful men who know already that the Holy Spirit is God, and not of another substance, nor less 
than the Father and the Son,-as we have shown to be true in the former books, according to the same 
Scriptures. We have reasoned also from the creature which God made, and, as far as we could, have 
warned those who demand a reason on such subjects to behold and understand His invisible things, so far 
as they could, by those things which are made? and especially by the rational or intellectual creature which 
is made after the image of God; through which glass, so to say, they might discern as far as they could, if 
they could, the Trinity which is God, in our own memory, understanding, will. Which three things, if any one 
intelligently regards as by nature divinely appointed in his own mind, and remembers by memory, 
contemplates by understanding, embraces by love, how great a thing that is in the mind, whereby even the 
eternal and unchangeable nature can be recollected, beheld, desired, doubtless that man finds an image 
of that highest Trinity. And he Ought to refer the whole of his life to the remembering, seeing, loving that 
highest Trinity, in order that he may recollect, contemplate, be delighted by it. But I have warned him, so far 
as seemed sufficient, that he must not so compare this image thus wrought by that Trinity, and by his own 
fault changed for the worse, to that same Trinity as to think it in all points like to it, but rather that he should 
discern in that likeness, of whatever sort it be, a great unlikeness also. 

CHAP. 21. -OF THE LIKENESS OF THE FATHER AND OF THE SON ALLEGED TO BE IN 
OUR MEMORY AND UNDERSTANDING. OF THE LIKENESS OF THE HOLY SPIRIT IN OUR 
WILL OR LOVE. 

40. I have undoubtedly taken pains so far as I could, not indeed so that the thing might be seen face to face, 
but that it might be seen by this likeness in an enigma, [1] in how small a degree soever, by conjecture, in our 
memory and understanding, to intimate God the Father and God the Son: i.e. God the begetter, who has in 
some way spoken by His own co-eternal Word all things that He has in His substance; and God His Word 
Himself, who Himself has nothing either more or less in substance than is in Him, who, not lyingly but truly, 
hath begotten the Word; and I have assigned to memory everything that we know, even if we were not 
thinking of it, but to understanding the formation after a certain special mode of the thought. For we are 
usually said to understand what, by thinking of it, we have found to be true; and this it is again that we leave 

in the memory. But that is a still more hidden depth of our memory, wherein we found this also first when we 
thought of it, and wherein an inner word is begotten such as belongs to no tongue, — as it were, knowledge of 
knowledge, vision of vision, and understanding which appears in [reflective] thought; of understanding which 
had indeed existed before in the memory, but was latent there, although, unless the thought itself had also 
some sort of memory of its own, it would not return to those things which it had left in the memory while it 
turned to think of other things. 

41 . But I have shown nothing in this enigma respecting the Holy Spirit such as might appear to be like Him, 
except our own will, or love, or affection, which is a stronger will, since our will which we have naturally is 
variously affected, according as various objects are adjacent or occur to it, by which we are attracted or 
offended. What, then, is this ? Are we to say that our will, when it is right, knows not what to desire, what to 
avoid? Further, if it knows, doubtless then it has a kind of knowledge of its own, such as cannot be without 
memory and understanding. Or are we to listen to any one who should say that love knows not what it does, 
which does not do wrongly? As, then, there are both understanding and love in that primary memory wherein 
we find provided and stored up that to which we can come in thought, because we find also those two things 
there, when we find by thinking that we both understand and love anything; which things were there too when 
we were not thinking of them: and as there are memory and love in that understanding, which is formed by 
thought, which true word we say inwardly without the tongue of any nation when we say what we know; for the 
gaze of our thought does not return to anything except by remembering it, and does not care to return unless 
by loving it: so love, which combines the vision brought about in the memory, and the vision of the thought 
formed thereby, as if parent and offspring, would not know what to love rightly unless it had a knowledge of 
what it desired, which it cannot have without memory and understanding. 

CHAP. 22. -HOW GREAT THE UNLIKENESS IS BETWEEN THE IMAGE OF THE TRINITY 
WHICH WE HAVE FOUND IN OURSELVES, AND THE TRINITY ITSELF. 

42. But since these are in one person, as man is, some one may say to us, These three things, memory, 
understanding, and love, are mine, not their own; neither do they do that which they do for themselves, but for 
me, or rather I do it by them. For it is I who re member by memory, and understand by understanding, and 
love by love: and when I direct the mind's eye to my memory, and so say in my heart the thing I know, and a 

true word is begotten of my knowledge, both are mine, both the knowledge certainly and the word. For it is I 
who know, and it is I who say in my heart the thing I know. And when I come to find in my memory by thinking 
that I understand and love anything, which understanding and love were there also before I thought thereon, 
it is my own understanding and my own love that I find in my own memory, whereby it is I that understand, 
and I that love, not those things themselves. Likewise, when my thought is mindful, and wills to return to those 
things which it had left in the memory, and to understand and behold them, and say them inwardly, it is my 
own memory that is mindful, and it is my own, not its will, wherewith it wills. When my very love itself, too, 
remembers and understands what it ought to desire and what to avoid, it remembers by my, not by its own 
memory; and understands that which it intelligently loves by my, not by its own, understanding. In brief, by all 
these three things, it is I that remember, I that understand, I that love, who am neither memory, nor 
understanding, nor love, but who have them. These things, then, can be said by a single person, which has 
these three, but is not these three. But in the simplicity of that Highest Nature, which is God, although there is 
one God, there are three persons, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. 

CHAP. 23.--AUGUSTIN DWELLS STILL FURTHER ON THE DISPARITY BETWEEN THE 
TRINITY WHICH IS IN MAN, AND THE TRINITY WHICH IS GOD. THE TRINITY IS NOW 
SEEN THROUGH A GLASS BY THE HELP OF FAITH, THAT IT MAY HEREAFTER BE 
MORE CLEARLY SEEN IN THE PROMISED SIGHT FACE TO FACE. 

43. A thing itself, then, which is a trinity is different from the image of a trinity in some other thing; by reason of 
which image, at the same time that also in which these three things are is called an image; just as both the 
panel, and the picture painted on it, are at the same time called an image; but by reason of the picture 
painted on it, the panel also is called by the name of image. But in that Highest Trinity, which is 
incomparably above all things, there is so great an indivisibility, that whereas a trinity of men cannot be 
called one man, in that, there both is said to be and is one God, nor is that Trinity in one God, but it is one 
God. Nor, again, as that image in the case of man has these three things but is one person, so is it with the 
Trinity; but therein are three persons, the Father of the Son, and the Son of the Father, and the Spirit of both 
Father and Son. For although the memory in the case of man, and especially that memory which beasts 
have not-viz. the memory by which things intelligible are so contained as that they have not entered that 
memory through the bodily senses[1]-has in this image of the Trinity, in proportion to its own small measure, 
a likeness of the Father, incomparably unequal, yet of some sort, whatever it be: and likewise the 
understanding in the case of man, which by the purpose of the thought is formed thereby, when that which is 
known is said, and there is a word of the heart belonging to no tongue, has in its own great disparity some 
likeness of the Son; and love in the case of man proceeding from knowledge, and combining memory and 
understanding, as though common to parent and offspring, whereby it is understood to be neither parent nor 
offspring, has in that image, some, however exceedingly unequal, likeness of the Holy Spirit: it is 
nevertheless not the case, that, as in that image of the Trinity, these three are not one man, but belong to 
one man, so in the Highest Trinity itself, of which this is an image, these three belong to one God, but they 
are one God, and these are three persons, not one. A thing certainly wonderfully ineffable, or ineffably 
wonderful, that while this image of the Trinity is one person, but the Highest Trinity itself is three persons, yet 
that Trinity of three persons is more indivisible than this of one. For that [Trinity], in the nature of the Divinity, 
or perhaps better Deity, is that which it is, and is mutually and always unchangeably equal: and there was no 
time when it was not, or when it was otherwise; and there will be no time when it will not be, or when it will be 
otherwise. But these three that are in the inadequate image, although they are not separate in place, for they 
are not bodies, yet are now in this life mutually separate in magnitude. For that there are therein no several 
bulks, does not hinder our seeing that memory is greater than understanding in one man, but the contrary in 
another; and that in yet another these two are overpassed by the greatness of love; and this whether the two 
themselves are or are not equal to one another. And so each two by each one, and each one by each two, 
and each one by each one: the less are surpassed by the greater. And when they have been healed of all 
infirmity, and are mutually equal, not even then will that thing which by grace will not be changed, be made 
equal to that which by nature cannot change, because the creature cannot be equalled to the Creator, and 
when it shall be healed from all infirmity, will be changed. 

44. But when the sight shall have come which is promised anew to us face to face, we shall see this not only 
incorporeal but also absolutely indivisible and truly unchangeable Trinity far more clearly and certainly than 
we now see its image which we ourselves are: and yet they who see through this glass and in this enigma, 
as it is permitted in this life to see, are not those who behold in their own mind the things which we have set in 
order and pressed upon them; but those who see this as if an image, so as to be able to refer what they see, 
in some way be it what it may, to Him whose image it is, and to see that also by conjecturing, which they see 
through the image by beholding, since they cannot yet see face to face. For the apostle does not say, We 
see now a glass, but, We see now through a glass. [1] 

CHAP. 24.-THE INFIRMITY OF THE HUMAN MIND. 

They, then, who see their own mind, in whatever way that is possible, and in it that Trinity of which I have 
treated as I could in many ways, and yet do not believe or understand it to be an image of God, see indeed 
a glass, but do not so far see through the glass Him who is now to be seen through the glass, that they do 
not even know the glass itself which they see to be a glass, i.e. an image. And if they knew this, perhaps 
they would feel that He too whose glass this is, should by it be sought, and somehow provisionally be seen, 
an unfeigned faith purging their hearts, [2] that He who is now seen through a glass may be able to be seen 
face to face. And if they despise this faith that purifies the heart, what do they accomplish by understanding 
the most subtle disputes concerning the nature of the human mind, unless that they be condemned also by 
the witness of their own understanding? And they would certainly not so fail in understanding, and hardly 
arrive at anything certain, were they not involved in penal darkness, and burdened, with the corruptible body 
that presses down the soul. [3] And for what demerit save that, of sin is this evil inflicted on them? Where- 
fore, being warned by the magnitude of so great an evil, they ought to follow the Lamb, that taketh away the 
sins of the world. [4] 

CHAP. 25.-THE QUESTION WHY THE HOLY SPIRIT IS NOT BEGOTTEN, AND HOW HE 
PROCEEDS FROM THE FATHER AND THE SON, WILL ONLY BE UNDERSTOOD WHEN 
WE ARE IN BLISS. 

For if any belong to Him, although far duller in intellect than those, yet when they are freed from the body at 
the end of this life, the envious powers have no right to hold them. For that Lamb that was slain by them 
without any debt of sin has conquered them; but not by the might of power before He had done so by the 
righteousness of blood. And free accordingly from the power of the devil, they are borne up by holy angels, 
being set free from all evils by the mediator of God and men, the man Christ Jesus. [5] Since by the 
harmonious testimony of the Divine Scriptures, both Old and New, both those by which Christ was foretold, 
and those by which He was announced, there is no other name under heaven whereby men must be 
saved. [6] And when purged from all contagion of corruption, they are placed in peaceful abodes until they 
take their bodies again, their own, but now incorruptible, to adorn, not to burden them. For this is the will of the 
best and most wise Creator, that the spirit of a man, when piously subject to God, should have a body 
happily subject, and that this happiness should last for ever. 

45. There we shall see the truth without any difficulty, and shall enjoy it to the full, most clear and most certain. 
Nor shall we be inquiring into anything by a mind that reasons, but shall discern by a mind that 
contemplates, why the Holy Spirit is not a Son, although He proceeds from the Father. In that light there will 
be no place for inquiry: but here, by experience itself it has appeared to me so difficult,— as beyond doubt it 
will likewise appear to them also who shall carefully and intelligently read what I have written,-that although 
in the second book? I promised that I would speak thereof in another place, yet as often as I have desired to 
illustrate it by the creaturely image of it which we ourselves are, so often, let my meaning be of what sort it 
might, did adequate utterance entirely fail me; nay, even in my very meaning I felt that I had attained to 
endeavor rather than accomplishment. I had indeed found in one person, such as is a man, an image of that 
Highest Trinity, and had desired, especially in the ninth book, to illustrate and render more intelligible the 
relation of the Three Persons by that which is subject to time and change. But three things belonging to one 
person cannot suit those Three Persons, as man's purpose demands; and this we have demonstrated in 
this fifteenth book. 

CHAP. 26. -THE HOLY SPIRIT TWICE GIVEN BY CHRIST. THE PROCESSION OF THE 
HOLY SPIRIT FROM THE FATHER AND FROM THE SON IS APART FROM TIME, NOR CAN 
HE BE CALLED THE SON OF BOTH. 

Further, in that Highest Trinity which is God, there are no intervals of time, by which it could be shown, or at 
least inquired, whether the Son was born of the Father first and then afterwards the Holy Spirit proceeded 
from both; since Holy Scripture calls Him the Spirit of both. For it is He of whom the apostle says, "But 
because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of His Son into your hearts:"[1] and it is He of whom the 
same Son says, "For it is not ye who speak, but the Spirit of your Father who speaketh in you. "[2] And it is 
proved by many other testimonies of the Divine Word, that the Spirit, who is specially called in the Trinity the 
Holy Spirit, is of the Father and of the Son: of whom likewise the Son Himself says, "Whom I will send unto 
you from the Father;"[3] and in another place, "Whom the Father will send in my name. "[4] And we are so 
taught that He proceeds from both, because the Son Himself says, He proceeds from the Father. And when 
He had risen from the dead, and had appeared to His disciples, "He breathed upon them, and said, 

Receive the Holy Ghost,"[5] so as to show that He proceeded also from Himself. And Itself is that very 
"power that went out from Him," as we read in the Gospel, "and healed them all. "[6] 

46. But the reason why, after His resurrection, He both gave the Holy Spirit, first on earth, [7] and afterwards 
sent Him from heaven, [8] is in my judgment this: that "love is shed abroad in our hearts, "[9] by that Gift itself, 
whereby we love God and our neighbors, according to those two commandments, "on which hang all the law 
and the prophets. "[1 0] And Jesus Christ, in order to signify this, gave to them the Holy Spirit, once upon 
earth, on account of the love of our neighbor, and a second time from heaven, on account of the love of God. 
And if some other reason may perhaps be given for this double gift of the Holy Spirit, at any rate we ought 
not to doubt that the same Holy Spirit was given when Jesus breathed upon them, of whom He by and by 
says, "Go, baptize all nations in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit," where this 
Trinity is especially commended to us. It is therefore He who was also given from heaven on the day of 
Pentecost, i.e. ten days after the Lord ascended into heaven. How, therefore, is He not God, who gives the 
Holy Spirit? Nay, how great a God is He who gives God! For no one of His disciples gave the Holy Spirit, 
since they prayed that He might come upon those upon whom they laid their hands: they did not give Him 
themselves. And the Church preserves this custom even now in the case of her rulers. Lastly, Simon Magus 
also, when he offered the apostles money, does not say, "Give me also this power, that I may give" the Holy 
Spirit; but, "that on whomsoever I may lay my hands, he may receive the Holy Spirit." Because neither had 
the Scriptures said before, And Simon, seeing that the apostles gave the Holy Spirit; but it had said," And 
Simon, seeing that the Holy Spirit was given by the laying on of the apostles' hands. "[11] Therefore also the 
Lord Jesus Christ Himself not only gave the Holy Spirit as God, but also received it as man, and therefore 
He is said to be full of grace, [12] and of the Holy Spirit.[13] And in the Acts of the Apostles it is more plainly 
written of Him, "Because God anointed Him With the Holy Spirit."[1 4] Certainly not with visible oil but with the 
gift of grace which is signified by the visible ointment wherewith the Church anoints the baptized. And Christ 
was certainly not then anointed with the Holy Spirit, when He, as a dove, descended upon Him at His 
baptism. [1 5] For at that time He deigned to prefigure His body, i.e. His Church, in which especially the 
baptized receive the Holy Spirit. But He is to be understood to have been then anointed with that mystical 
and invisible unction, when the Word of God was made flesh, [16] i.e. when human nature, without any 
precedent merits of good works, was joined to God the Word in the womb of the Virgin, so that with it it 
became one person. Therefore it is that we confess Him to have been born of the Holy Spirit and of the 
Virgin Mary. For it is most absurd to believe Him to have received the Holy Spirit when He was near thirty 
years old: for at that age He was baptized by John;[1 7] but that He came to baptism as without any sin at all, 
so not without the Holy Spirit. For if it was written of His servant and forerunner John himself, "He shall be 
filled with the Holy Spirit, even from his mother's womb, "[18] because, although generated by his father, yet 
he received the Holy Spirit when formed in the womb; what must be understood and believed of the man 
Christ, of whose flesh the very conception was not carnal, but spiritual? Both natures, too, as well the human 
as the divine, are shown in that also that is written of Him, that He received of the Father the promise of the 
Holy Spirit, and shed forth the Holy Spirit:[19] seeing that He received as man, and shed forth as God. And 
we indeed can receive that gift according to our small measure, but assuredly we cannot shed it forth upon 
others; but, that this may be done, we invoke over them God, by whom this is accomplished. 

47. Are we therefore able to ask whether the Holy Spirit had already proceeded from the Father when the 
Son was born, or had not yet proceeded; and when He was born, proceeded from both, wherein there is no 
such thing as distinct times: just as we have been able to ask, in a case where we do find times, that the will 
proceeds from the human mind first, in order that that may be sought which, when found, may be called 
offspring; which offspring being already brought forth or born, that will is made perfect, resting in this end, so 
that what had been its desire when seeking, is its love when enjoying; which love now proceeds from both, 
i.e. from the mind that begets, and from the notion that is begotten, as if from parent and offspring? These 
things it is absolutely impossible to ask in this case, where nothing is begun in time, so as to be perfected in 
a time following. Wherefore let him who can understand the generation of the Son from the Father without 
time, understand also the procession of the Holy Spirit from both without time. And let him who can 
understand, in that which the Son says, "As the Father hath life in Himself, so hath He given to the Son to 
have life in Himself,"[1] not that the Father gave life to the Son already existing without life, but that He so 
begat Him apart from time, that the life which the Father gave to the Son by begetting Him is co-eternal with 
the life of the Father who gave it:[2] let him, I say, understand, that as the Father has in Himself that the Holy 
Spirit should proceed from Him, so has He given to the Son that the same Holy Spirit should proceed from 
Him, and be both apart from time: and that the Holy Spirit is so said to proceed from the Father as that it be 
understood that His proceeding also from the Son, is a property derived by the Son from the Father. For if 
the Son has of the Father whatever He has, then certainly He has of the Father, that the Holy Spirit proceeds 
also from Him. But let no one think of any times therein which imply a sooner and a later; because these 
things are not there at all. How, then, would it not be most absurd to call Him the Son of both: when, just as 
generation from the Father, without any changeableness of nature, gives to the Son essence, without 

beginning of time; so procession from both, without any changeableness of nature, gives to the Holy Spirit 
essence without beginning of time? For while we do not say that the Holy Spirit is begotten, yet we do not 
therefore dare to say that He is unbegotten, lest any one suspect in this word either two Fathers in that 
Trinity, or two who are not from another. For the Father alone is not from another, and therefore He alone is 
called unbegotten, not indeed in the Scriptures, [3] but in the usage of disputants, who employ such 
language as they can on so great a subject. And the Son is born of the Father; and the Holy Spirit proceeds 
from the Father principally, the Father giving the procession without any interval of time, yet in common from 
both [Father and Son]. [4] But He would be called the Son of the Father and of the Son, if— a thing abhorrent to 
the feeling of all sound minds-both had begotten Him. Therefore the Spirit of both is not begotten of both, 
but proceeds from both. 

CHAP. 27. -WHAT IT IS THAT SUFFICES HERE TO SOLVE THE QUESTION WHY THE 
SPIRIT IS NOT SAID TO BE BEGOTTEN, AND WHY THE FATHER ALONE IS 
UNBEGOTTEN. WHAT THEY OUGHT TO DO WHO DO NOT UNDERSTAND THESE 
THINGS. 

48. But because it is most difficult to distinguish generation from procession in that co-eternal, and equal, 
and incorporeal, and ineffably unchangeable and indivisible Trinity, let it suffice meanwhile to put before 
those who are not able to be drawn on further, what we said upon this subject in a sermon to be delivered in 
the ears of Christian people, and after saying wrote it down. For when, among other things, I had taught them 
by testimonies of the Holy Scriptures that the Holy Spirit proceeds from both, I continue: "If, then, the Holy 
Spirit proceeds both from the Father and from the Son, why did the Son say, 'He proceedeth from the 
Father?' "[5] Why, think you, except as He is wont to refer to Him, that also which is His own, from whom also 
He Himself is? Whence also is that which He saith, "My doctrine is not mine own, but His that sent me?"[1] If, 
therefore, it is His doctrine that is here understood, which yet He said was not His own, but His that sent Him, 
how much more is it there to be understood that the Holy Spirit proceeds also from Himself, where He so 
says, He proceedeth from the Father, as not to say, He proceedeth not from me? From Him, certainly, from 
whom the Son had his Divine nature, for He is God of God, He has also, that from Him too proceeds the 
Holy Spirit; and hence the Holy Spirit has from the Father Himself, that He should proceed from the Son 
also, as He proceeds from the Father. Here, too, in some way may this also be understood, so far as it can 
be understood by such as we are, why the Holy Spirit is not said to be born, but rather to proceed;[2] since if 
He, too, was called a Son, He would certainly be called the Son of both, which is most absurd, since no one 
is son of two, save of father and mother. But far be it from us to surmise any such thing as this between God 
the Father and God the Son. Because not even the son of men proceeds at the same time from both father 
and mother; but when he proceeds from the father into the mother, he does not at that time proceed from the 
mother; and when he proceeds from the mother into this present light, he does not at that time proceed from 
the father. But the Holy Spirit does not proceed from the Father into the Son, and from the Son proceed to 
sanctify the creature, but proceeds at once from both; although the Father has given this to the Son, that He 
should proceed, as from Himself, so also from Him. For we cannot say that the Holy Spirit is not life, while 
the Father is life, and the Son is life: and hence as the Father, while He has life in Himself, has given also to 
the Son to have life in Himself; so has He given also to Him that life should proceed from Him, as it also 
proceeds from Himself."[3] I have transferred this from that sermon into this book, but I was speaking to 
believers, not to unbelievers. 

49. But if they are not competent to gaze upon this image, and to see how true these things are which are in 
their mind, and yet which are not so three as to be three persons, but all three belong to a man who is one 
person; why do they not believe what they find in the sacred books respecting that highest Trinity which is 
God, rather than insist on the clearest reason being rendered them, which cannot be comprehended by the 
human mind, dull and infirm as it is? And to be sure, when they have steadfastly believed the Holy 
Scriptures as most true witnesses, let them strive, by praying and seeking and living well, that they may 
understand, i.e. that so far as it can be seen, that may be seen by the mind which is held fast by faith. Who 
would forbid this? Nay, who would not rather exhort them to it? But if they think they ought to deny that these 
things are, because they, with their blind minds, cannot discern them, they, too, who are blind from their birth, 
ought to deny that there is a sun. The light then shineth in darkness; but if the darkness comprehend it not,[4] 
let them first be illuminated by the gift of God, that they may be believers, and let them begin to be light in 
comparison with the unbelievers; and when this foundation is first laid, let them be built up to see what they 
believe, that at some time they may be able to see. For some things are so believed, that they cannot be 
seen at all. For Christ is not to be seen a second time on the cross; but unless this be believed which has 
been so done and seen, that it is not now to be hoped for as about to be and to be seen, there is no coming 
to Christ, such as without end He is to be seen. But as far as relates to the discerning in some way by the 
understanding that highest, ineffable, incorporeal, and unchangeable nature the sight of the human mind can 

nowhere better exercise itself, so only that the rule of faith govern it, than in that which man himself has in his 
own nature better than the other animals, better also than the other parts of his own soul, which is the mind 
itself, to which has been assigned a certain sight of things invisible, and to which, as though honorably 
presiding in a higher and inner place, the bodily senses also bring word of all things, that they may be 
judged, and than which there is no higher, to which it is to be subject, and by which it is to be governed, 
except God. 

50. But among these many things which I have now said, and of which there is nothing that I dare to profess 
myself to have said worthy of the ineffableness of that highest Trinity, but rather to confess that the wonderful 
knowledge of Him is too great for me, and that I cannot attain(1) to it: O thou, my soul, where dost thou feel 
thyself to be? where dost thou lie? where dost thou stand? until all thy infirmities be healed by Him who has 
forgiven all thy iniquities. (2) Thou perceivest thyself assuredly to be in that inn whither that Samaritan brought 
him Whom he found with many wounds inflicted by thieves, half-dead. (3) And yet thou hast seen many things 
that are true, not by those eyes by which colored objects are seen, but by those for which he prayed who 
said, "Let mine eyes behold the things that are equal. "(4) Certainly, then, thou hast seen many things that are 
true, and hast distinguished them from that light by the light of which thou hast seen them. Lift up thine eyes to 
the light itself, and fix them upon it if thou canst. For so thou wilt see how the birth of the Word of God differs 
from the procession of the Gift of God, on account of which the only-begotten Son did not say that the Holy 
Spirit is begotten of the Father, otherwise He would be His brother, but that lie proceeds from Him. Whence, 
since the Spirit of both is a kind of consubstantial communion of Father and Son, He is not called, far be it 
from us to say so, the Son of both. But thou canst not fix thy sight there, so as to discern this lucidly and 
clearly; I know thou canst not. I say the truth, I say to myself, I know what I cannot do; yet that light itself shows 
to thee these three things in thyself, wherein thou mayest recognize an image of the highest Trinity itself, 
which thou canst not yet contemplate with steady eye. Itself shows to thee that there is in thee a true word, 
when it is born of thy knowledge, i.e. when we say what we know: although we neither utter nor think of any 
articulate word that is significant in any tongue of any nation, but our thought is formed by that which we know; 
and there is in the mind's eye of the thinker an image resembling that thought which the memory contained, 
will or love as a third combining these two as parent and offspring. And he who can, sees and discerns that 
this will proceeds indeed from thought (for no one wills that of which he is absolutely ignorant what or of what 
sort it is), yet is not an image of the thought: and so that there is insinuated in this intelligible thing a sort of 
difference between birth and procession, since to behold by thought is not the same as to desire, or even to 
enjoy will. Thou, too, hast been able [to discern this], although thou hast not been, neither art, able to unfold 
with adequate speech what, amidst the clouds of bodily likenesses, which cease not to flit up and down 
before human thoughts, thou hast scarcely seen. But that light which is not thyself shows thee this too, that 
these incorporeal likenesses of bodies are different from the truth, which, by rejecting them, we contemplate 
with the understanding. These, and other things similarly certain, that light hath shown to thine inner eyes. 
What reason, then, is there why thou canst not see that light itself with steady eye, except certainly infirmity? 
And what has produced this in thee, except iniquity? Who, then, is it that healeth all thine infirmities, unless it 
be He that forgiveth all thine iniquities? And therefore I will now at length finish this book by a prayer better 
than by an argument. 

CHAP. 28. -THE CONCLUSION OF THE BOOK WITH A PRAYER, AND AN APOLOGY FOR 
MULTITUDE OF WORDS. 

51 . O Lord our God, we believe in Thee, the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit. For the Truth would not 
say, Go, baptize all nations in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, unless Thou wast 
a Trinity. Nor wouldest thou, O Lord God, bid us to be baptized in the name of Him who is not the Lord God. 
Nor would the divine voice have said, Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is one God, unless Thou wert so a 
Trinity as to be one Lord God. And if Thou, O God, weft Thyself the Father, and weft Thyself the Son, Thy 
Word Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit your gift, we should not read in the book of truth, "God sent His 
Son;"(5) nor wouldest Thou, O Only-begotten, say of the Holy Spirit, "Whom the Father will send in my 
name;"(6) and, "Whom I will send to you from the Father."(7) Directing my purpose by this rule of faith, so far 
as I have been able, so far as Thou hast made me to be able, I have sought Thee, and have desired to see 
with my understanding what I believed; and I have argued and labored much. O Lord my God, my one hope, 
hearken to me, lest through weariness I be unwilling to seek Thee, "but that I may always ardently seek Thy 
face. "(8) Do Thou give strength to seek,, who hast made me find Thee, and hast given the hope of finding 
Thee more and more. My strength and my infirmity are in Thy sight: preserve the one, and heal the other. My 
knowledge and my ignorance are in Thy sight; where Thou hast opened to me, receive me as I enter; where 
Thou hast closed, open to me as I knock. May I remember Thee, understand Thee, love Thee. Increase 
these things in me, until Thou renewest me wholly. I know it is written, "In the multitude of speech, thou shalt 
not escape sin."(1) But O that I might speak only in preaching Thy word, and in praising Thee! Not only 

should I so flee from sin, but I should earn good desert, however much I so spake. For a man blessed of 
Thee would not enjoin a sin upon his own true son in the faith, to whom he wrote, "Preach the word: be instant 
in season, out of season. "(2) Are we to say that he has not spoken much, who was not silent about Thy word, 
O Lord, not only in season, but out/of season? But therefore it was not much, because it was only what was 
necessary. Set me free, O God, from that multitude of speech which I suffer inwardly in my soul, wretched as 
it is in Thy sight, and flying for refuge to Thy mercy; for I am not silent in thoughts, even when silent in words. 
And if, indeed, I thought of nothing save what pleased Thee, certainly I would not ask Thee to set me free 
from such multitude of speech. But many are my thoughts, such as Thou knowest, "thoughts of man, since 
they are vain. "(3) Grant to me not to consent to them; and if ever they delight me, nevertheless to condemn 
them, and not to dwell in them, as though I slumbered. Nor let them so prevail in me, as that anything in my 
acts should proceed from them; but at least let my opinions, let my conscience, be safe from them, under 
Thy protection. When the wise man spake of Thee in his book, which is now called b the special name of 
Ecclesiasticus, We speak," he said, "much, and yet come short; and in sum of words, He is all. "(4) When, 
therefore, we shall have come to Thee, these very many things that we speak, and yet come short, will 
cease; and Thou, as One, wilt remain "all in all. "(5) And we shall say one thing without end, in praising Thee 
in One, ourselves also made one in Thee. O Lord the one God, God the Trinity, whatever I have said in 
these books that is of Thine, may they acknowledge who are Thine; if anything of my own, may it be 
pardoned both by Thee and by those who are Thine. Amen.
