John Chrysostom, Homilies on First and Second Timothy
Translation: Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Schaff et al. (1886-1900), Public Domain
Source: https://archive.org/details/EarlyChurchFathers38Volumes

HOMILIES OF ST. JOHN CHRYSOSTOM ON THE FIRST 
EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL THE APOSTLE TO TIMOTHY, 
HOMILIES I TO VII (CHAPTERS 1 & 2) 

HOMILIES OF ST. JOHN CHRYSOSTOM, 

ARCHBISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE, 

ON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST. PAULTHE APOSTLE 

TO TIMOTHY 

ARGUMENT. 

1. TIMOTHY too(1) was one of the disciples of the Apostle Paul. To the extraordinary qualities of this youth 
testimony is borne by Luke, who informs us, that he was "well reported of by the brethren that were at Lystra 
and Iconium." (Acts xvi. 2.) He became at once a disciple and a teacher, and gave this singular instance of 
his prudence, that hearing Paul preach without insisting upon circumcision, and understanding that he had 
formerly withstood Peter upon that point, he chose not only not to preach against it, but to submit to that rite. 
For Paul, it is said, "took and circumcised him" (Acts xvi. 3), though he was of adult age, and so trusted him 
with his whole economy. (2) 

The affection of Paul for him is a sufficient evidence of his character. For he elsewhere says of him, "Ye 
know the proof of him, that as a son with a father, he hath served with me in the Gospel." (Phil. ii. 22.) And to 
the Corinthians again he writes: "I have sent unto you Timothy, who is my beloved son, and faithful in the 
Lord." (1 Cor. iv. 17.) And again: "Let no man despise him, for he worketh the work of the Lord, as I also do." 
(1 Cor. xvi. 10, 11.) And to the Hebrews he writes, "Know that our brother Timothy is set at liberty." (Heb. xiii. 
23.) Indeed his love for him is everywhere apparent, and the miracles(3) that are now wrought still attest his 
claims. (4) 

2. If it should be asked why he addresses Epistles to Titus and Timothy alone, though Silas was approved, 
as also was Luke, for he writes, "Only Luke is with me" (2 Tim. iv. 11), and Clement was one of his 
associates, of whom he says, "with Clement and other my fellow-laborers" (Phil. iv. 3), for what reason then 
does he write only to Titus and Timothy? It is because he had already committed the care of churches to 
these, and certain marked(5) places had been assigned to them, but the others were in attendance upon 
him. For so preeminent in virtue was Timothy, that his youth was no impediment to his promotion; therefore 
he writes, "Let no man despise thy youth" (1 Tim. iv. 12, and v. 2); and again, "The younger women as 
sisters. "(6) For where there is virtue, all other things are superfluous, and there can be no impediment. 
Therefore when the Apostle discourses of Bishops, among the many things he requires of them, he makes 
no particular mention of age. And if he speaks of a Bishop "being the husband of one wife," and "having his 
children in subjection" (1 Tim. iii. 2, 4), this is not said, as if it were necessary he should have a wife and 
children; but that if any should happen from a secular life to be advanced to that office, they might be such 
as knew how to preside over their household and children, and all others committed to them. For if a man 
were both secular and deficient in these points, how should he be(1) intrusted with the care of the Church? 

3. But why, you will say, does he address an Epistle to a disciple already appointed to the office of a 
Teacher? Ought he not to have been made perfect for his office, before he was sent? Yes; but the instruction 
which he needed was not that which was suited to a disciple, but that which was proper for a Teacher. You 
will perceive him therefore through the whole Epistle adapting his instructions to a Teacher. Thus at the very 
beginning he does not say, "Do not attend to those who teach otherwise," but, "Charge them that they teach 
no other doctrine." (1 Tim. i. 3.) 

HOMILY I. 

1 TIMOTHY i. 1,2. 

"Paul, an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the commandment of God our Saviour, and Lord Jesus Christ, which is 

our hope; unto Timothy, my own son in the faith: Grace, mercy, and peace, from God our Father and Jesus 
Christ our Lord." [The R. V. omits <greek>kuriou</greek> and translates: Christ Jesus our hope, 
<greek>ths</greek> <greek>elpidos</greek> <greek>hmpn</greek> 

1 . GREAT and admirable is the dignity of an Apostle, and we find Paul constantly setting forth the causes of 
it, not as if he took the honor to himself, but as intrusted with it, and being under the necessity of so doing. For 
when he speaks of himself as "called," and that "by the will of God," and again elsewhere, "a necessity is 
laid upon me" (1 Cor. ix. 16), and when he says, "for this I was separated," by these expressions all idea of 
arrogance and ambition is removed. For as he deserves the severest blame, who intrudes into an office 
which is not given him of God, so he who refuses, and shrinks from it when offered to him, incurs blame of 
another kind, that of rebellion and disobedience. Therefore Paul, in the beginning of this Epistle, thus 
expresses himself, "Paul, an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the commandment of God." He does not say here, 
"Paul called," but "by commandment." He begins in this manner, that Timothy may not feel any human 
infirmity from supposing that Paul addresses him on the same terms as his disciples. But where is this 
commandment given? We read in the Acts of the Apostles: "The Spirit said, Separate me Paul and 
Barnabas." (Acts xiii. 2.) And everywhere in his writings Paul adds the name of Apostle, to instruct his 
hearers not to consider the doctrines he delivered as proceeding from man. For an Apostle(2) can say 
nothing of his own, and by calling himself an Apostle, he at once refers his hearers to Him that sent him. In all 
his Epistles therefore he begins by assuming this title, thus giving authority to his words, as here he says, 
"Paul, an Apostle of Jesus Christ according to the commandment of God our Saviour." Now it does not 
appear that the Father anywhere commanded him. It is everywhere Christ who addresses him. Thus, "He 
said unto me, Depart, for I will send thee far hence unto the Gentiles" (Acts xxii. 21); and again, "Thou must 
be brought before Cassar." (Acts xxvii. 24.) But whatever the Son commands, this he considers to be the 
commandment of the Father, as those of the Spirit are the commandments of the Son. For he was sent by 
the Spirit, he was separated by the Spirit, and this he says was the commandment of God. What then? does 
it derogate from the power of the Son, that His Apostle was sent forth by the commandment of the Father? By 
no means. For observe, how he represents the power as common to both. For having said, "according to 
the commandment of God our Saviour"; he adds, "and Lord Jesus Christ, our hope." And observe, with what 
propriety he applies the titles. (3) And indeed, the Psalmist applies this to the Father, saying, "The hope of all 
the ends of the earth." (Ps. Ixiv. 5.) And again, the blessed Paul in another place writes, "For therefore we 
both labor, and suffer reproach, because we have hope in the living God." The teacher must suffer dangers 
even more than the disciple. "For I will smite the shepherd, (he says,) "and the sheep shall be scattered 
abroad." (Zech. xiii. 7.) Therefore the devil rages with greater violence against teachers, because by their 
destruction the flock also is scattered. For by slaying the sheep, he has lessened the flock, but when he has 
made away with the shepherd, he has ruined the whole flock, so that he the rather assaults him, as working 
greater mischief by a less effort; and in one soul effecting the ruin of all. For this reason Paul, at the 
beginning, elevates and encourages the soul of Timothy, by saying, We have God for our Saviour and 
Christ for our hope. We suffer much, but our hopes are great; we are exposed to snares and perils, but to 
save us we have not man but God. Our Saviour is not weak, for He is God, and whatever be our dangers 
they will not overcome us; nor is our hope made ashamed, for it is Christ.(1) For in two ways we are enabled 
to bear up against dangers, when we are either speedily delivered from them, or supposed by good hopes 
under them. 

But Paul never calls himself the Apostle of the Father, but always of Christ. Because he makes everything 
common to both. The Gospel itself he calls "the Gospel of God. "(2) And ent are as nothing. 
"Unto Timothy, my own son in the faith." 

This too is encouraging. For if he evinced such faith as to be called peculiarly Paul's "own" son, he might be 
confident also with respect to the future. For it is the part of faith not to be cast down or disturbed, though 
circumstances occur that seem contrary to the promises. But observe he says, "my son," and even "mine 
own son," and yet he is not of the same substance. But what? was he of irrational kind? "Well," says one, "he 
was not of Paul, so this does not imply 'being of another." What then? was he of another substance neither 
was it so, for after saying "mine own son," he adds, "in the faith," to show that he was really "his own son," 
and truly from him. There was no difference. The likeness he bore to him was in respect to his faith, as in 
human births there is a likeness in respect of substance The son is like the father in human beings, but with 
respect to God the proximity is greater.(3) For here a father and a son, though of the same substance, differ 
in many particulars, as in color, figure, understanding, age, bent of mind, endowments of soul and body, and 
in many other things they may be like or unlike, but there is no such dissimilarity in the divine Essence. "By 
commandment." This is a stronger ex- son," in like manner he says to the Corinthians, "in Christ Jesus I have 
begotten you," i.e. in faith; but he adds the word "own, "(4) to show his particular likeness to himself, as well 
as his own love and great affection for him. Notice again the "in" applied to the faith. "My own son," he says, 
"in the faith." See what an honorable distinction, in that he calls him not only his "son," but his "own" son. 
Ver. 2. "Grace, mercy, and peace from God our Father and Jesus Christ our Lord." 

Why is mercy mentioned here, and not in the other Epistles? This is a further mark of his affection. Upon his 
son he invokes greater blessings, with the anxious apprehension of a parent. For such was his anxiety, that 
he gives directions to Timothy, which he has done in no other case, to attend to his bodily health; where he 
says, "Use a little wine for thy stomach's sake, and thine often infirmities" (1 Tim. v. 23.) Teachers indeed 
stand more in need of mercy. 

"From God our Father," he says, "and Jesus Christ our Lord." 

Here too is consolation. For if God is our Father, He cares for us as sons, as Christ says, "What man is there 
of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he give him a stone?" (Matt. vii. 9.) 
Ver. 3. "As I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, when I went into Macedonia." 

Observe the gentleness of the expression, more like that of a servant than of a master. For he does not say 
"I commanded," or "bade" or even "exhorted," but "I besought thee." But this tone is not for all: only meek 
and virtuous disciples are to be treated thus. The corrupt and insincere are to be dealt with in a different 
manner, as Paul himself elsewhere directs, "Rebuke them with all authority" (Tit. ii. 15); and here he says 
"charge," not "beseech," but "charge some that they teach no other doctrine" What means this? That Paul's 
Epistle which he sent them was not sufficient? Nay, it was sufficient; but men are apt sometimes to slight 
Epistles, or perhaps this may have been before the Epistles were written. He had himself passed some 
time in that city. There was the temple of Diana, and there he had been exposed to those great sufferings. 
For after the assembly in the Theater had been dissolved, and he had called to him and exhorted the 
disciples, he found it necessary to sail away, though afterwards he returned to them. It were worth enquiry, 
whether he stationed Timothy there at that time. (5) For he says, that "thou mightest charge some that they 
teach no other doctrine": he does not mention the persons by name, that he might not, by the openness of 
his rebuke, render them more shameless. There were in that city certain false Apostles of the Jews, who 
wished to oblige the faithful to observe the Jewish law, a fault he is everywhere position to him. This is meant 
by "teaching another doctrine." 

Ver. 4. "Neither give heed to fables and endless genealogies." 

By "fables" he does not mean the law; far from it; but inventions and forgeries and counterfeit doctrines. For, 
it seems, the Jews wasted their whole discourse on these unprofitable points, knowledge and research. 
"That thou mightest charge some," he says, "that they teach no other doctrine, neither give heed to fables 
and endless genealogies." Why does he call them "endless"? It is because they had no end, or none of 
any use, or none easy for us to apprehend. Mark how he disapproves of questioning. For where faith exists, 
there is no need of question. Where there is no room for curiosity, questions are superfluous. Questioning is 
the subversion of faith. (1) For he that seeks has not yet found. He who questions cannot believe. Therefore it 
is his advice that we should not be occupied with questions, since if we question, it is not faith; for faith sets 
reasoning at rest. But why then does Christ say, "Seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto 
you" (Matt. vii. 7); and, "Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life"? (John v. 39.) The 
seeking there is meant of prayer and vehement desire, and He bids "search the Scriptures," not to 
introduce the labors of questioning, but to end them, that we may ascertain and settle their true meaning, not 
that we may be ever questioning, but that we may have done with it. And he justly said, "Charge some that 
they teach no other doctrine, neither give heed to fables, and endless genealogies, which minister 
questions rather than the dispensation of God in faith. "(2) Justly has he which is the best medicine of our 
souls. This questioning therefore is opposed to the dispensation of God. For what is dispensed by faith? To 
recede His mercies and become better men; to doubt and dispute of nothing; but to repose in confidence. 
For what "ministers questions" displaces faith and that which faith hath wrought and builded. Christ has said 
that we must be saved by faith; this these teachers questioned and even denied. For since the 
announcement was present, but the issue of it future, faith was required. But they bring preoccupied by legal 
observances threw impediments in the way of faith. He seems also here to glance at the Greeks, where he 
speaks of "fables and genealogies," for they enumerated their Gods. 

MORAL. Let us not then give heed to questions. For we were called Faithful, that we might unhesitatingly 
believe what is delivered to us, and entertain no doubt. For if the things asserted were human, we ought to 
examine them; but since they are of God, they are only to be revered and believed. If we believe not, how 
shall we be persuaded of the existence of a God? For how knowest thou that there is a God, when thou 
callest Him to account? The Him without proofs and demonstrations. Even the Greeks know this; for they 
believed their Gods telling them, saith one, even without proof; and what?-That(3) they were the off- 
sorcerer,^) (I speak of Pythagoras,) they acted in like manner, for of him it was said, (5) He said it.(6) And 
over their temples was an image of Silence, and her finger on her mouth, compressing her lips, and 
significantly exhorting all that passed by to be silent. And were their doctrines so sacred, and are ours less 
so? and even to be ridiculed? What extreme madness is this! The tenets of the Greeks indeed are rightly 
questioned. For they were of that nature, being but disputes, conflicts of reasonings, and doubts, and 
conclusions. But ours are far from all these. For human wisdom invented theirs, but ours were taught by the 
grace of the Spirit. Their doctrines are madness and folly, ours are true wisdom. In their case there is neither 

teacher nor scholar; but all alike are disputants. Here whether teacher or scholar, each is to learn(7) of him 
from whom he ought to learn, and not to doubt, but obey; not to dispute, but believe. For all the ancients 
obtained a good report through faith, and without this everything is subverted. And why do I speak of it in 
heavenly things? We shall find upon examination that earthly things depend upon it no less. For without this 
there would be no trade nor contracts, nor anything of the sort. And if it be so necessary here in things that 
are false, how much more in those. (1) doctrines, such, for instance, as relate to nativity(2) and fate. (3) If you 
believe that there is a resurrection and a judgment, you will be able to expel from your mind all those false 
opinions. Believe that there is a just God, and you will not believe that there can be an unjust nativity. 
Believe that there is a God, and a Providence, (4) and you will not believe that there can be a nativity, that 
holds all things together.(5) Believe that there is a place of punishment, and a Kingdom, and you will not 
brave in a nativity that takes away our free agency, and subjects us to necessity and force. Neither sow, nor 
plant, nor according to the course of nativity ! What need have we more of Prayer? And why should you 
deserve to be a Christian, if there be this nativity? for you will not then be responsible. And whence proceed 
the arts of life? are these too from nativity? Yes, you say, and it is fated to one to become wise with labor. But 
can you show me one who has learnt an art without labor? You cannot. It is not then from nativity but from 
labor that he derives his skill. 

But why does a man who is corrupt and wicked become rich, without inheriting it from raise, always arguing 
upon wealth and poverty, and never taking the case of vice and virtue. Now in this question talk not of that, 
but show me a man who has become bad, whilst he was striving to be good; or one that, without striving, has 
become good. For if Fate has any power, its power should be shown in the most important things; in vice 
and virtue, not in poverty and riches. Again you ask, why is one man sickly and another healthy? why is one 
honored, another disgraced? Why does ever thing succeed well with this man, whilst another meets with 
nothing but failure and impediments? Lay aside the notion of nativity, and you will know. Believe firmly that 
there is a God and a Providence, and all these things will be cleared up. "But I cannot," you say, "conceive 
that honest man, and not to the virtuous? How can I believe this? for there must be facts to ground belief." 
Well then, do these cases proceed from a nativity that was just, or unjust? "Unjust," you say. Who then made 
it? "Not God," you say, "it was unbegotten." But how can the unbegotten produce these things? for they are 
contradictions. "These things are not then in any wise the works of God." Shall we then enquire who made 
the earth, the sea, the heavens, the seasons? "Nativity," you answer. Did nativity then produce in things 
inanimate such order and harmony, but in us, for whom these things were made, so much disorder? As if 
one, in building a house, should be careful to make it magnificent, but bestow not a thought upon his 
household. But who preserves the succession of the seasons? Who established the regular laws of nature? 
Who appointed the courses of day and night? These things are superior to any such nativity. "But these," 
you say, "came to be of themselves." And yet how can such a well-ordered system spring up of itself? 
"But whence" you say "come the rich, the healthy, the renowned, and how are some made rich by 
covetousness, some by inheritance, some by violence? and why does God suffer the wicked to be 
prosperous?" We answer, Because the retribution, according to the desert of each, does not take place 
here, but is reserved for hereafter. Show me any such thing taking place Then ! "Well," say you, "give me 
here, and I do not look for hereafter."(6) But it is because you seek here, that you receive not. For if when 
earthly enjoyment is not within your reach, you seek present things so eagerly as to prefer them to future, 
what would you do if you were in possession of unmixed pleasure? God therefore shows you that these 
things are nothing, and indifferent; for if they were not indifferent, He would not below them on such men. You 
will own that it is a matter of indifference whether one be tall or short, black or white; so is it whether one be 
rich or poor. For, tell me, are not things necessary bestowed on all equally, as the capacity for virtue, the 
distribution of spiritual gifts? If you understood aright the mercies of God, you would not complain of wanting 
worldly things, whilst you enjoyed these best gifts equally with others; and knowing that equal distribution 
you would not desire superiority in the rest. As if a servant enjoying from his master's bounty food, clothing, 
and lodging, and all other necessaries equally with his fellow- this reason it is, that God withdraws those 
things fore us, to extinguish this madness, and transfer our affections from them to heaven. But nevertheless 
we do not learn wisdom. As if a child possessing a toy, should prefer it to things necessary, and his father, to 
lead him against his will to what was better for him, should deprive him of his toy; so God takes these things 
from us, that He may lead us to heaven. If you ask then why He permits the wicked to be rich, it is because 
they are not high in His esteem. And if the righteous too are rich, it is rather that He allows it to be, than that 
He makes them so. they might gain wealth, do not seek wealth; when they might enjoy health, mortify their 
bodies; when they might rise to glory, make it their aim to be despised. But there is no good man, who ever 
studied to be bad. Let us therefore desist from seeking things below, and let us seek heavenly things; for so 
we shall be able to attain them, and we shall enjoy eternal delights, (2) by the grace and lovingkindness of 
our Lord Jesus Christ. To Whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, power, and honor, now, and 
ever, and world without end. Amen. 

HOMILY II. 

1 TIMOTHY i. 5--7. 

"Now the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith 

unfeigned:: From which some having swerved have turned aside unto vain jangling; Desiring to be teachers 

of the law; understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm." 

NOTHING iS so injurious to mankind as to undervalue friendship(l); and not to cultivate it with the greatest 

care; as nothing, on the other hand, is so beneficial, as to pursue it to the utmost of our power. This Christ has 

shown, where He says, "If two of you shall agree on earth, as touching anything that they shall ask, it shall be 

done for them of My Father" (Matt, xviii. 1 9); and again, "Because iniquity shall abound, love shall wax cold." 

(Matt. xxiv. 12.) It is this that has been the occasion of all heresies. For men, because they loved not their 

brethren, have envied those who were in high repute, and from envying, they have become eager for power, 

and from a love of power have introduced heresies. On this account Paul having said, "that thou mightest 

charge some that they teach no other doctrine," now shows that the manner in which this may be effected is 

by charity. As therefore when he says, "Christ is the end of the Law" (Rom. x. 4), that is, its fulfillment, and this 

is connected with the former, so this(3) a commandment implied in love. The end of medicine is health, but 

where there is health, there is no need to make much ado; so where there is love, there is no need of much 

commanding. But what sort of love does he speak of? That which is sincere, which is not merely in words but 

which flows from the disposition, from sentiment, and sympathy. "From a pure heart," he says, either with 

respect to a right conversation, or sincere affection. For an impure life too produces divisions. "For every 

one that doeth evil, hateth the light." (John iii. 20.) There is indeed a friendship even among the wicked. 

Robbers and murderers may love one another, but this is not "from a good conscience," not "from a pure" 

but from an impure "heart," not from "faith unfeigned," but from that which is false and hypocritical. For faith 

points out the truth, and a sincere faith produces love, which he who truly believes in God cannot endure to 

lay aside. 

Ver. 6. "From which some having swerved have turned aside to vain jangling." 

He has well said, "swerved," for it requires skill, (4) to shoot straight and not beside the mark, to have(1) the 

direction of the Spirit. For there are many things to turn us aside from the right course, and we should look but 

to one object. 

Ver. 7. "Desiring to be teachers of the law." 

Here we see another cause of evil, the love of power. Wherefore Christ said, "Be not ye called Rabbi" (Matt. 

xxiii. 8); and the Apostle again, "For neither do they keep the law, but that they may glory in your flesh." (Gal. 

vi. 1 3.) They desire preeminence, he means, and on that account disregard truth. 

"Understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm." 

Here he censures them, because they know not the end and aim of the Law, nor the period for which it was 

to have authority. But if it was from ignorance, why is it called a sin? Because it was incurred not only from 

their desiring to be teachers of the law,(2) but from their not retaining love. Nay, and their very ignorance 

arose from these causes. For when the soul abandons itself to carnal things, the clearness of its vision is 

dimmed, and falling from love it drops into contentiousness, and the eye of the mind is blinded. For he that is 

possessed by any desire for these temporal things intoxicated, as he is, with passion, cannot be an 

impartial judge of truth. (3) 

"Not knowing whereof they affirm." 

For it is probable that they spoke of the law, and enlarged on its purifications and other bodily rites. The 

Apostle then forbearing to censure these, as either nothing, or at best a shadow and figure of spiritual things, 

proceeds in a more engaging way to praise the law, calling the Decalogue here the law, and by means of it 

discarding the rest. For if even these precepts punish transgressors, and become useless to us, much more 

the others. 

Ver. 8, 9. ".But we know that the law is good, if a man use it lawfully. Knowing this, that the law is not made for 

a righteous man." 

The law, he seems to say, is good, and again, not good. What then? if one use it not lawfully, is it not good? 

Nay even so it is good. But what he means is this; if any one fulfills it in his actions; for that is to "use it 

lawfully" as here intended. But when they expound it in their words, and neglect it in their deeds, that is using 

it unlawfully. For such an one uses it, but not to his own profit. And another way may be named besides. 

What is it? that the law, if thou use it aright, sends thee to Christ. For since its aim is to justify man, and it fails 

to effect this, it remits us to Him who can do so. Another way again of using the law lawfully, is when we keep 

it, but as a thing superfluous. And how as a thing superfluous? As the bridle is properly used, not by the 

prancing horse that champs it, but by that which wears it only for the sake of appearance, so he uses the law 

lawfully, who governs himself, though not as constrained by the letter of it. He uses the law lawfully who is 

conscious that he does not need it, for he who is already so virtuous that he fulfills it not from fear of it, but 

from a principle of virtue, (4) uses it lawfully and safely: that is, if one so use it, not as being in fear of it, but 
having before his eyes rather the condemnation of conscience than the punishment hereafter. Moreover he 
calls him a righteous man, who has attained unto virtue. He therefore uses the law lawfully, who does not 
require to be instructed by it. For as points in reading are set before children; but he who does what they 
direct, without their aid, from other knowledge, shows more skill, and is a better reader; so he who is above 
the law, is not under the schooling of the law. For he keeps it in a much higher degree, who fulfills it not from 
fear, but from a virtuous inclination; since he that fears punishment does not fulfill it in the same manner as he 
that aims at reward. He that is under the law doth it not as he that is above the law. For to live above the law 
is to use it lawfully. He uses it lawfully, and keeps it, who achieves things beyond the law, and who does not 
need its instructions. For the law, for the most part, is prohibition of evil; now this alone does not make a man 
righteous, but the performance of good actions besides. Hence those, who abstain from evil like slaves, do 
not come up to the mark of the law. For it was appointed for the punishment of transgression. Such men 
indeed use it, but it is to dread its punishment. It is said, "Wilt thou not be afraid of the power? do that which is 
good" (Rom. xiii. 3): which implies, that the law threatens punishment only to the wicked. But of what use is 
the law to him whose actions deserve a crown? as the surgeon is of use only to him who hath some hurt, and 
not to the sound and healthy man. "But for the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners." He 
calls the Jews "lawless and disobedient" too. "The law (he says) worketh wrath," that is, to the evil doers. 
But what to him who is deserving of reward? "By the law is the knowledge of sin." (Rom. iii. 20.) What then 
with respect to the righteous? "the law is not made," he says, "for a righteous man." Wherefore? Because he 
is exempted from its punishment, and he waits not to learn from it what is his duty, since he has the grace of 
the Spirit within to direct him. For the law was given that men might be chastened by fear of its threatenings. 
But the tractable horse needs not the curb, nor the man that can dispense with instruction the schoolmaster. 
"But for the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for the unholy and profane, for 
murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers." Thus he does not stop at the mention of sins in general, nor 
of these only, but goes over the several kinds of sin, to shame men, as it were, of being under the direction 
of the law; and having thus particularized some, he adds a reference to those omitted, though what he had 
enumerated were sufficient to withdraw men. Of whom then does he say these things? Of the Jews, for they 
were "murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers": they were "profane and unholy," for these too he 
means when he says, "ungodly and sinners," and being such, the law was necessarily given to them. For 
did they not repeatedly worship idols? did they not stone Moses? were not their hands imbrued in the blood 
of their kindred? Do not the prophets constantly accuse them of these things? But to those who are 
instructed by a heavenly philosophy, these commandments are superfluous. "For murderers of fathers and 
murderers of mothers, for manslayers, for whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with mankind, for 
menstealers, for liers, for perjured persons, and if there be any other thing that is contrary to sound doctrine"; 
for all the things which he had mentioned were the passions of a corrupted soul, and contrary, therefore, to 
sound doctrine. 

Ver. 1 1 . "According to the glorious Gospel of the blessed God, which was committed to my true." 
Thus the Law is still necessary for the confirmation of the Gospel, yet to those who obey it is unnecessary. 
And he calls the Gospel "glorious." There were some who were ashamed of its persecutions, and of the 
sufferings of Christ, and so for the sake of these, as well as for others, he has called it "the glorious Gospel," 
thus showing that the sufferings of Christ are our glory. And perhaps he glances too at the future. For if our 
present state is exposed to shame and reproach, it will not be so hereafter; and it is to things future, and not 
to things present, that the Gospel belongs. Why then did the Angel say, "Behold, I bring you good tidings of 
great joy, for unto you is born a Saviour "? (Luke ii. 10.) Because He was born to be their Saviour, though His 
miracles did not commence from His birth. "According to the Gospel," he saith, "of the blessed God." The 
glory(1) he means is either that of the service of God, or, in that if present things are filled with its glory, yet 
much more will things future be so; when "His enemies shall be put under His feet" (1 COR. xv. 25), when 
there shall be nothing opposed, when the just shall behold all those blessed things, which "eye hath not 
seen, nor ear heard, and which hath not entered into the heart of man." (1 COR. ii. 9.) "For I will" says our 
Saviour, "that they also may be with Me, where I am, that they may behold My glory, which Thou hast given 
Me." (John xvii. 24.) 

MORAL. Let us then learn who these are, and let us esteem them blessed, considering what felicities they 
will then enjoy, of what light and glory they will then participate. The glory of this world is worthless and not 
enduring, or if it abides, it abides but till death, and after that is wholly extinguished. For "his glory," it says, 
"shall not descend after him." (Ps. xlix. 17.) And with many it lasts not even to the end of life. But no such thing 
is to be thought of in that glory; it abides, and will have no end. For such are the things of God, enduring, and 
above all change or end. For the glory of that state is not from without, but from within. I mean, it consists not 
in a multitude of servant, or of chariot, nor in costly garments. Independently of these things, the man himself 
is clothed with glory. Here, without these things, the man appears naked. In the baths, we see the illustrious 
the undistinguished, and the base, alike bare. Often have the great been exposed to danger in public, being 

left on some occasion by their servants. But in that world men carry their glory about with them, and the 
Saints, like the Angels, wherever they appear, have their glory in themselves. Yea rather as the sun needs 
no vestures, and requires no foreign aid, but wherever he appears, his glory at once shines forth; so shall it 
then be. 

Let us then pursue that glory, than which nothing is more venerable; and leave the glory of the world, as 
beyond anything worthless. "Boast not of thy clothing and raiment." (Ecclus. xi. 4.) This was the advice given 
of old to the simple. Indeed the dancer, the harlot, the player, are arrayed in a gayer and more costly robe 
than thou. And besides, this boasting were of that, which if but moths attack, they can rob thee of its 
enjoyment. Dost thou see what an unstable thing it is, this glory of the present life? Thou pridest thyself upon 
that which insects make and destroy. For Indian insects,, it is said, spin those fine threads of which your 
robes are made. But rather seek a clothing woven from things above, an admirable and radiant vesture, 
raiment of real gold; of gold not dug by malefactors' hands out of the mine, but the produce of virtue. Let us 
clothe ourselves with a robe not the manufacture of poor men or slaves, but wrought by our Lord Himself. But 
your garments, you say, are in-wrought with gold! And what is that to thee? He that wrought it, not he that 
wears it, is the object of admiration, for there it is really due. It is not the frame on which the garment is 
stretched at the fuller's, but the maker of it, that is admired. Yet the block wears it, and has it bound on itself. 
And as that wears it, but not for use, even so do some of these women, for the benefit of the garment, to air it, 
they say, that it may not be moth-eaten! Is it not then the extreme of folly to be solicitous about a thing so 
worthless, to do anything whatever, to risk your salvation for it, to make a mock at Hell, to set God at 
defiance, to overlook Christ hungering? Talk not of the precious spices of India, Arabia, and Persia, the 
moist and the dry, the perfumes and unguents, so costly and so useless. Why, O woman, dost thou lavish 
perfumes upon a body full of impurity within? why spend on what is offensive, as if one should waste 
perfumes upon dirt, or distill balms upon a brick. There is, if you desire it, a precious ointment and a 
fragrance, with which you might anoint your soul; not brought from Arabia, or Ethiopia, nor from Persia, but 
from heaven itself; purchased not by gold, but by a virtuous will, and by faith unfeigned. Buy this perfume, the 
odor of which is able to fill the world. It was of this the Apostles savored. "For we are (he says) a sweet 
savor, to some of death, to others of life." (2 Cor. ii. 15, 16.) And what means this? That it is as they say, that 
the swine is suffocated by perfumes! But this spiritual fragrance scented not only the bodies but the 
garments of the Apostles; and Paul's garments were so impregnated with it, that they cast out devils. What 
balmy leaf, what cassia, what myrrh so sweet or so efficacious as this perfume? For if it put devils to flight, 
what could it not effect? With this ointment let us furnish ourselves. And the grace of the Spirit will provide it 
through almsgiving. Of these we shall savor, when we go into the other world. And as here, he(1) that is 
perfumed with sweet odors draws upon himself, the notice of all, and whether at the bath, or the assembly, or 
any other concourse of men, all follow him, and observe him; so, in that world, when souls come in that are 
fragrant with this spiritual savor, all arise and make room. And even here devils and all vices are afraid to 
approach it, and cannot endure it, for it chokes them. Let us then not bear about us that perfume which is a 
mark of effeminacy, but this, which is a mark of manhood, which is truly admirable, which fills us with a holy 
confidence. This is a spice which is not the produce of the earth, but springs from virtue, which withers not, 
but blooms for ever. This is it that renders those who possess it honorable. With this we are anointed at our 
Baptism, then we savor sweetly of it; but it must be by our care afterwards that we retain the savor. Of old the 
Priests were anointed with ointment, as an emblem of the virtue, the fragrance of which a Priest should 
diffuse around him. 

But nothing is more offensive than the savor of sin, which made the Psalmist say, "My wounds stink and are 
corrupt." (Ps. xxxviii. 5.) For sin is more foul than putrefaction itself. What, for instance, is more offensive than 
fornication? And if this is not perceived at the time of its commission, yet, after it is committed, its offensive 
nature, the impurity contracted in it, and the curse, (2) and the abomination of it is perceived. So it is with all 
sin. Before it is committed it has something of pleasure, but after its commission, the pleasure ceases and 
fades away, and pain and shame succeed. But with righteousness it is the reverse. At the beginning it is 
attended with toil, but in the end with pleasure and repose. But even here, as in the one case the pleasure of 
sin is no pleasure, because of the expectation of disgrace and punishment, so in the other the toil is not felt 
as toil, by reason of the hope of reward. And what is the pleasure of drunkenness? The poor gratification of 
drinking, and hardly that. For when insensibility follows, and the man sees nothing that is before him, and is 
in a worse state than a madman, what enjoyment remains? Nay, one might well say there is no pleasure in 
fornication itself. For when passion has deprived the soul of its judgment, can there be any real delights? As 
well might we say that the itch is a pleasure! I should call that true pleasure, when the soul is not affected by 
passion, not agitated nor overpowered by the body. For what pleasure can it be to grind the teeth, to distort 
the eyes, to be irritated and inflamed beyond decency? But so far is it from being pleasant, that men hasten 
to escape from it, and when it is over are in pain. But if it were pleasure, they would wish not to escape from 
it, but to continue it. It has therefore only the name of pleasure. 
But not such are the pleasures enjoyed by us; they are truly delightful, they do not agitate nor inflame. They 

leave the soul free, and cheer and expand it. Such was the pleasure of Paul when he said, "In this I rejoice, 
yea, and I will rejoice"; and again, "Rejoice in the Lord always." (Phil. i. 18, and iv. 4.) For sinful pleasure is 
attended with shame and condemnation; it is indulged in secret, and is attended with infinite uneasiness. But 
from all these the true pleasure is exempt. This then let us pursue, that we may attain those good things to 
come, through the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom, &c. 

HOMILY III. 

1 TIMOTHY i. 12--14. 

"And I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who hath enabled me, for that he counted me faithful, putting me into the 
ministry [R. V.: to his service, <greek>eis</greek> <greek>diakonian</greek>]; who was before a 
blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious: but I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief. 
And the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant, with faith and love which is in Christ Jesus." 
THE advantages arising from humility are generally acknowledged, and yet it is a thing not easily to be met 
with. There is affectation of humble talking enough and to spare, but humbleness of mind is nowhere to be 
found. This quality was so cultivated by the blessed Paul, that he is ever looking out for inducements to be 
humble. They who are conscious to themselves of great merits must struggle much with themselves if they 
would be humble. And he too was one likely to be under violent temptations, his own good conscience 
swelling him up like a gathering humor. Observe therefore his method in this place. "I was intrusted," he had 
said, "with the glorious Gospel of God, of which they who still adhere to the law have no right to partake; for it 
is now opposed to the Gospel, and their difference is such, that those who are actuated by the one, are as 
yet unworthy to partake of the other; as we should say, that those who require punishments, and chains, 
have no right to be admitted into the train of philosophers." Being filled therefore with high thoughts, and 
having used magnificent expressions, he at once depresses himself, and engages others also to do the 
like. Having said therefore that "the Gospel was committed to his trust"; lest this should seem to be said from 
pride, he checks himself at once, adding by way of correction, "I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who hath 
enabled me, for that He counted me faithful, putting me into the ministry." Thus everywhere, we see, he 
conceals his own merit, and ascribes everything to God, yet so far only, as not to take away free will. For the 
unbeliever might perhaps say, If everything is of God, and we contribute nothing of ourselves, while He turns 
us, as if we were mere wood and stone, from wickedness to the love of wisdom, why then did He make Paul 
such as he was, and not Judas? To remove this objection, mark the prudence of his expression, "Which 
was committed," he says, "to my trust." This was his own excellence and merit, but not wholly his own; for he 
says, "I thank Christ Jesus, who enabled me." This is God's part: then his own again, "Because He counted 
me faithful." Surely because he would be serviceable of his own part. 

Ver. 13. "Putting me into his service, who was before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious; but I 
obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief." 

Thus we see him acknowledge both his own part and that of God, and whilst he ascribes the greater part to 
the providence of God, he extenuates his own, yet so far only, as we said before, as was consistent with free 
will. And what is this, "Who enabled me"? I will tell you. He had so heavy a burden to sustain, that he needed 
much aid from above. For think what it was to be exposed to daily insults, and mockeries, and snares, and 
dangers, scoffs, and reproaches, and deaths; and not to faint, or slip, or turn backward, but though assaulted 
every day with darts innumerable, to bear up manfully, and remain firm and imperturbable. This was the 
effect of no human power, and yet not of Divine influence alone, but of his own resolution also. For that Christ 
chose him with a foreknowledge of what he would be, is plain from the testimony He bore to him before the 
commencement of his preaching. "He is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles 
and kings." (Acts ix. 15.) For as those who bear the royal standard in war(1) require both strength and 
address, that they may not let it fall into the hands of the enemy; so those who sustain the name of Christ, not 
only in war but in peace, need a mighty strength, to presence it uninjured from the attacks of accusers. Great 
indeed is the strength required to bear the name of Christ, and to sustain it well, and bear the Cross. For he 
who in action, or word, or thought, does anything unworthy of Christ, does not sustain His name, and has not 
Christ dwelling in him. For he that sustains that name bears it in triumph, not in the concourse of men, but 
through the very heavens, while all angels stand in awe, and attend upon him, and admire him. 
"I thank the Lord, who hath enabled me." Observe how he thanks God even for that which was his own part. 
For he acknowledges it as a favor from Him that he was "a chosen vessel." For this, O blessed Paul, was 
thy own part. "For God is no respecter of persons. "(1) But I thank Him that he "thought me worthy of this 
ministry." For this is a proof that He esteemed me faithful. The steward in a house is not only thankful to his 
master that he is trusted, but considers it as a sign that he holds him more faithful than others: so it is here. 
Then observe how he magnifies the mercy and loving-kindness of God, in describing his former life, "who 
was formerly," he says, "a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious." And when he speaks of the still 

unbelieving Jews, he rather extenuates their guilt. "For I bear them record that they have a zeal for God, but 
not according to knowledge." (Rom. x. 2.) But of himself he says, "Who was a blasphemer and a 
persecutor." Observe his lowering of himself! So free was he from self-love, so full of humility, that he is not 
satisfied to call himself a persecutor and a blasphemer, but he aggravates his guilt, showing that it did not 
stop with himself, that it was not enough that he Gas a blasphemer, but in the madness of his blasphemy he 
persecuted those who were willing to be godly. (2) 
"But I obtained mercy because I did it ignorantly in unbelief." 

Why then did other Jews not obtain mercy? Because what they did, they did not ignorantly, but willfully, well 
knowing what they did. For this we have the testimony of the Evangelist. "Many of the Jews believed on Him, 
but because of the Pharisees they did not confess Him. For they loved the praise of men more than the 
praise of God." (John xii. 42, 43.) And Christ again said to them, "How can ye believe, who receive honor 
one of another" (John v. 44)? and the parents of the blind man "said these things for fear of the Jews, lest 
they should be put out of the synagogue." (John ix. 22.) Nay the Jews themselves said, "Perceive ye how 
we avail nothing? behold, the world is gone after Him." (John xii. 1 9.) Thus their love of power was 
everywhere in their way. When they admitted that no one can forgive sins but God only, and Christ 
immediately did that very thing, (3) which they had confessed to be a sign of divinity, this Could not be a case 
of ignorance. But where was Paul then? Perhaps one should say he was sitting at the feet of Gamaliel, and 
took no part with the multitude who conspired against Jesus: for Gamaliel does not appear to have been an 
ambitious man. Then how is it that afterwards Paul was found joining with the multitude? He saw the doctrine 
growing, and on the point of prevailing, and being generally embraced. For in the lifetime of Christ, the 
disciples consorted with Him, and afterwards with their teachers, (4) but when they were completely 
separated, Paul did not act as the other Jews did, from the love of power, but from zeal. For what was the 
motive of his journey to Damascus? He thought the doctrine pernicious, and was afraid that the preaching of 
it would spread everywhere. But with the Jews it was no concern for the multitude, but the love of power, that 
influenced their actions. Hence they say, "The Romans will come and take away both our place and 
nation." (John xi. 48.) What fear was this that agitated them, but that of man? But it is worthy of enquiry, how 
one so skillful in the law as Paul could be ignorant? For it is he who says, "which He had promised before by 
His holy prophets." (Rom. iv. 2.) How is it then that thou knowest not, thou who art zealous of the law of their 
fathers, who wert brought up at the feet of Gamaliel? Yet they who spent their days on lakes and rivers, and 
the very publicans, have embraced the Gospel, whilst thou that studiest the law art persecuting it! It is for this 
he condemns himself, saying, "I am not meet to be called an Apostle." (1 Cor. ix. 9.) It is for this he confesses 
his ignorance, which was produced by unbelief. For this cause, he says, that he obtained "mercy." What 
then does he mean when he says," He counted me faithful"? He would give up no right of his Master's: even 
his own part he ascribed to Him, and assumed nothing to himself, nor claimed for his own the glory which 
was due to God. Hence in another place we find him exclaiming, "Sirs, why do ye these things to us? we 
also are men of like passions with you." (Acts xiv. 15.) So again, "He counted me faithful." And again, "I 
labored more abundantly than they all, yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me." (1 Cor. xv. 10.) And 
again, "It is He that worketh in us both to will and to do." (Phil. ii. 1 3.) Thus in acknowledging that he "obtained 
mercy," he owns that he deserved punishment, since mercy is for such. And again in another place he says 
of the Jews, "Blindness in part is happened to Israel." (Rom. xi. 25.) 

Ver. 14. "And the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant with faith and love which is in Christ Jesus." 
This is added, lest hearing that he obtained mercy, we should understand by it only, that being deserving of 
punishment, as a persecutor and blasphemer, nevertheless he was not punished. But mercy was not 
confined to this, that punishment was not inflicted; many other great favors are implied by it. For not only has 
God released us from the impending punishment, but He has made us "righteous" too, and "sons," and 
"brethren," and "heirs," and "joint-heirs." Therefore it is he says, that "grace was exceeding abundant." For 
the gifts bestowed were beyond mercy, since they are not such as would come of mercy only, but of 
affection and excessive love. Having thus enlarged upon the love of God which, not content with showing 
mercy to a blasphemer and persecutor, conferred upon him other blessings in abundance, he has guarded 
against that error of the unbelievers which takes away free will, by adding, "with faith and love which is in 
Christ Jesus." Thus much only, he says, did we contribute. We have believed that He is able to save us. 
MORAL. Let us then love God through Christ. What means "through Christ"? That it is He, and not the Law, 
who has enabled us to do this. Observe what blessings we owe to Christ, and what to the Law. And he says 
not merely that grace has abounded, but "abounded exceedingly," in bringing at once to the adoption those 
who deserved infinite punishment. 

And observe again that "in"(1) is used for "through. "(1) For not only faith is necessary, but love. Since there 
are many still who believe that Christ is God, who yet love Him not, nor act like those who love Him. For how 
is it when they prefer everything to Him, money, nativity, fate, augury, divinations, omens? When we live in 
defiance of Him, pray, where is our love? Has any one a warm and affectionate friend? Let him love Christ 
but equally. So, if no more, let him love Him who gave His Son for us His enemies, who had no merits of our 

own. Merits did I say? who had committed numberless sins, who had dared Him beyond all daring, and 
without cause! yet He, after numberless instances of goodness and care, did not even then cast us off. At 
the very time when we did Him the greatest wrong, then did He give His Son for us. And still we, after so 
great benefits, after being made His friends, and counted worthy through Him of all blessings, have not 
loved Him as our friend!(2) What hope then can be ours? You shudder perhaps at the word, but I would that 
you shuddered at the fact! What? How shall it appear that we do not love God even as our friends, you say? 
I will endeavor to show you-and would that my words were groundless, and to no purpose! but I am afraid 
they are borne out by facts. For consider: friends, that are truly friends, will often suffer loss for those they 
love. But for Christ, no one will suffer loss, or even be content with his present state. For a friend we can 
readily submit to insults, and undertake quarrels; but for Christ, no one can endure enmity: and the saying is, 
"Be loved for nothing-but be not hated for nothing." 

None of us would fail to relieve a friend who was hungering, but when Christ comes to us from day to day, 
and asks no great matter, but only bread, we do not even regard him, yea though we are nauseously over 
full, and swollen with gluttony: though our breath betrays the wine of yesterday, and we live in luxury, and 
waste our substance on harlots and parasites and flatterers, and even on monsters, idiots, and dwarfs; for 
men convert the natural defects of such into matter for amusement. Again, friends, that are truly such, we do 
not envy, nor are mortified at their success, yet we feel this toward (the minister of)(3) Christ, and our 
friendship for men is seen to be more powerful than the fear of God, for the envious and the insincere plainly 
respect men more than God. And how is this? God sees the heart, yet man does not forbear to practice 
deceit in His sight; yet if the same man were detected in deceit by men, he thinks himself undone, and 
blushes for shame. And why speak of this? If a friend be in distress, we visit him, and should fear to be 
condemned, if we deferred it for a little time. But we do not visit Christ, though He die again and again in 
prison; nay, if we have friends among the faithful, we visit them, not because they are Christians, but 
because they are our friends. Thus we do nothing from the fear or the love of God, but some things from 
friendship, some from custom. When we see a friend depart on travel, we weep and are troubled, and if we 
see his death, we bewail him, though we know that we shall not be long separated, that he will be restored to 
us at the Resurrection. But though Christ departs from us, or rather we reject Him daily, we do not grieve, nor 
think it strange, to injure, to offend, to provoke Him by doing what is displeasing to Him; and the fearful thing 
is not that we do not treat Him as a friend; for I will show that we even treat Him as an enemy. How, do you 
ask? because "the carnal mind is enmity against God," as Paul has said, and this we always carry about us. 
And we persecute Christ, when He advances toward us, and comes to our very doors. (1) For wicked 
actions in effect do this, and every day we subject him to insults by our covetousness and our rapacity. And 
does any one by preaching His word, and benefiting His Church, obtain a good reputation? Then he is the 
object of envy, because he does the work of God. And we think that we envy him, but our envy passes on to 
Christ. We affect to wish the benefit to come not from others, but from ourselves. But this cannot be for 
Christ's sake, but for our own: otherwise, it would be a matter of indifference, whether the good were done by 
others or ourselves. If a physician found himself unable to cure his son, who was threatened with blindness, 
would he reject the aid of another, who was able to effect the cure? Far from it! "Let my son be restored," he 
would almost say to him, "whether it is to be by you or by me." And why? Because he would not consider 
himself, but what was beneficial to his son. So, were our regard "to Christ," it would lead us to say, "Let good 
be done, whether by ourselves or by any other." As Paul said, "Whether in pretense or in truth Christ is 
preached." (Phil. i. 18). In the same spirit Moses answered, when some would have excited his displeasure 
against Eldad and Modad, because they prophesied, "Enviest thou for my sake? Would God that all the 
Lord's people were prophets!" (Num. xi. 29.) These jealous feelings proceed from vainglory; and are they 
not those of opponents and enemies? Doth any one speak ill of you? Love him! It is impossible, you say. 
Nay, if you will, it is quite possible. For if you love him only who speaks well of you, what thanks have you? It 
is not for the Lord's sake, but for the sake of the man's kind speech that you do it. Has any one injured you? 
Do him good! For in benefiting him who has benefited you there is little merit. Have you been deeply 
wronged and suffered loss? Make a point of requiting it with the contrary. Yes, I entreat you. Let this be the 
way we do our own part. Let us cease from hating and injuring our enemies. He commands us "to love our 
enemies" (Matt. v. 44): but we persecute Him while He loves us. God forbid! we all say in words, but not so in 
deeds. So darkened are our minds by sin, that we tolerate in our actions what in words we think intolerable. 
Let us desist then from things that are injurious and ruinous to our salvation, that we may obtain those 
blessings which as His friends we may obtain. For Christ says, "I will that where I am, there My disciples may 
be also, that they may behold My glory" (John xvii. 24), which may we all attain, through the grace and love 
of Jesus Christ. 

HOMILY IV. 

1 TIMOTHY i. 15, 16. 

"This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners; 
of whom I am chief. Howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth all 
longsuffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe on Him to life everlasting." 
THE favors of God so far exceed human hope and expectation, that often they are not believed. For God 
has bestowed upon us such things as the mind of man never looked for, never thought of. It is for this reason 
that the Apostles spend much discourse in securing a belief of the gifts that are granted us of God. For as 
men, upon receiving some great good, ask themselves if it is not a dream, as not believing it; so it is with 
respect to the gifts of God. What then was it that was thought incredible? That those who were enemies, and 
sinners, neither justified by the law, nor by works, should immediately through faith alone be advanced to the 
highest favor. Upon this head accordingly Paul has discoursed at length in his Epistle to the Romans, and 
here again at length. "This is a faithful saying," he says, "and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus 
came into the world to save sinners." 

As the Jews were chiefly attracted by this, he persuades them not(2) to give heed to the law, since they 
could not attain salvation by it without faith. Against this he contends; for it seemed to them incredible, that a 
man who had mis-spent all his former life in vain and wicked actions, should afterwards be saved by his 
faith alone. On this account he says, "It is a saying to be believed." But some not only disbelieved but even 
objected, as the Greeks do now. "Let us then do evil, that good may come." This was the consequence they 
drew in derision of our faith, from his words, "Where sin abounded grace did much more abound." (Rom. iii. 
8, and v. 20.) So when we discourse to them of Hell they say, How can this be worthy of God? When man 
has found his servant offending, he forgives it, and thinks him worthy of pardon and does God punish 
eternally? And when we speak of the Layer, and of the remission of sins through it, this too they say is 
unworthy of God, that he who has committed offenses without number should have his sins remitted. What 
perverseness of mind is this, what a spirit of contention does it manifest! Surely if forgiveness is an evil, 
punishment is a good; but if punishment is an evil, remission of it is a good. I speak according to their 
notions, for according to ours, both are good. This I shall show at another time, for the present would not 
suffice for a matter so deep, and which requires to be elaborately argued. I must lay it before your Charity at 
a fitting season. At present let us proceed with our proposed subject. "This is a faithful saying," he says. But 
why is it to be believed? 

This appears both from what precedes and from what follows. Observe how he prepares us(1) for this 
assertion, and how he then dwells upon it. For he hath previously declared that He showed mercy to me "a 
blasphemer and a persecutor"; this was in the way of preparation. And not only did He show mercy, but "He 
accounted me faithful." So far should we be he means, from disbelieving that He showed mercy. For no one, 
who should see a prisoner admitted into a palace, could doubt whether he obtained mercy. And this was 
visibly the situation of Paul, for he makes himself the example. Nor is he ashamed to call himself a sinner, 
but rather delights in it, as he thus can best demonstrate the miracle of God's regard for him, and that He had 
thought him worthy of such extraordinary kindness. 

But how is it, that he here calls himself a sinner, nay, the chief of sinners, whereas he elsewhere asserts that 
he was "touching the righteousness which is in the law blameless"? (Phil. iii. 6.) Because with respect to the 
righteousness which God has wrought, the justification which is really sought, even those who are 
righteous(2) in the law are sinners, "for all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God." (Rom. iii. 23.) 
Therefore he does not say righteousness simply, but "the righteousness which is in the law." As a man that 
has acquired wealth, with respect to himself appears rich, but upon a comparison with the treasures of kings 
is very poor and the chief of the poor; so it is in this case. Compared with Angels, even righteous men are 
sinners; and if Paul, who wrought the righteousness that is in the law, was the chief of sinners, what other man 
can be called righteous? For he says not this to condemn his own life as impure, let not this be imagined; but 
comparing his own legal righteousness with the righteousness of God, he shows it to be nothing worth, and 
not only so, but he proves those who possess it to be sinners. 

Ver. 16. "Howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth all 
longsuffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe on Him to life everlasting:" 
See how he further humbles and depreciates himself, by naming a fresh and less creditable reason. For 
that he obtained mercy on account of his ignorance, does not so much imply that he who obtained mercy 
was a sinner, or under deep condemnation; but to say that he obtained mercy in order that no sinner 
hereafter might despair of finding mercy, but that each might feel sure of obtaining the like favor, this is an 
excess of humiliation, such that even in calling himself the chief of sinners, "a blasphemer and a persecutor, 
and one not meet to be called an Apostle," he had said nothing like it. This will appear by an example. 
Suppose a populous city, all whose inhabitants were wicked, some more so, and some less, but all 
deserving of condemnation; and let one among that multitude be more deserving of punishment than all the 
rest, and guilty of every kind of wickedness. If it were declared that the king was willing to pardon all, it would 
not be so readily believed, as if they were to see this most wicked wretch actually pardoned. There could 

then be no longer any doubt. This is what Paul says, that God, willing to give men full assurance that He 
pardons all their transgressions, chose, as the object of His mercy, him who was more a sinner than any; for 
when I obtained mercy, he argues, there could be no doubt of others: as familiarly speaking we might say, 
"If God pardons such an one, he will never punish anybody"; and thus he shows that he himself, though 
unworthy of pardon, for the sake of others' salvation, first obtained that pardon. Therefore, he says, since I 
am saved, let no one doubt of salvation. And observe the humility of this blessed man; he says not, "that in 
me he might show forth" His "longsuffering," but "all longsuffering"; as if he had said, greater longsuffering 
He could not show in any case than in mine, nor find a sinner that so required all His pardon, all His 
long-suffering; not a part only, like those who are only partially sinners, but "all" His longsuffering. 
"For a pattern to those who should hereafter believe." This is said for comfort, for encouragement.(l) But 
because he had spoken highly of the Son, and of the great love which He hath manifested, lest he should 
be thought to exclude the Father from this, he ascribes the glory to Him also. 

Ver. 1 7. "Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor and glory for ever and 
ever. Amen." 

For these things, then, we glorify not the Son only, but the Father. Here let us argue with the heretics. 
Speaking of the Father, he says, "To the only God." Is the Son then not God? "The only immortal. "(2) Is the 
Son then not immortal? Or does He not possess that Himself, which hereafter He will give to us? Yes, they 
say, He is God and immortal, but not such as the Father. What then? is He of inferior essence, and therefore 
of inferior immortality? What then is a greater and a less immortality? For immortality is nothing else than the 
not being subject to destruction. For there is a greater and a less glory; but immortality does not admit of 
being greater or less: as neither is there a greater and a less health. For a thing must either be destructible, 
or altogether indestructible. Are we men then immortal even as He? God forbid! Surely not! Why? because 
He has it by nature, but we adventitiously. Why then do you make the difference? Because the Father, he 
says, is made such as He is by no other: but the Son is what He is, from the Father. This we also confess, 
not denying that the Son is generated from the Father incorruptibly.(3) And we glorify the Father, he means, 
for having generated the Son, such as He is. Thus you see the Father is most glorified, when the Son hath 
done great things. For the glory of the Son is referred again to Him. And since He generated Him 
omnipotent and such as He is in Himself, it is not(4) more the glory of the Son than of the Father, that He is 
self-sufficient, and self-maintained, and free from infirmity. It has been said of the Son, "By whom He made 
the worlds." (Heb. i. 2.) Now there is a distinction observed among us between creation and 
workmanship. (5) For one works and toils and executes, another rules; and why? because he that executes 
is the inferior. But it is not so there; nor is the sovereignty with One, the workmanship with the Other. For when 
we hear, "By whom He made the worlds, "(6) we do not exclude the Father from creation. Nor when we say, 
"To the King immortal, "(7) do we deny dominion to the Son. For these are common to the One and the Other, 
and each belongs to Both. The Father created, in that He begat the creating Son; the Son rules, as being 
Lord of all things created. For He does not work for hire, nor in obedience to others, as workmen do among 
us, but from His own goodness and love for mankind. But has the Son(8) ever been seen? No one can 
affirm this. What means then, "To the King immortal, invisible, the only wise(9) God? Or when it is said, 
"There is no other name whereby we must be saved": and again, "There is salvation in no other? (Acts iv. 
12.) 

"To Him be honor and glory forever. Amen." 

Now honor and glory are not mere words; and since He has honored us not by words only, but by what He 
has done for us, so let us honor Him by works and deeds. Yet this honor touches us, while that reaches not 
Him, for He needs not the honor that comes from us, we do need that which is from Him. 
In honoring Him, therefore, we do honor to ourselves. He who opens his eyes to gaze on the light of the sun, 
receives delight himself, as he admires the beauty of the star, but does no favor to that luminary, nor 
increases its splendor, for it continues what it was; much more is this true with respect to God. He who 
admires and honors God does so to his own salvation, and highest benefit; and how? Because he follows 
after virtue, and is honored by Him. For "them that honor Me," He says, "I will honor." ( 1 Sam. iv. 30.) How 
then is He honored, if He enjoys no advantage from our honor? Just as He is said to hunger and thirst. For 
He assumes everything that is ours, that He may in anywise attract us to Him. He is said to receive honors, 
and even insults, that we may be afraid. But with all this we are not attracted towards Him! 
MORAL. Let us then "glorify God," and bear God(10) both "in our body and in our spirit." (1 Cor. vi. 20.) And 
how is one to glorify Him in the body? saith one, and how in the spirit? The soul is here called the spirit to 
distinguish it from the body. But how may we glorify Him in the body and in the spirit? He glorifies Him in the 
body, who does not commit adultery or fornication, who avoids gluttony and drunkenness, who does not 
affect a showy exterior, who makes such provision for himself as is sufficient for health only: and so the 
woman, who does not perfume nor paint her person, but is satisfied to be such as God made her, and adds 
no device of her own. For why dost thou add thy own embellishments to the work which God made? Is not 
His workmanship sufficient for thee? or dost thou endeavor to add grace to it, as if forsooth thou wert the 

better artist?(1) It is not for thyself, but to attract crowds of lovers, that thou thus adornest thy person, and 
insultest thy Creator. And do not say, "What can I do? It is no wish of my own, but I must do it for my husband. 
I cannot win his love except I consent to this." God made thee beautiful, that He might be admired even in thy 
beauty, and not that He might be insulted. Do not therefore make Him so ill a return, but requite Him with 
modesty and chastity. God made thee beautiful, that He might increase the trials of thy modesty. For it is 
much harder for one that is lovely to be modest, than for one who has no such attractions, for which to be 
courted. Why does the Scripture tell us, that "Joseph was a goodly person, and wall favored" (Gen. xxxix. 6), 
but that we might the more admire his modesty coupled with beauty? Has God made thee beautiful? Why 
dost thou make thyself otherwise? For as though one should overlay a golden statue with a daubing of mire, 
so it is with those women that use paints. Thou besmearest thyself with red and white earth! But the homely, 
you say, may fairly have recourse to this. And why? To hide their ugliness? It is a vain attempt. For when was 
the natural appearance improved upon by that which is studied and artificial? And why shouldest thou be 
troubled at thy want of beauty, since it is no reproach? For hear the saying of the Wise Man, "Commend not 
a man for his beauty, neither abhor a man for his outward appearance." (Ecclus. xi. 2.) Let God be rather 
admired, the best Artificer, and not man, who has no merit in being made such as he is. What are the 
advantages, tell me, of beauty? None. It exposes its possessor to greater trials, mishaps, perils, and 
suspicions. She that wants it escapes suspicion; she that possesses it, except she practice a great and 
extraordinary reserve, incurs an evil report, and what is worse than all, the suspicion of her husband, who 
takes less pleasure in beholding her beauty, than he suffers pain from jealousy. And her beauty fades in his 
sight from familiarity, whilst she suffers in her character from the imputation of weakness, dissipation, and 
wantonness, and her very soul(2) becomes degraded and full of haughtiness. To these evils personal 
beauty is exposed. But she who has not this attraction, escapes unmolested. The dogs do not assail her; 
she is like a lamb, reposing in a secure pasture, where no wolf intrudes to harass her, because the 
shepherd is at hand to protect her. 

The real superiority(3) is, not that one is fair, and the other homely, but it is a superiority that one, even if she 
is not fair, is unchaste, and the other is not wicked. Tell me wherein is the perfection of eyes? Is it in their 
being soft, and rolling, and round, and dark, or in their clearness and quicksightedness. Is it the perfection of 
a lamp to be elegantly formed, and finely turned, or to shine brightly, and to enlighten the whole house? We 
cannot say it is not this, for the other is indifferent, and this the real object. Accordingly we often say to the 
maid whose charge it is, "You have made a bad lamp of it." So entirely is it the use of a lamp to give light. 
So it matters not what is the appearance of the eye, whilst it performs its office with full efficiency. We call the 
eye bad, which is dim or disordered, and which, when open, does not see. For that is bad, which does not 
perform its proper office-and this is the fault of eyes. And for a nose, tell me, when is it a good one? When it 
is straight, and polished on either side, and finely proportioned? or when it is quick to receive odors, and 
transmit them to the brain? Any one can answer this. 

Come now, let us illustrate this by an example-as of gripers, I mean the instruments so called; we say those 
are well-made, which are able to take up and hold things, not those which are only handsomely and 
elegantly shaped. So those are good teeth which are fit for the service of dividing and chewing our food, not 
those which are beautifully set. And applying the same reasoning to other parts of the body, we shall call 
those members beautiful, which are sound, and perform their proper functions aright. So we think any 
instrument, or plant, or animal good, not because of its form or color, but because it answers its purpose. 
And he is thought a good(4) servant, who is useful and ready for our service, not one who is comely but 
dissolute. I trust ye now understand how it is in your power to be beautiful. 
And since the greatest and most important benefits are equally enjoyed by all, we are under no 
disadvantage. Whether we are beautiful or not, we alike behold this universe, the sun, the moon, and the 
stars; we breathe the same air, we partake alike of water, and the fruits of the earth. And if we may say what 
will sound strange, the homely are more healthy than the beautiful. For these, to preserve their beauty, 
engage in no labor, but give themselves up to indolence and delicate living, by which their bodily energies 
are impaired; whilst the others, having no such care, spend all their attention simply and entirely on active 
pursuits. 

Let us then "glorify God, and take and bear Him in our body." (1 Cor. vi. 20.) Let us not affect a beautiful 
appearance; that care is vain and unprofitable. Let us not teach our husbands to admire the mere outward 
form; for if such be thy adornment, his very habit of viewing thy face will make him easy to be captivated by a 
harlot. But if thou teachest him to love good manners, and modesty, he will not be ready to wander, for he will 
see no attractions in a harlot, in whom those qualities are not found, but the reverse. Neither teach him to be 
captivated by laughter, nor by a loose dress, test thou prepare a poison against thyself. Accustom him to 
delight in modesty, and this thou wilt do, if thy attire be modest. But if thou hast a flaunting air, an unsteady 
manner, how canst thou address(1) him in a serious strain? and who will not hold thee in contempt and 
derision? 
But how is it possible to glorify God in our spirit?(2) By practicing virtue, by adorning the soul. For such 

embellishment is not forbidden. Thus we glorify God, when we are good in every respect, and we shall be 
glorified by Him in a much higher degree in that great day. For "I reckon that the sufferings of this present 
time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us." (Rom. viii. 18.) Of which that 
we may all be partakers, God grant, by the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

HOMILY V. 

1 TIMOTHY i. 18, 19. 

"This charge I commit unto thee, son [my child, <greek>teknon</greek>] Timothy, according to the 
prophecies which went before on thee, that thou by them mightest [mayest] war a good warfare; holding 
faith, and a good conscience; which some having put away have made shipwreck concerning the faith." 
THE office of a Teacher and that of a Priest is of great dignity, and to bring forward one that is worthy 
requires a divine election. So it was of old, and so it is now, when we make a choice without human passion, 
not looking to any temporal consideration, swayed neither by friendship, nor enmity. For though we be not 
partakers of so great a measure of the Spirit as they, yet a good purpose is sufficient to draw unto us the 
election of God. For the Apostles, when they elected Matthias, had not yet received the Holy Spirit, but 
having committed the matter to prayer, they chose him into the number of the Apostles. For they looked not 
to human friendships. And so now too it ought to be with us. But we have advanced to the extreme of 
negligence; and even what is clearly evident, we let pass. Now when we overlook what is manifest, how will 
God reveal to us what is unseen? as it is said, "If ye have not been faithful in that which is little, who will 
commit to you that which is great and true?" (Luke xvi. 1 1 .) But then, when nothing human was done, the 
appointment of Priests too was by prophecy. What is "by prophecy"? By the Holy Spirit. For prophecy is not 
only the telling of things future, but also of the present. It was by prophecy that Saul was discovered "hidden 
among the stuff." (1 Sam. x. 22.) For God reveals things to the righteous. So it was said by prophecy, 
"Separate me Barnabas and Saul." (Acts xiii. 2.) In this way Timothy also was chosen, concerning whom he 
speaks of prophecies in the plural; that, perhaps, upon which(3) he "took and circumcised him," and when 
he ordained him, as he himself says in his Epistle to him, "Neglect not the gift that is in thee." (1 Tim. iv: 1 4.) 
Therefore to elevate him, and prepare him to be sober and watchful, he reminds him by whom he was 
chosen and ordained, as if he had said, "God hath chosen thee. He gave thee thy commission, thou wast 
not made by human vote. Do not therefore abuse or bring into disgrace the appointment of God." When 
again he speaks of a charge, which implies something burdensome, (4) he adds, "This charge I commit to 
thee, son Timothy." He charges him as his son, his own son, not so much with arbitrary or despotic authority 
as like a father, he says, "my son Timothy." The "committing," however, implies that it is to be diligently kept, 
and that it is not our own. For we did not obtain it for ourselves, but God conferred it upon us; and not it only, 
but also "faith and a good conscience." What He hath given us then, let us keep. For if He had not come, the 
faith had not been to be found, nor that pure life which we learn by education. As if he had said, "It is not I that 
charge thee, but He who chose thee," and this is meant by "the prophecies that went before on thee." Listen 
to them, obey them. 

And say; what chargest thou? "That by them thou shouldest war a good warfare." They chose thee, that then 
for which they chose thee do thou, "war a good warfare." He named "a good warfare," since there is a bad 
warfare, of which he says, "As ye have yielded your members instruments(l) to uncleanness and to 
iniquity." (Rom. vi. 1 9.) Those men serve under a tyrant, but thou servest under a King. And why calls he it a 
warfare? To show how mighty a contest is to be maintained by all, but especially by a Teacher; that we 
require strong arms, and sobriety, and awakenedness, and continual vigilance: that we must prepare 
ourselves for blood and conflicts, must be in battle array, and have nothing relaxed. "That thou shouldest 
war in them," he says. For as in an army all do not serve in the same capacity, but in their different stations; 
so also in the Church one has the office of a Teacher, another that of a disciple, another that of a private 
man. But thou art in this. And, because this is not sufficient he adds, 
Ver. 19. "Holding faith, and a good conscience." 

For he that would be a Teacher must first teach himself. For as he who has not first been a good soldier, will 
never be a general, so it is with the Teacher; wherefore he says elsewhere, "Lest when I have preached to 
others, I myself should be a cast-away." (1 Cor. ix. 27.) "Holding faith," he says, "and a good conscience," 
that so thou mayest preside over others. When we hear this, let us not disdain the exhortations of our 
superiors, though we be Teachers. For if Timothy, to whom all of us together are not worthy to be compared, 
receives commands and is instructed, and that being himself in the Teacher's office, much more should we. 
"Which some having put away, have made shipwreck concerning the faith. "(2) And this follows naturally. For 
when the life is corrupt, it engenders a doctrine congenial to it, and from this circumstance many are seen to 
fall into a gulf of evil, and to turn aside into Heathenism. For that they may not be tormented with the fear of 
futurity, they endeavor to persuade their souls, that what we preach is false. And some turn aside from the 

faith, who seek out everything by reasoning; for reasoning produces shipwreck, while faith is as a safe ship. 
They then who turn aside from the faith must suffer shipwreck; and this he shows by an example. 
Ver. 20. "Of whom are Hymenaeus and Alexander." 

And from them he would instruct us. You see how even from those times there have been seducing 
Teachers, curious enquirers, and men holding off from the faith, and searching out(3) by their own 
reasonings. As the shipwrecked man is naked and destitute of all things, so is he that fails away from the 
faith without resource, he knows not where to stand or where to stay himself, nor has he the advantage of a 
good life so as to gain anything from that quarter. For when the head is disordered, what avails the rest of 
the body? and if faith without a good life is unavailing, much more is the converse true. If God despises His 
own for our sakes, much more ought we to despise our own for His sake. (4) For so it is, where any one fails 
away from the faith, he has no steadiness, he swims this way and that, till at last he is lost in the deep. 
"Whom I delivered to Satan, that they might be taught not to blaspheme!" Thus it is blasphemy to search into 
divine things by our own reasonings. For what have human reasonings m common with them? But how does 
Satan instruct them not to blaspheme? can he instruct others, who has not yet taught himself, but is a 
blasphemer still? It is not that "he should instruct," but that they should be instructed. It is not he that does it, 
though such is the result. As elsewhere he says in the case of the fornicator: "To deliver such an one to 
Satan for the destruction of the flesh." Not that he may save the body, but "that the spirit may be saved." (1 
Cor. v. 5.) Therefore it is spoken impersonally. How then is this effected? As executioners, though 
themselves laden with numberless crimes, are made the correctors of others; so it is here with the evil spirit. 
But why didst thou not punish them thyself, as thou didst that Bar-Jesus, and as Peter did Ananias, instead of 
delivering them to Satan? It was not that they might be punished, but that they might be instructed. For that he 
had the power appears from other passages, "What will ye? Shall I come unto you with a rod?" (1 Cor. iv. 
21 .) And again, "Lest I should use sharpness, according to the power which the Lord hath given me to 
edification, and not to destruction." (2 Cor. xiii. 10.) Why did he then call upon Satan to punish them? That the 
disgrace might be greater, as the severity and the punishment was more striking. Or rather, they themselves 
chastised those who did not yet believe, but those who turned aside, they delivered to Satan. Why then did 
Peter punish Ananias? Because whilst he was tempting the Holy Ghost, he was still an unbeliever. That the 
unbelieving therefore might learn that they could not escape, they themselves inflicted punishment upon 
them; but those who had learnt this, yet afterwards turned aside, they delivered to Satan; showing that they 
were sustained not by their own power, but by their care for them; and as many as were lifted up into 
arrogance were delivered to him. For as kings with their own hands slay their enemies, but deliver their 
subjects to executioners for punishment, so it is in this case. And these acts were done to show the authority 
committed to the Apostles. Nor was it a slight power, to be able thus to subject the devil to their commands. 
For this shows that he served and obeyed them even against his will, and this was no little proof of the 
power of grace. And listen how he delivered them: "When ye are gathered together, and my spirit, with the 
power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such an one unto Satan." (1 Cor. v. 4.) He was then immediately 
expelled from the common assembly, he was separated from the fold, he became deserted and destitute; 
he was delivered to the wolf. For as the cloud designated the camp of the Hebrews, so the Spirit 
distinguished the Church. If any one therefore was without, he was consumed, (1) and it was by the judgment 
of the Apostles that he was cast out of the pale. So also the Lord delivered Judas to Satan. For immediately 
"after the sop Satan entered into him." (John xiii. 27.) Or this may be said; that those whom they wished to 
amend, they did not themselves punish, but reserved their punishments for those who were incorrigible. Or 
otherwise, that they were the more dreaded for delivering them up to others. Job also was delivered to 
Satan, but not for his sins, but for fuller proof of his worth. 

Many such instances still occur. For since the Priests cannot know who are sinners, and unworthy partakers 
of the holy Mysteries, God often in this way delivers them to Satan. For when diseases, and attacks, (2) and 
sorrows, and calamities, and the like occur, it is on this account that they are inflicted. This is shown by Paul. 
"For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep." (1 Cor. xi. 30.) But how? saith one, 
when we approach but once a year! But this is indeed the evil, that you determine the worthiness of your 
approach, not by the purity of your minds, but by the interval of time. You think it a proper caution not to 
communicate often; not considering that you are seared by partaking unworthily, though only once, but to 
receive worthily, though often, is salutary. It is not presumptuous to receive often, but to receive unworthily, 
though but once in a whole life. But we are so miserably foolish, that, though we commit numberless 
offenses in the course of a year, we are not anxious to be absolved from them, but are satisfied, that we do 
not often make bold impudently to insult the Body of Christ, not remembering that those who crucified Christ, 
crucified Him but once. Is the offense then the less, because committed but once? Judas betrayed his 
Master but once. What then, did that exempt him from punishment? Why indeed is time to be considered in 
this matter? let our time of coming be when our conscience is pure. The Mystery at Easter is not of more 
efficacy than that which is now celebrated. It is one and the same. There is the same grace of the Spirit, it is 
always a Passover.(3) You who are initiated know this. On the Preparation, (4) on the Sabbath, on the Lord's 

day, and on the day of Martyrs, it is the same Sacrifice that is performed. "For as often," he saith, "as ye eat 
this bread and drink this cup, ye do show the Lord's death." (1 Cor. xi. 26.) No time is limited for the 
performance of this Sacrifice, why then is it then called the Paschal feast?(5) Because Christ suffered for us 
then. Let not the time, therefore, make any difference in your approach. There is at all times the same power, 
the same dignity, the same grace, one and the same body; nor is one celebration of it more or less holy 
than another. And this you know, who see upon these occasions nothing new, save these worldly veils, and 
a more splendid attendance. The only thing that these days have more is that from them commenced the 
day of our salvation when Christ was sacrificed. But with respect to these mysteries, those days have no 
further preeminence. 

When you approach to take bodily food, you wash your hands and your mouth, but when you draw nigh to 
this spiritual food, you do not cleanse your soul, but approach full of uncleanness. But you say, Are not the 
forty days' fastings sufficient to cleanse the huge heap of our sins? But of what use is it, tell me? If wishing to 
store up some precious unguent, you should make clean a place to receive it, and a little after having laid it 
up, should throw dung upon it, would not the fine odor vanish? This takes place with us too. We make 
ourselves to the best of our power worthy to approach; then we defile ourselves again! What then is the 
good of it? This we say even of those who are able in those forty days to wash themselves clean. 
Let us then, I beseech you, not neglect our salvation, that our labor may not be in vain. For he who turns from 
his sins, and goes and commits the same again, is "like a dog that returneth to his vomit." (Prov. xxvi. 1 1 .) But 
if we act as we ought, and take heed to our ways, we shall be thought worthy of those high rewards, which 
that we may all obtain, God grant through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom, 
&c. 

HOMILY VI. 

1 TIMOTHY ii. 1-4. 

"I exhort therefore that, first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all 
men; for kings, and for all that are in authority; that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness 
and honesty. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour; who will have all men to be 
saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth." [R. V.: who willeth that all men should be saved, &c] 
THE Priest is the common father, as it were, of all the world; it is proper therefore that he should care for all, 
even as God, Whom he serves. (1) For this reason he says, "I exhort therefore that, first of all, supplications, 
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men." From this, two advantages result. First, 
hatred towards those who are without is done away; for no one can feel hatred towards those for whom he 
prays: and they again are made better by the prayers that are offered for them, and by losing their ferocious 
disposition towards us. For nothing is so apt to draw men under teaching, as to love, and be loved. Think 
what it was for those who persecuted, scourged, banished, and slaughtered the Christians, to hear that 
those whom they treated so barbarously offered fervent prayers to God for them. (2) Observe how he wishes 
a Christian to be superior to all ill-treatment. As a father who was struck on the face by a little child which he 
was carrying, would not lose anything of his affection for it; so we ought not to abate in our good will towards 
those who are without, even when we are stricken by them. What is "first of all"? It means in the daily Service; 
and the initiated know how this is done every day both in the evening and the morning, how we offer prayers 
for the whole world, for kings and all that are in authority. But some one perhaps will say, he meant not for all 
men, but for all the faithful. How then does he speak of kings? for kings were not then worshipers of God, for 
there was a long succession of ungodly princes. And that he might not seem to flatter them, he says first, "for 
all men," then "for kings"; for if he had only mentioned kings, that might have been suspected. And then 
since the soul of some Christians might be slow(3) at hearing this, and reject the exhortation, if at the 
celebration of the holy Mysteries it was necessary to offer prayers for a heathen king, he shows them the 
advantage of it, thus at least to reconcile them to the advice, "that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life"; 
as much as to say, Their safety is a security to us;(4) as also in his Epistle to the Romans, he exhorts them to 
obey their rulers, "not for wrath but for conscience' sake." (Rom. xiii. 5.) For God has appointed government 
for the public good. When therefore they make war for this end, and stand on guard for our security, were it 
not unreasonable that we should not offer prayers for their safety in wars and dangers? It is not therefore 
flattery, but agreeable to the rules of justice. For if they were not preserved, and prospered in their wars, our 
affairs must necessarily be involved in confusion and trouble; and if they were cut off, we must either serve 
ourselves, or be scattered up and down as fugitives. For they are a sort of bulwarks thrown up before us, 
within which those who are inclosed are in peace and safety. 

He says, "supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks." For we must give thanks to God for 
the good that befalls others, as that He maketh the sun to shine upon the evil and the good, and sendeth His 
rain both upon the just and the unjust. Observe how he would unite and bind us together, not only by prayer 

but by thanksgiving. For he who is urged to thank God for his neighbor's good, is also bound to love him, 
and be kindly disposed towards him. And if we must give thanks for our neighbor's good, much more for 
what happens to ourselves, and for what is unknown, and even for things against our will, and such as 
appear grievous to us, since God dispenses all things for our good. 

MORAL. Let every prayer of ours, then, be accompanied with thanksgiving. And if we are commanded to 
pray for our neighbors, not only for the faithful, but for the unbelieving also, consider how wrong it is to pray 
against your brethren. What? Has He commanded you to pray for your enemies, and do you pray against 
your brother? But your prayer is not against him, but against yourself. For you provoke God by uttering those 
impious words, "Show him the same!" "So do to him!" "Smite him!" "Recompense him!" Far be such words 
from the disciple of Christ, who should be meek and mild. From the mouth that has been vouch-safed such 
holy Mysteries, let nothing bitter proceed. (1) Let not the tongue that has touched the Lord's Body utter 
anything offensive, let it be kept pure, let not curses be borne upon it. For if "revilers shall not inherit the 
kingdom of God" (1 Cor. vi. 10), much less those who curse. For he that curses must be injurious; and 
injuriousness and prayer are at variance with each other, cursing and praying are far apart, accusation and 
prayer are wide asunder. Do you propitiate God with prayer, and then utter imprecations? If you forgive not, 
you will not be forgiven. (Matt. vi. 15.) But instead of forgiving, you beseech God not to forgive; what 
excessive wickedness in this! If the unforgiving is not forgiven, he that prays his Lord not to forgive, how shall 
he be forgiven? The harm is to yourself, not him. For though your prayers were on the point of being heard 
for yourself, they would never be accepted in such a case, as offered with a polluted mouth. For surely the 
mouth that curses is polluted with all that is offensive and unclean. 

When you ought to tremble for your own sins, to wrestle earnestly for the pardon of them, you come to move 
God against your brother-do you not fear, nor think of what concerns yourself? do you not see what you are 
doing? Imitate even the conduct of children at school. If they see their own class within giving account of their 
lessons, and all beaten for their idleness, and one by one severely examined and chastised with blows, 
they are frightened to death, and if one of their companions strikes them, and that severely, they cannot 
have while to be angry, nor complain to their master; so is their soul possessed with fear. They only look to 
one thing, that they may go in and come out without stripes, and their thoughts are on that time. And when 
they come out, whether beaten or not, the blows they have received from their play-fellows never enter their 
minds for the delight. And you, when you stand anxiously concerned for your own sins, how can you but 
shudder at making mention of others' faults?(2) How can you implore pardon of God? For your own case is 
made worse on the terms of your imprecations against another, and you forbid Him to make allowance for 
your own faults. Might He not say, "If thou wouldest have Me so severe in exacting offenses against thee, 
how canst thou expect Me to pardon thy offenses against Me?" Let us learn at last to be Christians! If we 
know not how to pray, which is a very simple and easy thing, what else shall we know? Let us learn to pray 
like Christians. Those are the prayers of Gentiles, the supplications of Jews. The Christian's are the reverse, 
for the forgiveness and forgetting of offenses against us. "Being reviled," it is said, "we bless; being 
persecuted, we suffer it; being defamed, we entreat." (1 Cor. iv. 12, 13.) Hear Stephen saying, "Lord, lay not 
this sin to their charge." (Acts vi. 60.) Instead of praying against them, he prayed for them. You, instead of 
praying for them, utter imprecations against them. You then are wicked in the degree that he was excellent. 
Whom do we admire, tell me; those for whom he prayed, or him who prayed for them? Him certainly! and if 
we, much more then God. Would you have your enemy stricken? pray for him: yet not with such intention, not 
to strike him. That will indeed be the effect, but let it not be your object. That blessed martyr suffered all 
unjustly, yet he prayed for them: we suffer many things justly from our enemies. And if he who suffered 
unjustly durst not forbear to pray for his enemies, what punishment do we deserve, who suffer justly, and yet 
do not pray for them, nay, pray against them? Thou thinkest indeed that thou art inflicting a blow upon 
another, but in truth thou art thrusting the sword against thyself. Thou sufferest not the Judge to be lenient to 
thy own offenses, by this way of urging Him to anger against others. For, "with what measure ye mete," He 
saith, "it shall be measured to you again; and with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged." (Matt. vii. 2.) 
Let us therefore be disposed to pardon, that God may be so disposed towards us. 
These things I wish you not only to hear, but to observe. For now the memory retains only the words, and 
perhaps hardly those. And after we are separated, if any one who was not present were to ask you, what 
had been our discourse, some could not tell: others would know merely the subject we had spoken of, and 
answer that there had been a Homily upon the subject of forgiving injuries, and praying for our enemies, but 
would omit all that had been said, as they could not remember: others remember a little, but still somewhat. If 
therefore you gain nothing by what you hear, I entreat you not even to attend at the discourse. For of what 
use is it? The condemnation is greater, the punishment more severe, if after so many exhortations, we 
continue in the same course. For this reason God has given us a definite form of prayer, that we might ask 
for nothing human, nothing worldly. And you that are faithful know what you ought to pray for, how the whole 
Prayer is common. But one says, "It is not commanded there to pray for unbelievers." This you would not 
say, if you understood the force, the depth, the hidden treasure of that(1) Prayer. Only unfold it, and you find 

this also comprised within it. For it is implied, when one says in prayer, "Thy will be done on earth, as it is in 
Heaven." Now, because in heaven there is no unbeliever nor offender; if therefore it was for the faithful 
alone, there would be no reason in that expression. If the faithful were to do the will of God and the 
unbelievers not to do it, His will were not done in earth as it is in heaven. But it means; As there is none 
wicked in heaven, so let there be none on earth; but draw all men to the fear of Thee, make all men angels, 
even those who hate us, and are our enemies. Dost thou not see how God is daily blasphemed and 
mocked by believers and unbelievers, both in word and in deed? What then? Has He for this extinguished 
the sun? or stayed the course of the moon? Has He crushed the heavens and uprooted the earth? Has He 
dried up the sea? Has He shut up the fountains of waters? or confounded the air? Nay, on the contrary, He 
makes His sun to rise, His rain to descend, gives the fruits of the earth in their seasons, and thus supplies 
yearly nourishment to the blasphemers, to the insensible, to the polluted, to persecutors; not for one day or 
two, but for their whole life. Imitate Him then, emulate Him as far as human powers admit. Canst thou not 
make the sun arise? Abstain from evil speaking. Canst thou not send rain? Forbear reviling. Canst thou not 
give food? Refrain from insolence. Such gifts from thee are sufficient. The goodness of God to His enemies 
is shown by His works. Do thou so at least by words: pray for thine enemies, so wilt thou be like thy Father 
who is in heaven. How many times have we discoursed upon this subject! nor shall we cease to discourse; 
only let something come of it. It is not that we are drowsy, and weary of speaking; only do not you that hear 
be annoyed. Now a person seems to be annoyed, when he will not do what one says. For he who practices, 
loves often to hear the same thing, and is not annoyed by it; for it is his own commendation. But annoyance 
arises simply from not doing what is prescribed. Hence the speaker is troublesome. If a man practices 
almsgiving, and hears another speak of alms-giving, he is not wearied, (2) but pleased, for he hears his own 
good actions recommended and proclaimed. So that when we are displeased at hearing a discourse upon 
the forgiveness of injuries, it is because we have no interest in forbearance, it is not practiced by us; for if we 
had the reality, we should not be pained at its being named. If therefore you would not have us wearisome 
or annoying, practice as we preach, exhibit in your actions the subject of our discourses. For we shall never 
cease discoursing upon these things till your conduct is agreeable to them. And this we do more especially 
from our concern and affection for you. For the trumpeter must sound his trumpet, though no one should go 
out to war; he must fulfill his part. We do it, not as wishing to, bring heavier condemnation upon you, but to 
avert it from ourselves. And besides this, love for you constrains us, for it would tear and torture our hearts if 
that should befall you, which God avert! It is not any costly process that we recommend to you: it does not 
require the spoiling of goods, nor a long and toilsome journey. It is only to will. It is a word, it is a purpose of 
the mind. Let us only set a guard on our tongues, a door and a bar upon our lips, that we may utter nothing 
offensive to God. It is for our own advantage, not for theirs for whom we pray, to act thus. For let us ever 
consider, that he who blesses his enemy, blesses himself, he who curses his enemy, curses himself, and he 
who prays for his enemy, prays not for him, but for himself. If we thus act, we shall be able to reduce to 
practice this excellent virtue, (1) and so to obtain the promised blessings, through the grace and 
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

HOMILY VII. 

1 TIMOTHY ii. 2-4. 

"That we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. For this is good and acceptable 
in the sight of God our Saviour; who willeth that all men should be saved, and come unto the knowledge of 
the truth." 

IF in order to put an end to public wars, and tumults, and battles, the Priest is exhorted to offer prayers for 
kings and governors, much more ought private individuals to do it. For there are three very grievous kinds of 
war. The one is public, when our soldiers are attacked by foreign armies: The second is, when even in time 
of peace, we are at war with one another: The third is, when the individual is at war with himself, which is the 
worst of all. For foreign war will not be able to hurt us greatly. What, I pray, though it slaughters and cuts us 
off? It injures not the soul. Neither will the second have power to harm us against our will; for though others be 
at war with us, we may be peaceable ourselves. For so says the Prophet, "For my love they are my 
adversaries, but I give myself unto prayer" (Ps. cix. 4); and again, "I was at peace with them that hate 
peace"; and, "I am for peace; but when I speak, they are for war. (Ps. cxx. 6, 7, Sept.) But from the third, we 
cannot escape without danger. For when the body is at variance with the soul, and raises up evil desires, 
and arms against it sensual pleasures, or the bad passions of anger, and envy; we cannot attain the 
promised blessings, till this war is brought to an end; whoever does not still this tumult, must fall pierced by 
wounds that will bring that death that is in hell. We have daily need therefore of care and great anxiety, that 
this war may not be stirred up within us, or that, if stirred up, it may not last, but be quelled and laid asleep. 
For what advantage is it, that the world enjoys profound peace, if thou art at war with thyself? This then is the 

peace we should keep. If we have it, nothing from without will be able to harm us. And to this end the public 
peace contributes no little: whence it is said, "That we may lead a quiet and peaceable life." But if any one 
is disturbed when there is quiet, he is a miserable creature. Seestthou that He speaks of this peace which I 
call the third kind? Therefore when he has said, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life," he does not 
stop there, but adds "in all godliness and honesty." But we cannot live in godliness and honesty, unless that 
peace be established. For when curious reasonings disturb our faith, what peace is there? or when spirits of 
uncleanness, what peace is there? 

For that we may not suppose that he speaks of that sort of life which all men live, when he says, "that we may 
lead a quiet and peaceable life," he adds, "in all godliness and honesty," since a quiet and peaceable life 
may be led by heathens, and profligates, and voluptuous and wanton persons may be found living such a 
life. That this cannot be meant, is plain, from what he adds, "in all godliness and honesty." Such a life is 
exposed to snares, and conflicts, and the soul is daily wounded by the tumults of its own thoughts. But what 
sort of life he really means is plain from the sequel, and plain too, in that he speaks not simply of godliness, 
but adds, of "all godliness." For in saying this he seems to insist on a godliness not only of doctrine, but 
such as is supported by life, for in both surely must godliness be required. For of what advantage is it to be 
godly as to doctrine, but ungodly in life? and that it is very possible to be ungodly in life, hear this same 
blessed Apostle saying elsewhere, "They profess that they know God, but in works they deny Him." (Tit. i. 
16.) And again, "He hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel." (1 Tim. v. 8.) And, "If any man that is 
called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater" (1 Cor. v. 1 1), such a man honors not God. And, 
"He that hateth his brother, knoweth not God." (1 John ii. 9.) Such are the various ways of ungodliness. 
Therefore he says, "All godliness and good order."(2) For not only is the fornicator not honest, but the 
covetous man may be called disorderly and intemperate. For avarice is a lust no less than the bodily 
appetites, which he who does not chastise, is called dissolute. (1) For men are called dissolute from not 
restraining their desires, so that the passionate, the envious, the covetous, the deceitful, and every one that 
lives in sin, may be called dissolute, disorderly, and licentious. 
Ver. 3. "For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour." 
What is said to be "acceptable"? The praying for all men. This God accepts, this He wills. 
Ver. 4. "Who willeth that all men should be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth." 
Imitate God! if He willeth that all men should be saved, there is reason why one should pray for all, if He hath 
willed that all should be saved, be thou willing also; and if thou wishest it, pray for it, for wishes lead to 
prayers. Observe how from every quarter He urges this upon the soul, to pray for the Heathen, showing how 
great advantage springs from it; "that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life"; and what is much more than 
this, that it is pleasing to God, and thus men become like Him, in that they will the same that He does. This is 
enough to shame a very brute. Fear not therefore to pray for the Gentiles, for God Himself wills it; but fear 
only to pray against any, for that He wills not. And if you pray for the Heathens, you ought of course to pray 
for Heretics also, for we are to pray for all men, and not to persecute. (2) And this is good also for another 
reason, as we are partakers of the same nature, and God commands and accepts benevolence and 
affection towards one another. 

But if the Lord Himself wills to give, you say, what need of my prayer? It is of great benefit both to them and to 
thyself. It draws them to love, and it inclines thee to humanity. It has the power of attracting others to the faith; 
(for many men have fallen away from God, from contentiousness towards one another;) and this(3) is what 
he now calls the salvation of God, "who will have all men to be saved"; without this all other is nothing great, 
a mere nominal salvation, (4) and only in words. "And to come to the knowledge of the truth." The truth: what 
truth? Faith in Him. And indeed he had previously said, "Charge some that they teach no other doctrine." But 
that no one may consider such as enemies, and on that account raise troubles(5) against them; he says 
that" He willeth that all men should be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth"; and having said this, 
he adds, 

Ver. 5. "For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men." 

He had before said, "to come to the knowledge of the truth," implying that the world is not in the truth. Now he 
says, "that there is one God," that is, not as some say, many, and that He has sent His Son as Mediator, thus 
giving proof that He will have all men to be saved. But is not the Son God? Most truly He is; why then does 
he say, "One God"? In contradistinction to the idols; not to the Son. For he is discoursing about truth and 
error. Now a mediator ought to have communion with both parties, between whom he is to mediate. For this 
is the property of a mediator, to be in close communion with each of those whose mediator he is. For he 
would be no longer a mediator, if he were connected with one but separated from the other.(6) If therefore 
He partakes not of the nature of the Father, He is not a Mediator, but is separated. For as He is partaker of 
the nature of men, because He came to men, so is He partaker of the nature of God, because He came 
from God. Because He was to mediate between two natures, He must approximate to the two natures; for as 
the place situated between two others is joined to each place, so must that between natures be joined to 
either nature. As therefore He became Man, so was He also God. A man could not have become a 

mediator, because he must also plead with God. God could not have been mediator, since those could not 
receive Him, toward whom He should have mediated. And as elsewhere he says, "There is one God the 
Father, ... and one Lord Jesus Christ" (1 Cor. viii. 6); so also here "One" God, and "One" Mediator; he does 
not say two; for he would not have that number wrested to Polytheism, of which he was speaking. So he 
wrote "One" and "One." You see how accurate are the expressions of Scripture! For though one and one 
are two, we are not to say this, though reason suggests it. And here thou sayest not one and one are two, 
and yet thou sayest what reason does not suggest. "If He begat He also suffered. "(7) "For there is one 
God," he says, "and one Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus." 
Ver. 6. "Who gave Himself a ransom for all to be testified(l) in due time." 

Was Christ then a ransom for the Heathen? Undoubtedly Christ died even for Heathen; and you cannot bear 
to pray for them. Why then, you ask, did they not believe? Because they would not: but His part was done. 
His suffering was a "Testimony," he says; for He came, it is meant, "to bear witness to the truth" of the Father, 
and was slain. (2) Thus not only the Father bore witness to Him, but He to the Father. "For I came," He saith, 
"in my Father's name." (John v. 43.) And again, "No man hath seen God at any time." (John i. 18.) And again, 
"That they might know Thee, the only true God." (John xvii. 3.) And, "God is a Spirit," (John iv, 24.) And He 
bore witness even to the death. But this, "in due time," means, In the fittest time. 
Ver. 7. "Whereunto I am ordained a preacher and an Apostle, (I speak the truth in Christ, and lie not:) a 
teacher of the Gentiles in faith and verity." 

Since therefore Christ suffered for the Gentiles, and I was separated to be a "teacher of the Gentiles," why 
dost thou refuse to pray for them? He fully shows his own credibility, by saying that he was "ordained" (Acts 
xiii. 2), that is, separated, for this purpose, the other Apostles being backward(3) in teaching the Gentiles; he 
adds, "in faith and verity," to show that in that faith there was no deceit. Here is observable the extension of 
grace. For the Jews had no prayers for the Gentiles; but now grace is extended to them: and when he says 
that he was separated to be a Teacher of the Gentiles, he intimates that grace was now shed over every 
part of the world. 

"He gave himself a ransom," he saith, how then was He delivered up by the Father? Because it was of His 
goodness. And what means "ransom"? God was about to punish them, but He forbore to do it. They were 
about to perish, but in their stead He gave His own Son, and sent us as heralds to proclaim the Cross. 
These things are sufficient to attract all, and to demonstrate the love of Christ. MORAL. So truly, so 
inexpressibly great are the benefits which God has bestowed upon us. He sacrificed Himself for His 
enemies, who hated and rejected Him. What no one would do for friends, for brethren, for children, that the 
Lord hath done for His servants; a Lord not Himself such an one as His servants, but God for men; for men 
not deserving. For had they been deserving, had they done His pleasure, it would have been less 
wonderful; but that He died for such ungrateful, such obstinate creatures, this it is which strikes every mind 
with amazement. For what men would not do for their fellow-men, that has God done for us! Yet after such a 
display of love towards us, we hold back,(4) and are not in earnest in our love of Christ. He has sacrificed 
Himself for us; for Him we make no sacrifice. We neglect Him when He wants necessary food; sick and 
naked we visit Him not. What do we not deserve, what wrath, what punishment, what hell? Were there no 
other inducement, it should be sufficient to prevail with every one that He condescended to make human 
sufferings His own, to say I hunger, I thirst. 

O the tyranny of wealth! or rather the wickedness of those who are its willing slaves! for it has no great power 
of itself, but through our weakness and servility:(5) it is we that are mean and groveling, that are carnal and 
without understanding. For what power has money? It is mute and insensible. If the devil, that wicked spirit, 
that crafty confounder of all things, has no power,(6) what power has money? When you look upon silver, 
fancy it is tin! Cannot you? Then hold it for what it really is; for earth it is. But if you cannot reason thus, 
consider that we too shall perish, that many of those who have possessed it have gained scarce any 
advantage by it, that thousands who gloried in it are now dust and ashes. That they are suffering extreme 
punishment, and far more beggarly than they that fed from glass and earthenware; that those who once 
reclined on ivory couches, are poorer now than those who are lying on the dunghill. But it delights the eyes! 
How many other things delight them more! The flowers, the pure sky, the firmament, the bright sun, are far 
more grateful to the eye. For it hath much of rust, whence some have asserted that it was black, which 
appears from the images that turn black. But there is no blackness in the sun, the heaven, the stars. Much 
greater delight is there in these brilliants(7) than in its color. It is not therefore its brilliancy(8) that makes it 
please, but covetousness and iniquity; these, and not money, give the pleasure. Cast these from thy soul, 
and what appeared so precious will seem to thee more worthless than clay. Those who are in a fever long 
for mud when they see it, as if it were spring water; but those in sound health seldom wish even for water. 
Cast off this morbid longing, and thou wilt see things as they are. And to prove that I do not speak falsely, 
know, that I can point out many who have done so. Quench this flame, and thou wilt see that these things are 
of less worth than flowers. 
Is gold good? Yes, it is good for almsgiving, for the relief of the poor; it is good, not for unprofitable use, to be 

hoarded up or buried in the earth, to be worn on the hands or the feet or the head. It was discovered for this 
end, that with it we should loose the captives, not form it into a chain for the image of God. Use thy gold for 
this, to loose him that is bound, not to chain her that is free. Tell me, why dost thou value above all things 
what is of so little worth? Is it the less a chain, because it is of gold? does the material make any 
difference?(1) whether it be gold or iron, it is still a chain; nay the gold is the heavier. What then makes it light, 
but vainglory, and the pleasure of being seen to wear a chain, of which you ought rather to be ashamed? To 
make this evident, fasten it, and place the wearer in a wilderness or where there is no one to see, and the 
chain will at once be felt heavy, and thought burdensome. 

Beloved, let us fear, lest we be doomed to hear those terrible words, "Bind him hand and foot." (Matt. xxii. 
13.) And why, O woman, dost thou now do so to thyself? No prisoner has both his hands and his feet bound. 
Why bindest thou thy head too? For thou art not content with hands and feet, but bindest thy head and thy 
neck with many chains. I pass over the care that comes of these things, the fear, the alarm, the strife 
occasioned by them with thy husband if ever he wants them, the death it is to people when they lose any of 
them. Canst thou call this a pleasure? To gratify the eyes of others, dost thou subject thyself to chains, and 
cares, and perils, and uneasiness, and daily quarrels? This is deserving of every censure and 
condemnation. Nay, I entreat you, let us not do thus, let us burst every "bond of iniquity" (Acts viii. 23); let us 
break our bread to the hungry, and let us do all other things, which may ensure to us confidence before God, 
that we may obtain the blessings promised through Jesus Christ our Lord, with whom, &c. 

HOMILIES OF ST. JOHN CHRYSOSTOM ON THE FIRST 
EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL THE APOSTLE TO TIMOTHY, 
HOMILIES VIII TO XIII (CHAPTERS 2 TO 5) 

HOMILY VIM. 

1 TIMOTHY ii. 8-10. 

"I will therefore that men pray everywhere, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting. In like manner 
also, that women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety; not with 
broidered hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array; but (which becometh women professing godliness) with 
good works." 

"WHEN thou prayest," saith Christ, "thou shalt not be as the hypocrites are; for they love to pray standing in 
the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, they 
have their reward. But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to 
thy Father, which is in secret; and thy Father, which seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly." (Matt. vi. 5, 6.) 
What then says Paul? "I will therefore that men pray everywhere, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and 
doubting." This is not contrary to the other, God forbid, but quite in harmony with it. But how, and in what way? 
We must first consider what means, "enter into thy closet, and why Christ commands this, if we are to pray in 
every place? or whether we may not pray in the church, nor in any other part of the house, but the closet? 
What then means that saying? Christ is recommending us to avoid ostentation, when He bids us offer our 
prayers not only privately, but secretly. For, when He says, "Let not thy left hand know what thy right hand 
doeth" (Matt. vi. 3), it is not the hands that He. considers, but He is bidding them use the utmost caution 
against ostentation: and He is doing the like here; He did not limit prayer to one place, but required one 
thing alone, the absence of vainglory. The object of Paul is to distinguish the Christian from the Jewish 
prayers, therefore observe what he says: "In every place lifting up holy hands," which was not permitted the 
Jews, for they were not allowed to approach God, to sacrifice and perform their services, elsewhere, but 
assembling from all parts of the world in one place, they were bound to perform all their worship(2) in the 
temple. In opposition to this he introduces his precept, and freeing them from this necessity, he says in 
effect, Our ways are not like the Jewish; for as Christ commanded us to pray for all men because He died for 
all men, and I preach these things for all men, so it is good to "pray everywhere." Henceforth the 
consideration is not of the place but of the manner of the prayer; "pray everywhere," but "everywhere lift up 
holy hands." That is the thing required. And what is "holy"?(1) Pure. And what is pure? Not washed with 
water, but free from covetousness, murder, rapacity, violence, "without wrath and doubting." What means 
this? Who is angry when he prays? It means, without bearing malice. Let the mind of him that prays be pure, 
freed from all passion. Let no one approach God in enmity, or in an unamiable temper, or with "doubting." 
What is "without doubting"? Let us hear. It implies that we should have no misgiving but that we shall be 
heard. For it is said, "whatever ye ask believing ye shall receive." (Matt. xxi. 22.) And again, "when ye stand 
praying forgive, if ye have aught against any one." (Markxi. 25.) This is to pray without wrath and doubting. 
But how can I believe that I shall obtain my request? By asking nothing opposed to that which He is ready to 
grant, nothing unworthy of the great King, nothing worldly, but all spiritual blessings; if you approach Him 
"without wrath," having pure hands, "holy hands": hands employed in almsgiving are holy. Approach Him 
thus, and you will certainly obtain your request. "For if ye being evil know how to give good gifts to your 
children, how much more shall your Father which is in Heaven give good things to them that ask Him?" (Matt, 
vii. II.) By doubting he means misgiving. In like manner he says, I will that women approach God without 
wrath and doubting, lifting up holy hands: that they should not follow their own desires, nor be covetous or 
rapacious. For what if a woman does not rob or steal herself, but does it through means of her husband? 
Paul however requires something more of women, that they adorn themselves "in modest apparel, with 
shamefacedness and sobriety; not with broidered hair or gold or pearls or costly array; But (which 
becometh women professing godliness) with good works." But what is this "modest apparel"? Such attire as 
covers them completely, and decently, not with superfluous ornaments, for the one is becoming, the other is 
not. 

MORAL. What? Dost thou approach God to pray, with broidered hair and ornaments of gold? Art thou come 
to a dance? to a marriage? to a gay procession? There such a broidery, such costly garments, had been 

seasonable, here not one of them is wanted. Thou art come to pray, to supplicate for pardon of thy sins, to 
plead for thine offenses, beseeching the Lord, and hoping to render Him propitious to thee. Why dost thou 
adorn thyself? This is not the dress of a suppliant. How canst thou groan? How canst thou weep? How pray 
with fervency, when thus attired? Shouldest thou weep, thy tears will be the ridicule of the beholders. She that 
weeps ought not to be wearing gold. It were but acting, and hypocrisy. For is it not acting to pour forth tears 
from a soul so overgrown with extravagance and ambition? Away with such hypocrisy! God is not mocked! 
This is the attire of actors and dancers, that live upon the stage. Nothing of this sort becomes a modest 
woman, who should be adorned "with shamefacedness and sobriety." 

Imitate not therefore the courtesans. For by such a dress they allure their many lovers; and hence many 
have incurred a disgraceful suspicion, and, instead of gaining any advantage from their ornaments, have 
injured many(2) by bearing this character. For as the adulteress, though she may have a character for 
modesty, derives no benefit from that character, in the Day, when He who judges the secrets of men shall 
make all things manifest; so the modest woman, if she contrive by this dress to pass for an adulteress, will 
lose the advantage other chastity. For many have suffered harm by this opinion. "What can I do," thou 
sayest, "if another suspects me?" But thou givest the occasion by thy dress, thy looks, thy gestures. It is for 
this reason that Paul discourses much of dress and much of modesty. And if be would remove those things 
which are only the indications of wealth, as gold, and pearls, and costly array; how much more those things 
which imply studied ornament, as painting, coloring the eyes, a mincing gait, the affected voice, a 
languishing and wanton look; the exquisite care in putting on the cloak and bodice, the nicely wrought girdle, 
and the closely-fitted shoes? For he glances at all these things, in speaking of "modest apparel" and 
"shamefacedness." For such things are shameless and indecent. 

Bear with me, I beseech you, for it is not my aim by this plain reproof to wound or pain you, but to remove 
from my flock all that is unbecoming to them. But if these prohibitions are addressed to those who have 
husbands, who are rich, and live luxuriously; much more to those who have professed virginity. But what 
virgin, you say, wears gold, or broidered hair? Yet there may be such a studied nicety in a simple dress, as 
that these are nothing to it. You may study appearance in a common garment more than those who wear 
gold. For when a very dark colored robe is drawn closely round the breast with the girdle(as dancers on the 
stage are attired), with such nicety that it may neither spread into breadth nor shrink into scantiness, but be 
between both; and when the bosom is set off with many folds, is not this more alluring than any silken robes? 
and when the shoe, shining through its blackness, ends in a sharp point, and imitates the elegance of 
painting, so that even the breadth of the sole is scarce visible-or when, though you do not indeed paint the 
face, you spend much time and pains on washing it, and spread a veil across the forehead, (1) whiter than 
the face itself-and above that put on a hood, (2) of which the blackness may set off the white by contrast-is 
there not in all this the vanity of dress? What can one say to the perpetual rolling of the eyes? to the putting 
on of the stomacher; so artfully as sometimes to conceal, sometimes to disclose, the fastening? For this too 
they sometimes expose, so as to show the exquisiteness of the cincture, winding the hood entirely round the 
head. Then like the players, they wear gloves so closely fitted, that they seem to grow upon the hands: and 
we might speak of their walk, and other artifices more alluring than any ornament of gold. Let us fear, 
beloved, lest we also hear what the Prophet said to the Hebrew women who were so studious of outward 
ornament; "Instead of a girdle, thou shalt be girded with a halter, instead of well-set hair, baldness." (Isa. iii. 
24, Sept.) These things and many others, invented only to be seen and to attract beholders, are more 
alluring than golden ornaments. These are no trifling faults, but displeasing to God, and enough to mar all 
the self-denial of virginity. 

Thou hast Christ for thy Bridegroom, O virgin, why dost thou seek to attract human lovers? He will judge thee 
as an adulteress. Why dost thou not wear the ornament that is pleasing to Him; modesty, chastity, 
orderliness, and sober apparel? This is meretricious, and disgraceful. We can no longer distinguish harlots 
and virgins, to such indecency have they advanced. A virgin's dress should not be studied, but plain, and 
without labor; but now they have many artifices to make their dress conspicuous. O woman, cease from this 
folly. Transfer this care to thy soul, to the inward adorning. For the outward ornament that invests thee, suffers 
not that within to become beautiful. He that is concerned for that which is without, despises that which is 
within, even as he that is unconcerned about the exterior, bestows all his care upon the interior. Say not, 
"Alas! I wear a threadbare garment, mean shoes, a worthless veil; what is there of ornament in these?" Do 
not deceive thyself. It is impossible, as I said, to study appearance more by these than by costlier dresses; 
especially when they are close-fitted to the body, fashioned to an immodest show, and of shining 
neatness. (3) Thou excusest thyself to me, but what canst thou say to God, who knows the heart and the spirit 
with which thou doest these things? "It is not done for fornication!" Perhaps not, but for admiration; and dost 
thou not blush for shame to be admired for such things? But thou sayest, "It is but chance I am so dressed, 
and for no motive of this kind." God knoweth what thou sayest to me: is it to me thou must give account? Nay, 
it is to Him who is present at thy actions, and will one day require into them, to whom all things are naked and 
open. It is on this account that we now urge these things, that we may not let you be amenable to those 

severe judgments. Let us fear, therefore, lest He reprove you in the words of the Prophet to the Jewish 
women. "They come to be seen of me wantoning and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their 
feet." (Isa. iii. 16.) 

Ye have taken upon you a great contest, where wrestling, not ornament is required; where the battle awaits 
you, not sloth and ease. Observe the combatants and wrestlers in the games. Do they concern themselves 
about their walk or their dress? No, but scorning all these, and throwing about them a garment(4) dripping 
with oil, they look only to one thing, to wound, and not be wounded. The devil stands grinding his teeth, 
watching to destroy thee every way, and thou remainest unconcerned, or concerned only about this satanic 
ornament. I say nothing about the voice, though much affectation is shown in this also, nor about perfumes, 
and other such luxuries. It is for these things we are ridiculed by the women of the world. The respect for 
virginity is lost. No one honors a virgin as she ought to be honored. They have given occasion to their own 
dishonor. Ought not they to be looked up to in the Church of God, as women coming from heaven? but now 
they are despised, and deservedly, though not those among them who are discreet. But when one who has 
a husband and children, and presides over a household, sees thee, who ought to be crucified to the world, 
more devoted to the world than herself, will she not ridicule and despise thee? See what care! what pains! In 
thy humble dress, thou exceedest her who wears the costliest ornament, and art more studious of 
appearance than she who is arrayed in gold. What is becoming to thee thou seekest not; that which 
misbecomes thee thou pursuest, when thou oughtest to be occupied in good works. On this account virgins 
are less honored than women of the world. For they do not perform works worthy of their virgin profession. 
This is not said to all; or rather it is said to all; to those who are in fault, that they may learn modesty; to those 
who are free from blame, that they may teach modesty to others. But beware lest this rebuke be verified in 
deed. For we have not said these things that we may grieve, but that we may correct you, that we may glory 
in you. And may we all do those things which are acceptable to God, and live to His glory, that we may 
obtain the blessings promised by the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom, &c. 

HOMILY IX. 

1 TIMOTHY ii. 11-15. 

"Let the women learn in silence with all subjection. But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority 
over the man, but to be in silence. For Adam was first formed, then Eve. And Adam was not deceived, but 
the woman being deceived was in the transgression. Notwithstanding she shall be saved in [through the] 
child-bearing, if they continue in faith and charity and holiness with sobriety." 

GREAT modesty and great propriety does the blessed Paul require of women, and that not only with 
respect to their dress and appearance: he proceeds even to regulate their speech. And what says he? "Let 
the woman learn in silence"; that is, let her not speak at all in the church; which rule he has also given in his 
Epistle to the Corinthians, where he says," It is a shame for women to speak in the church" (1 Cor. xiv. 35); 
and the reason is, that the law has made them subject to men. And again elsewhere, "And if they will learn 
anything, let them ask their husbands at home." (Ibid.) Then indeed the women, from such teaching, kept 
silence; but now there is apt to be great noise among them, much clamor and talking, and nowhere so much 
as in this place. They may all be seen here talking more than in the market, or at the bath. For, as if they 
came hither for recreation, they are all engaged in conversing upon unprofitable subjects. Thus all is 
confusion, and they seem not to understand, that unless they are quiet, they cannot learn anything that is 
useful. For when our discourse strains against the talking, and no one minds what is said, what good can it 
do to them? To such a degree should women be silent, that they are not allowed to speak not only about 
worldly matters, but not even about spiritual things, in the church. This is order, this is modesty, this will adorn 
her more than any garments. Thus clothed, she will be able to offer her prayers in the manner most 
becoming. 

"But I suffer not a woman to teach." "I do not suffer," he says. What place has this command here? The fittest. 
He was speaking of quietness, of propriety, of modesty, so having said that he wished them not to speak in 
the church, to cut off all occasion of conversation, he says, let them not teach, but occupy the station of 
learners. For thus they will show submission by their silence. For the sex is naturally somewhat talkative: and 
for this reason he restrains them on all sides. "For Adam," says he, "was first formed, then Eve. And Adam 
was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the transgression." 

If it be asked, what has this to do with women of the present day? it shows that the male sex enjoyed the 
higher honor. Man was first formed; and elsewhere he shows their superiority. "Neither was the man created 
for the woman, but the woman for the man." (1 Cor. xi. 9.) Why then does he say this? He wishes the man to 
have the preeminence in every way; both for the reason given above, he means, let him have precedence, 
and on account of what occurred afterwards. For the woman taught the man once, and made him guilty of 
disobedience, and wrought our ruin. Therefore because she made a bad use of her power over the man, or 

rather her equality with him, God made her subject to her husband. "Thy desire shall be to thy husband?" 
(Gen. iii. 16.) This had not been said to her before. 

But how was Adam not deceived? If he was not deceived, he did not then transgress? Attend carefully. The 
woman said, "The serpent beguiled me." But the man did not say, The woman deceived me, but, "she gave 
me of the tree, and I did eat." Now it is not the same thing to be deceived by a fellow-creature, one of the 
same kind, as by an inferior and subordinate animal. This is truly to be deceived. Compared therefore with 
the woman, he is spoken of as "not deceived." For she was beguiled by an inferior and subject, he by an 
equal. Again, it is not said of the man, that he "saw the tree was good for food," but of the woman, and that 
she "did eat, and gave it to her husband": so that he transgressed, not captivated by appetite, but merely 
from the persuasion of his wife. The woman taught once, and ruined all. On this account therefore he saith, 
let her not teach. But what is it to other women, that she suffered this? It certainly concerns them; for the sex is 
weak and fickle, and he is speaking of the sex collectively. For he says not Eve, but "the woman," which is 
the common name of the whole sex, not her proper name. Was then the whole sex included in the 
transgression for her fault? As he said of Adam, "After the similitude of Adam's transgression, who is the 
figure of Him that was to come" (Rom. v. 14); so here the female sex transgressed, and not the male. Shall 
not women then be saved? Yes, by means of children. For it is not of Eve that he says, "If they continue in 
faith and charity and holiness with sobriety." What faith? what charity? what holiness with sobriety? It is as if 
he had said, "Ye women, be not cast down, because your sex has incurred blame. God has granted you 
another opportunity of salvation, by the bringing up of children, so that you are saved, not only by 
yourselves, but by others." See how many questions are involved in this matter. "The woman," he says, 
"being deceived was in the transgression." What woman? Eve. Shall she then be saved by child-bearing? 
He does not say that, but, the race of women shall be saved. Was not it then involved in transgression? Yes, 
it was, still Eve transgressed, but the whole sex shall be saved, notwithstanding, "by childbearing." And why 
not by their own personal virtue? For has she excluded others from this salvation? And what will be the case 
with virgins, with the barren, with widows who have lost their husbands, before they had children? will they 
perish? is there no hope for them? yet virgins are held in the highest estimation. What then does he mean to 
say? 

Some interpret his meaning thus. As what happened to the first woman occasioned the subjection of the 
whole sex, (for since Eve was formed second and made subject, he says, let the rest of the sex be in 
subjection,) so because she transgressed, the rest of the sex are also in transgression. But this is not fair 
reasoning; for at the creation all was the gift of God, but in this case, it is the consequence of the woman's 
sin. But this is the amount of what he says. As all men died through one, because that one sinned, so the 
whole female race transgressed, because the woman was in the transgression. Let her not however grieve. 
God hath given her no small consolation, that of childbearing. And if it be said that this is of nature, so is 
that(1) also of nature; for not only that which is of nature has been granted, but also the bringing up of 
children. "If they continue in faith and charity and holiness with sobriety"; that is, if after childbearing, they 
keep them(2) in charity and purity. By these means they will have no small reward on their account, because 
they have trained up wrestlers for the service of Christ. By holiness he means good life, modesty, and 
sobriety. 

Chap. iii. ver. 1. "This is a faithful saying." 

This relates to the present subject, not to what follows, respecting the office of a Bishop. For as it was 
doubted, he affirms it to be a true saying, that fathers may be benefited by the virtue of their children, and 
mothers also, when they have brought them up well. But what if she be herself addicted to wickedness and 
vice? Will she then be benefited by the bringing up of children? Is it not probable that she will bring them up 
to be like herself? It is not therefore of any woman, but of the virtuous woman, that it is said she shall receive 
a great recompense for this also. 

MORAL. Hear this, ye fathers and mothers, that your bringing up of children shall not lose its reward. This 
also he says, as he proceeds, "Well reported of for good works; if she have brought up children." (1 Tim. v. 
10.) Among other commendations he reckons this one, for it is no light praise to devote to God those 
children which are given them of God. For if the basis, the foundation which they lay be good, great will be 
their reward; as great, if they neglect it, will be their punishment. It was on account of his children that Eli 
perished. For he ought to have admonished them, and indeed he did admonish them, but not as he ought; 
but from his unwillingness to give them pain he destroyed both himself and them. Hear this, ye fathers, bring 
your children up with great care "in the nurture and admonition of the Lord." (Eph. vi. 4.) Youth is wild, and 
requires many governors, teachers, directors, attendants, and tutors; and after all these, it is a happiness if it 
be restrained. For as a horse not broken in, or a wild beast untamed, such is youth. But if from the beginning, 
from the earliest age, we fix it in good rules, much pains will not be required afterwards; for good habits 
formed will be to them as a law. Let us not suffer them to do anything which is agreeable, but injurious; nor let 
us indulge them, as forsooth but children. Especially let us train them in chastity, for there is the very bane of 
youth. For this many struggles, much attention will be necessary. Let us take wives for them early, so that 

their brides may receive their bodies pure and unpolluted, so their loves will be more ardent. He that is 
chaste before marriage, much more will he be chaste after it; and he that practiced fornication before, will 
practice it after marriage. "All bread," it is said, "is sweet to the fornicator." (Ecclus. xxiii. 17.) Garlands are 
wont to be worn on the heads of bridegrooms, as a symbol of victory, betokening that they approach the 
marriage bed unconquered by pleasure. But if captivated by pleasure he has given himself up to harlots, 
why does he wear the garland, since he has been subdued? 

Let us admonish them of these things. Let us employ sometimes advice, sometimes warnings, sometimes 
threatening. In children we have a great charge committed to us. Let us bestow great care upon them, and 
do everything that the Evil One may not rob us of them. But now our practice is the very reverse of this. We 
take all care indeed to have our farm in good order, and to commit it to a faithful manager, we look out for it 
an ass-driver, and muleteer, and bailiff, and a clever accomptant. But we do not look out for what is much 
more important, for a person to whom we may commit our son as the guardian of his morals, though this is a 
possession much more valuable than all others. It is for him indeed that we take such care of our estate. We 
take care of our possessions for our children, but of the children themselves we take no care at all. What an 
absurdity is this! Form the soul of thy son aright, and all the rest will be added hereafter. If that is not good, he 
will derive no advantage from his wealth, and if it is formed to goodness he will suffer no harm from poverty. 
Wouldest thou leave him rich? teach him to be good: for so he will be able to acquire wealth, or if not, he will 
not fare worse than they who possess it. But if he be wicked, though you leave him boundless wealth, you 
leave him no one to take care of it, and you render him worse than those who are reduced to extreme 
poverty. For poverty is better than riches for those children who are not well-disposed. For it retains them in 
some degree of virtue even against their will. Whereas money does not suffer those who would be sober to 
continue so, it leads them away, ruins them, and plunges them into infinite dangers. 
Mothers, be specially careful to regulate your daughters well; for the management of them is easy. Be 
watchful over them, that they may be keepers at home. Above all, instruct them to be pious, modest, 
despisers of wealth, indifferent to ornament. In this way dispose of them in marriage. For if you form them in 
this way, you will save not only them, but the husband who is destined to marry them, and not the husband 
only, but the children, not the children only, but the grandchildren. For the root being made good, good 
branches will shoot forth, and still become better, and for all these you will receive a reward. Let us do all 
things therefore, as benefiting not only one soul, but many through that one. For they ought to go from their 
father's house to marriage, as combatants from the school of exercise, furnished with all necessary 
knowledge, and to be as leaven able to transform the whole lump to its own virtue. And let your sons be so 
modest, as to be distinguished for their steadiness and sobriety, that they may receive great praise both 
from God and men. Let them learn to govern their appetites, to avoid extravagance, to be good economists, 
affectionate, and submissive to rule. For so they will be able to secure a good reward to their parents, so all 
things will be done to the glory of God, and to our salvation, through Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom, &c. 

HOMILY X. 

1 TIMOTHY iii. 1-4 

"If a man desire the office of a Bishop, he desireth a good work. A Bishop then must be blameless, the 
husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to hospitality, apt to teach; not given to wine, no 
striker, not greedy of filthy lucre; but patient, not a brawler, not covetous; one that ruleth well his own house, 
having his children in subjection with all gravity." 

As now proceeding to discourse of the Episcopal office, he sets out with showing what sort of a person a 
Bishop ought to be. And here he does not do it as in the course of his exhortation to Timothy, but addresses 
all, and instructs others through him. And what says he? "If a man desire the office of a Bishop," I do not 
blame him, for it is a work of protection. If any one has this desire, so that he does not covet the dominion 
and authority, but wishes to protect the Church, I blame him not. "For he desireth a good work." Even Moses 
desired the office, though not the power, and his desire exposed him to that taunt, "Who made thee a ruler 
and a judge over us?" (Acts vii. 27 Ex. ii. 14.) If any one, then, desire it in this way, let him desire it. For the 
Episcopate is so called from having the oversight of all. 

"A Bishop then," he says, "must be blameless, the husband of one wife." This he does not lay down as a 
rule, as if he must not be without one, but as prohibiting his having more than one.(1) For even the Jews were 
allowed to contract second marriages, and even to have two wives at one time. For "marriage is 
honorable," (Heb. xiii. 4.) Some however say, that this is said that he should be the husband of one wife. (2) 
"Blameless." Every virtue is implied in this word; so that if any one be conscious to himself of any sins, he 
doth not well to desire an office for which his own actions have disqualified him. For such an one ought to be 
ruled, and not to rule others. For he who bears rule should be brighter than any luminary; his life should be 
unspotted, so that all should look up to him, and make his life the model of their own. But in employing this 

exhortation, he had no common object in view. For he too(3) was about to appoint Bishops, (which also he 
exhorts Titus to do in his Epistle to him,) and as it was probable that many would desire that office, therefore 
he urges these admonitions. "Vigilant," he says, that is, circumspect, having a thousand eyes about him, 
quicksighted, not having the eyes of his mind dimmed. For many things occur which permit not a man to see 
clearly, to see things as they are. For care and troubles, and a load of business on all sides press upon 
him. He must therefore be vigilant, not only over his own concerns, but over those of others. He must be well 
awake, he must be fervent in spirit, and, as it were, breathe fire he must labor and attend upon his duty by 
day and by night, even more than a general upon his army; he must be careful and concerned for all. 
"Sober, of good behavior, given to hospitality." Because these qualities are possessed by most of those 
who are under their rule, (for in these respects they ought to be equal to those who rule over them,) he, to 
show what is peculiar to the Bishops, adds, "apt to teach." For this is not required of him that is ruled, but is 
most essential to him who has this rule committed to him. [4] 

"Not given to wine": here he does not so much mean intemperate, as insolent and impudent. "No striker": 
this too does not mean a striker with the hands. What means then "no striker"? Because there are some who 
unseasonably smite the consciences of their brethren, it seems to be said with reference to them. "Not 
greedy of filthy lucre, but patient: not a brawler, not covetous; one that ruleth well his own house, having his 
children in subjection with all gravity." If then "he who is married cares for the things of the world" (1 Cor. vii. 
33), and a Bishop ought not to care for the things of the world, why does he say the husband of one wife? 
Some indeed think that he says this with reference to one who remains free(5) from a wife. But if otherwise, 
he that hath a wife may be as though he had none. (1 Cor. vii. 29.) For that liberty was then properly granted, 
as suited to the nature of the circumstances then existing. And it is very possible, if a man will, so to regulate 
his conduct. For as riches make it difficult to enter into the kingdom of Heaven, yet rich men have often 
entered in, so it is with marriage. But why does he say, speaking of a Bishop, that he should be "not given to 
wine, hospitable," when he should name greater things? Why said he not that he should be an Angel, not 
subject to human passions? Where are those great qualities of which Christ speaks, which even those 
under their rule ought to possess? To be crucified to the world, to be always ready to lay down their lives, as 
Christ said. "The good Shepherd giveth his life for the sheep" (John x. 11); and again, "He that taketh not his 
cross and followeth after me, is not worthy of me." (Matt. x. 38.) But "not given to wine," he says; a good 
prospect indeed, if such are the things of which a Bishop is to be admonished! Why has he not said that he 
ought to be already raised above the world? But dost thou demand less of the Bishop, than even of those in 
the world? For to these he saith, "Mortify your members which are upon the earth" (Col. iii. 5), and "He that is 
dead, is freed from sin." (Rom. vi. 7.) "They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh"; and Christ again says, 
"Whosoever forsaketh not all that he hath, he is not worthy of Me." (Luke xv. 33.) Why are not these things 
required by Paul? Plainly because few could be found of such a character, and there was need of many 
Bishops, that one might preside in every city. 

But because the Churches were to be exposed to attacks, (6) he requires not that superior and highly 
exalted virtue, but a moderate degree of it; for to be sober, of good behavior, and temperate, were qualities 
common to many. "Having his children in subjection with all gravity." This is necessary, that an example 
might be exhibited in his own house. For who would believe that he who had not his own son in subjection, 
would keep a stranger under command? "One that ruleth well his own house." Even those who are without 
say this, that he who is a good manager of a house will be a good statesman. For the Church is, as it were, a 
small household, and as in a house there are children and wife and domestics, and the man has rule over 
them all; just so in the Church there are women, children, servants. And if he that presides in the Church has 
partners in his power, so hath the man a partner, that is, his wife. Ought the Church to provide for her widows 
and virgins? so there are in a family servants, and daughters, to be provided for. And, in fact, it is easier to 
rule the house; therefore he asks, "if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take care of the 
Church of God?" 

Ver. 6. "Not a novice. "(2) He does not say, not a young man, but not a new convert. For he had said, "I have 
planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the increase." (1 Cor. iii. 6.) Wishing them to point out such an one, 
he used this word. For, otherwise, what hindered him from saying, "Not a young man"? For if youth only was 
an objection, why did he himself appoint Timothy, a young man? (and this he proves by saying to him, "Let 
no man despise thy youth.") (1 Tim. iv. 12.) Because(3) he was aware of his great virtue, and his great 
strictness of life. Knowing which he writes, "From a child thou hast learned the holy Scriptures." (2 Tim. iii. 15.) 
And that he practiced intense fasting is proved by the words, "Use a little wine for thine often infirmities"; 
which he wrote to him amongst other things, as, if he had not known of such good works of his, he would not 
have written, nor given any such charge to his disciple. But as there were many then who came over from 
the Heathen, and were baptized, he says, "Do not immediately advance to a station of dignity a novice, that 
is, one of these new converts." For, if before he had well been a disciple, he should at once be made a 
Teacher, he would be lifted up into insolence. If before he had learnt to be under rule, he should be 
appointed one of the rulers, he would be puffed up: therefore he adds, "Lest being lifted up with pride, he fall 

into the condemnation of the devil," that is, into the same condemnation which Satan incurred by his pride. 
Ver. 7. "Moreover he must have a good report of them which are without; test he fall into reproach and the 
snare of the devil." 

This is rightly said, as he was certain to be reproached by them, and for the same reason perhaps he said, 
"the husband of one wife," though elsewhere he says, "I would that all men were even as I myself!" (1 Cor. vii. 
7), that is, practicing continency. That he may not therefore confine them within too narrow a limit, by requiring 
an over-strict conversation, he is satisfied to prescribe moderate virtue. For it was necessary to appoint one 
to preside in every city, as he writes to Titus, "That thou shouldest ordain elders in every city, as I had 
appointed thee." (Tit. i. 5.) But what if he should have a good report, and fair reputation, and not be worthy of 
it? In the first place this would not easily happen. It is much for good men to obtain a good report among their 
enemies. But, in fact, he has not left this to stand by itself; a good report "also," he says, that is, besides 
other qualities. What then, if they should speak evil of him without a cause from envy, especially as they 
were Heathens? This was not to be expected. For even they will reverence a man of blameless life. Why 
then does he say, speaking of himself, "Through evil: report and good report"? (2 Cor. vi. 6.) Because it was 
not his life that they assailed, but his preaching. Therefore he says, "through evil report." They were 
slandered as deceivers and impostors, on account of their preaching, and this because they could not 
attack their moral characters and lives. For why did no one say of the Apostles, that they were fornicators, 
unclean, or covetous persons, but that they were deceivers, which relates to their preaching only? Must it not 
be that their lives were irreproachable? It is manifest. 

Therefore so let us too live, and no enemy, no unbeliever, will be able to speak evil of us. For he whose life 
is virtuous, is revered even by them. For truth stops the months even of enemies. 

But how does he "fall into a snare"? By falling often into the same sins, as those who are without. For if he be 
such a character, the evil one soon lays another snare for him, and they soon effect his destruction. But if he 
should have a good report from his enemies, much more will he have it from his friends. For that it is not 
likely that he, whose life is blameless, should be ill-reported of, we may infer from the words of Christ; "Let 
your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in 
Heaven." (Matt. v. 16. ) But what if one be falsely accused, and from peculiar circumstances be slandered? 
Well this is a possible case; but even such an one ought not to be promoted. For the result is much to be 
feared. Therefore it is said he should have "a good report," for your good works are to shine. As therefore 
no one will say that the sun is dark, not even the blind, (for he will be ashamed to oppose the opinion of all,) 
so him that is of remarkable goodness no one will blame. And though, on account of his doctrines, the 
Heathen will often slander him, yet they will not attack his virtuous life, but will join with others in admiring and 
revering it. 

MORAL. Let us then so live, that the name of God be not blasphemed. Let us not, on the one hand, look to 
human reputation; nor on the other, subject ourselves to an evil report, but on both sides let us observe 
moderation; as he saith, "Among whom ye shine as lights in the world." (Phil. ii. 15.) For on this account He 
left us here, that we may be as luminaries, that we may be appointed Teachers of others, that we may be as 
leaven; that we may converse as angels among men, as men with children, as spiritual with natural men, that 
they may profit by us, that we may be as seed, and may bring forth much fruit. There were no need of words, 
if we so shone forth in our lives, there were no need of Teachers, did we but exhibit works. There would be 
no Heathen, if we were such Christians as we ought to be. If we kept the commandments of Christ, if we 
suffered injury, if we allowed advantage to be taken of us, if being reviled we blessed, if being ill-treated we 
did good (1 Cor. iv. 12); if this were the general practice among us, no one would be so brutal as not to 
become a convert to godliness. And to show this; Paul was but one man, yet how many did he draw after 
him? If we were all such as he, how many worlds might we not have drawn to us? Behold, Christians are 
more numerous than Heathens. And in other arts, one man can teach a hundred boys together; but here, 
where there are many more teachers, and many more than the learners, no one is brought over. For those 
who are taught, look to the virtue of their teachers: and when they see us manifesting the same desires, 
pursuing the same objects, power and honor, how can they admire Christianity? They see our lives open to 
reproach, our souls worldly. We admire wealth equally with them, and even more. We have the same horror 
of death, the same dread of poverty, the same impatience of disease, we are equally fond of glory and of 
rule. We harass ourselves to death from our love of money, and serve the time. How then can they believe? 
From miracles? But these are no longer wrought. From our conversation? It has become corrupt. From 
charity? Not a trace of it is anywhere to be seen. Therefore we shall have to give an account not only of our 
own sins, but of the injury done by them to others. 

Let us then return to a sound mind; let us watch, and show forth a heavenly conversation upon earth. Let us 
say, "Our conversation is in heaven" (Phil. iii. 20), and let us upon earth maintain the contest. There have 
been great men, it may be said, amongst us, but "how," says the Greek, "shall I believe it? for I do not see 
anything like it in your conduct. If this is to be said, we too have had our philosophers, men admirable for 
their lives." "But show me another Paul, or a John: you cannot." Would he not then laugh at us for reasoning 

in this manner? Would he not continue to sit still in ignorance, seeing that the wisdom we profess is in words, 
not in works? For now for a single halfpenny ye are ready to slay or be slain! For a handful of earth thou 
raisest lawsuit after lawsuit! For the death of a child thou turnest all upside down: I omit other things that might 
make us weep; your auguries, your omens, your superstitious observances, your casting of nativities, your 
signs, your amulets, your divinations, your incantations, your magic arts. These are crying sins, enough to 
provoke the anger of God; that after He has sent His own Son, you should venture on such things as these. 
What then can we do but weep? For hardly is a small portion of the world in the way of salvation, and they 
who are perishing hear it, and rejoice that they are not destined to suffer alone, but in company with 
numbers. But what cause is this for joy? That very joy will subject them to punishment. For do not think that it 
is there as here, that to have companions in suffering affords consolation. And whence is this manifest? I will 
make it clear. Suppose that a man were commanded to be burnt, and that he saw his own son burning with 
him, and that the smell of his scorched flesh rose to his nostrils; would it not be of itself death to him? No 
doubt. And I will tell you how it is. If those who are not suffering, yet seeing those things are benumbed and 
faint with terror, much more will they be so affected, who are themselves sufferers. Wonder not at this. Hear a 
certain wise one saying, "Art thou become weak as we? art thou become like unto us?" (Isa. xiv. 1 0.) For 
human nature is disposed to sympathy, and the affections of others move us to pity. Will then a father seeing 
His son in the same condemnation, or a husband his wife, or a man his fellow-man, receive consolation, and 
not rather an aggravation of his sufferings? Are not we in such case the more overcome? But there, you say, 
there are no such feelings. I know there are not; but there are others much more wretched. For there will be 
wailing inconsolable, all witnessing each other's torments. Do they who are furnishing derive comfort in their 
distress from the participation of others? It is no consolation surely to see a son, a father, a wife, or 
grandchildren, suffering the same punishment. If one sees friends in such a case, is it any comfort? None! 
None! It rather adds to the intensity of our own sufferings! Besides, there are evils, which by reason of their 
severity cannot be mitigated by being common. If two men were together thrown into the fire, would they 
comfort one another? Tell me; if we have ever been attacked by a violent fever, have we not found that all 
consolation has failed us? for there are calamities, so overwhelming as to leave no room for comfort in the 
soul. When a wife has lost her husband, is it a lessening of her grief to number up the many who have 
suffered the like loss? Let us not therefore be supported by any such hope, rather let us find our sole 
consolation in repenting of our sins, in pursuing the good path that leads to Heaven, that we may obtain the 
kingdom of Heaven, by the grace and lovingkindness of Jesus Christ our Lord, with whom, &c. 

HOMILY XI. 

1 TIMOTHY iii. 8-10. 

"Likewise must the Deacons be grave, not doubletongued, not given much to wine, not greedy of filthy lucre; 
holding the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience. And let these also first be proved: then let them use the 
office of a Deacon, being found blameless." 

DISCOURSING of Bishops, and having described their character, and the qualities which they ought to 
possess, and having passed over the order of Presbyters, he proceeds to that of Deacons. The reason of 
this omission was, that between Presbyters and Bishops there was no great difference. Both had 
undertaken the office of Teachers and Presidents in the Church, and what he has said concerning Bishops 
is applicable to Presbyters. For they are only superior in having the power of ordination, and seem to have 
no other advantage over Presbyters. 

"Likewise the Deacons." That is, they should have the same qualities as Bishops. And what are these 
same? To be blameless, sober, hospitable, patient, not brawlers, not covetous. And that he means this 
when he says "likewise," is evident from what he says in addition, "grave, not doubletongued"; that is, not 
hollow or deceitful. For nothing so debases a man as deceit, nothing is so pernicious in the Church as 
insincerity. "Not given to much wine, not greedy of filthy lucre; holding the mystery of the faith in a pure 
conscience." Thus he explains what he means by "blameless." And here he requires, though in other words, 
that he be "not a novice," where he says, "Let these also first be proved," where the conjunction "also" is 
added, as connecting this with what had been said before of Bishops, for nothing intervenes between. And 
there is the same reason(1) for the "not a novice" in that case. For would it not be absurd, that when a newly 
purchased slave is not entrusted with anything in a house, till he has by long trial given proofs of his 
character, yet that one should enter into the Church of God from a state of heathenism, and be at once 
placed in a station of preeminence? 

Ver. 1 1 . "Even so must the women(2) be grave, not slanderers, sober, faithful in all things." 
Some have thought that this is said of women generally, but it is not so, for why should he introduce anything 
about women to interfere with his subject? He is speaking of those who hold the rank of Deaconesses. 
Ver. 12. "Let the Deacons be husbands of one wife." 

This[3] must be understood therefore to relate to Deaconesses. For that order is necessary and useful and 

honorable in the Church. Observe how he requires the same virtue from the Deacons, as from the Bishops, 

for though they were not of equal rank, they must equally be blameless; equally pure. 

"Ruling their children and their own houses well." 

Ver. 1 3. "For they that have used the office of a Deacon well purchase to themselves a good degree, and 

much boldness in the faith which is in Christ Jesus." 

Everywhere they are required to rule their children well, that others may not be scandalized by their 

misconduct. 

"They that use the office of a Deacon well, purchase to themselves a good degree," that is, advancement, 

"and much boldness in the faith of Jesus Christ"; as if he would say, that those who have been found vigilant 

in the lower degree(1) will soon ascend to the higher. 

Ver. 14, 15. "These things write I unto thee, hoping to come unto thee shortly. But if I tarry long, that thou 

mayest know how thou oughtestto behave thyself in the house of God, which is the Church of the living God, 

the pillar and ground of the truth." 

That he may not plunge Timothy into dejection by giving him orders about such matters, he says, I write thus 

not as though I were not coming, but I will indeed come, still in case I should be delayed, that thou mayest 

not be distressed. And this he writes to him to prevent his being dejected, but to others in order to rouse 

them to greater earnestness. For his presence, though only promised, would have great effect. Nor let it 

seem strange that, though foreseeing everything through the Spirit, he was yet ignorant of this, and only 

says, I hope to come, but if I tarry, which implies uncertainty. For since he was led by the Spirit, and did not 

act from his own inclination, he was naturally uncertain about this matter. 

"That thou mayest know," he says, "how thou oughtest to behave thyself in the house of God, which is the 

Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth." Not like that Jewish house. For it is this that 

maintains the faith and the preaching of the Word. For the truth is the pillar and the ground of the Church. (2) 

Ver. 16. "And without controversy great is the mystery of godliness; God [He who](3) was manifest in the 

flesh, justified in the Spirit." 

Here he speaks of the Dispensation in our behalf. Tell me not of the bells, nor of the holy of holies, nor of the 

high priest. The Church is the pillar of the world. Consider this mystery, and thou mayest be struck with awe: 

for it is indeed "a great mystery," and "a mystery of godliness," and that "without controversy" or question, 

for it is beyond all doubt. Since in his directions to the Priests he had required nothing like what is found in 

Leviticus he refers the whole matter to Another, saying, "God was manifest in the flesh." The Creator was 

seen incarnate. "He was justified in the Spirit." As it is said, "Wisdom is justified of her children," or because 

He practiced no guile, as the Prophet says, "Because he had done no violence, neither was guile found in 

his mouth." (Isa. liii. 9; 1 Pet. ii. 22.) "Seen of Angels." So that Angels together with us saw the Son of God, not 

having before seen Him. Great, truly great, was this mystery! "Preached unto the Gentiles, believed on m the 

world." He was heard of and believed in through all parts of the world, as the Prophet foreshowed, saying, 

"Their sound is gone out into all the world." (Ps. xix. 4.) Think not that these things are mere words, for they 

are not, but full of hidden realities. "Received up into glory." He ascended upon clouds. "This Jesus," it is 

said, "Who is taken up from you, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen Him go into heaven." (Acts i. 

11.) 

The discretion of the blessed Paul is observable. When he would exhort the Deacons to avoid excess in 

wine, he does not say, "Be not drunken," but "not" even "given to much wine." A proper caution; for if those 

who served in the Temple did not taste wine at all, much more should not these, For wine produces disorder 

of mind, and where it does not cause drunkenness, it destroys the energies and relaxes the firmness of the 

soul. 

The dispensation in our behalf he calls a "mystery," and well may it be so called, since it is not manifest to 

all, nay, it was not manifest to the Angels, for how could it, when it was "made known by the Church"? (Eph. iii. 

10.) Therefore he says, "without controversy great is the mystery." Great indeed was it. For God became 

Man, and Man became God. A Man was seen without sin! A Man was received up, was preached in the 

world! Together with us the Angels saw Him. This is indeed a mystery! Let us not then expose(4) this 

mystery. Let us not lay it forth everywhere, but let us live in a manner worthy of the mystery. They to whom a 

mystery is intrusted are great persons. We account it a mark of favor, if a king intrusts a secret to us. But God 

has committed His mystery to us, yet are we ungrateful to our Benefactor, as if we had not received the 

greatest benefits. Our insensibility to such a kindness should strike us with horror. And how is that a mystery 

which all know? In the first place all do not know it, and before then too they knew it not, but now it is made 

manifest. (5) 

MORAL. In keeping this mystery, then, let us be faithful to our trust. So great a mystery has He intrusted to us, 

and we do not trust Him even with our money, though He has bid us lay up our wealth with Him, where none 

can take it away, neither can moth nor thief waste it. And He promises to pay us a hundred-fold, yet we obey 

Him not. Yet here if we intrust any with a deposit, we receive nothing back in addition, but are thankful if that is 

restored which we deposited. If a thief steals it there, He saith, set that to My account; I say not to thee, a thief 
has taken it, or moth devoured it. He repays a hundred-fold here, and eternal life is superadded hereafter, 
yet do we not lay up our treasure there! "But," you say, "He repays slowly." Well this too is a proof of the 
greatness of His gift, that He does not repay here in this mortal life; or rather He does repay even here a 
hundred-fold. For did not Paul leave here his tools, (1) Peter his rod and hook, and Matthew his seat of 
custom? and was not the whole world opened to them more than to kings? Were not all things laid at their 
feet? Were they not appointed rulers, (2) and lords? Did not men commit their lives into their hands? suspend 
themselves wholly upon their counsel, and enlist in their service? And do we not see many similar 
occurrences even now? Many men of poor and humble means, who did but handle the spade, and had 
hardly a sufficiency of necessary food, having but the character of monks, have been celebrated above all 
men, and honored of kings. 

Are these things inconsiderable? Well, consider that these are but additions, the principal sum is stored up 
for the life to come. Despise riches, if thou wouldest have riches. If thou wouldest be truly rich, become poor. 
For such are the paradoxes of God. He would not have thee rich from thy own care, but from His grace. 
Leave these things to Me, He says; make spiritual things thy concern, that thou mayest know My power. 
Flee from that yoke of slavery, which riches impose. As long as thou cleavest to them, thou art poor. When 
thou despisest them, thou art doubly rich, in that such things shall flow in upon thee from every side, and in 
that thou shall want none of those things, which the multitude want. For not to possess much, but to need little, 
is to be rich indeed. The king, so long as he wants aught, differs not from the poor man. For this is poverty, to 
stand in need of others; and by this argument the king is poor, in so far as he stands in need of his subjects. 
But he that is crucified, to the world is not so; he wants for nothing; for his hands are sufficient for his 
subsistence, as Paul said, "These hands have ministered to my necessities, and to them that were with 
me. "(Acts xx. 34.) These are his words who says, "As having nothing, yet possessing all things." (2 Cor. vi. 
20.) This is he who was thought a God by the inhabitants of Lystra. If thou wouldest obtain worldly things, 
seek Heaven; if you wouldest enjoy things here, despise them. For, "Seek ye first the kingdom of God," He 
saith, "and all these things shall be added unto you." (Matt. vi. 33.) 

Why dost thou admire these trifles? Why long for things of no real worth? How long is one poor?(3) how long 
a beggar? Raise thine eyes to heaven, think of the riches there, and smile at gold; think of how little use it is; 
that the enjoyment of it lasts but for the present life, and that compared with eternity, the present life is as a 
grain of sand, or as a drop of water to the boundless ocean. This wealth is not a possession, it is not 
property, it is a loan for use. For when thou diest, willingly or unwillingly, all that thou hast goes to others, and 
they again give it up to others, and they again to others. For we are all sojourners; and the tenant of the 
house is more truly perchance the owner of it, for the owner dies, and the tenant lives, and still enjoys the 
house. And if the latter hires it, the other might be said to hire it too: for he built it, and was at pains with it, and 
fitted it up. Property, in fact, is but a word: we are all owners in fact but of other men's possessions. Those 
things only are our own, which we have sent before us to the other world. Our goods here are not our own; 
we have only a life interest in them; or rather they fail us during our lives. Only the virtues of the soul are 
properly our own, as alms-giving and charity. Worldly goods, even by those without, were called external 
things, because they are without us. But let us make them internal. For we cannot take our wealth with us, 
when we depart hence, but we can take our charities. But let us rather send them before us, that they may 
prepare for us an abode in the eternal mansions. (Luke xvi. 9.) 

Goods(4) are named from use, (5) not from lordship, and are not our own, and possessions are not a 
property but a loan. For how many masters has every estate had, and how many will it have! There is a 
sensible proverb, (and popular proverbs, when they contain any wisdom, are not to be despised,) "O field, 
how many men's hast thou been, and how many men's wilt thou be?" This we should say to our houses and 
all our goods. Virtue alone is able to depart with us, and to accompany us to the world above. Let us then 
give up and extinguish that love of wealth, that we may kindle m us an affection for heavenly things. These 
two affections cannot possess one soul. For it is said, "Either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else 
he will hold to the one, and despise the other." (Matt. vi. 24.) Seest thou a man with a long train of attendants, 
clearing a way(6) along the streets, clothed in silken garments, riding aloft, and stiffening his neck? Be not 
overawed, but smile. As we laugh when we see children playing at kings, so laugh at his state, for it is no 
better than theirs, nor indeed so pleasant, for there is not the same innocence and simplicity as with children. 
With them it is laughter and pleasure, here is a man made ridiculous and contemptible. 
Glorify God, Who has kept thee free from this theatrical ostentation. For, if thou wilt, humble as thy station is, 
thou mayest be higher than he who is exalted in his chariot. And why? because, though his body is a little 
raised from the earth, his soul is fixed upon it, for "My strength," he saith, "cleaveth to my flesh" (Ps. cii. 6), but 
thou in thy spirit walkest in heaven. What though he has many attendants clearing his way? is he more 
honored by this than his horse? and what an absurdity is it, to drive men before one to clear the way for a 
beast to pass! Then what sort of honor is it to bestride a horse? an honor shared by his slaves Yet some are 
so vain of this, that they have it led after them even though they do not want it. What greater folly can there 

be? To wish to be distinguished by their horses, by the costliness of their garments, by their retinue! What 
can be more contemptible than glory which consists in horses, and servants? Art thou virtuous? use not such 
distinctions. Have ornaments in thyself. Be not indebted for thy glory to the presence of others. To such 
honor the most wicked, corrupt, and base of men may attain; all indeed who are rich. Actors and dancers 
may ride on horseback with a servant running before them, yet are they but actors and dancers still. Their 
horses and attendants procure them no respect. For when the graces of the soul are wanting to such 
persons, the addition of these external things is superfluous and vain. And as when a wall is weak, or a body 
disordered, whatever you put upon it, it still remains unsound and decayed; so in this case; the soul 
continues the same, and receives no advantage from things without, not though the man wear a thousand 
ornaments of gold. Let us not therefore be anxious for such things. Let us withdraw ourselves from temporal 
things, and pursue greater, even spiritual distinctions, which will render us truly objects of veneration, that we 
also may obtain the blessings of futurity, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with 
whom, &c. 

HOMILY XII. 

1 TIMOTHY iv. 1--3. 

"Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to 
seducing spirits, and doctrines of demons; speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their conscience seared with 
a hot iron; forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God hath created to be 
received with thanksgiving of them which believe and know the truth." 

As those who adhere to the faith are fixed on a safe anchor, so those who fall from the faith can nowhere rest; 
but after many wanderings to and fro, they are borne at last into the very gulf of perdition. And this he had 
shown before, saying, that some had "already made shipwreck concerning the faith," and now he says, 
"Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to 
seducing spirits." This is said of the Manichaeans, the Encratites,(1) and the Marcionites, and the whole of 
their tribe, (2) that they should hereafter depart from the faith. Seest thou that this departure from the faith is the 
cause of all the evils that follow! 

But what is "expressly"? Plainly, clearly, and beyond doubt. Marvel not, he says, if some having departed 
from the faith still adhere to Judaism. There will be a time, when even those who have partaken of the faith 
will fall into a worse error, not only with respect to meats, but to marriages, and other such things, introducing 
the most pernicious notions. This refers not to the Jews, (for "the latter times," and a "departure from the 
faith," is not applicable to them;) but to the Manichees, and the founders of these sects. And he calls them 
very justly, "seducing spirits," since it was by these they were actuated in speaking such things. "Speaking 
lies in hypocrisy." This implies that they utter not these falsehoods through ignorance and unknowingly, but 
as acting a part, knowing the truth, but "having their conscience seared," that is, being men of evil lives. 
But why does he speak only of these heretics? Christ had before said, "Offenses must need come" (Matt, 
xviii. 7), and he had predicted the same in his parable of the sower, and of the springing up of the tares. But 
here admire with me the prophetic gift of Paul, who, before the times in which they were to appear, specifies 
the time itself. As if he had said, Do not wonder, if, at the commencement of the faith, some endeavor to bring 
in these pernicious doctrines; since, after it has been established for a length of time, many shall depart from 
the faith. "Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats." Why then has he mentioned no 
other heresies? Though not particularized, they are implied by the expressions of "seducing spirits and 
doctrines of demons." But he did not wish to instill these things into the minds of men before the time; but that 
which had already commenced, the case of meats, he specifies. "Which God hath created to be received 
with thanksgiving of them which believe and know the truth." Why did he not say, by the unbelievers too? 
How by the unbelievers, when they exclude themselves from them by their own rules? But is not luxury 
forbidden? Certainly it is. But why? if good things are created to be received. Because He created bread, 
and yet too much is forbidden; and wine also, and yet excess is forbidden; and we are not commanded to 
avoid dainties as if they were unclean in themselves, but as they corrupt the soul by excess. 
Ver. 4. "For every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving." 
If it be the creature of God, it is good. For "all things," it is said, "were very good." (Gen. i. 31 .) By speaking 
thus of things eatable, he by anticipation impugns the heresy of those who introduce an uncreated matter, 
and assert that these things proceed from it. But if it is good, why is it "sanctified by the word of God and 
prayers"? For it must be unclean, if it is to be sanctified? Not so, here he is speaking to those who thought 
that some of these things were common; therefore he lays down two positions: first, that no creature of God 
is unclean: secondly, that if it were become so, you have a remedy, seal it,(1) give thanks, and glorify God, 
and all the uncleanness passes away. Can we then so cleanse that which is offered to an idol? If you know 
not that it was so offered. But if, knowing this, you partake of it, you will be unclean; not because it was 

offered to an idol, but because contrary to an express command, you thereby communicate with devils. So 
that it is not unclean by nature, but becomes so through your wilful disobedience. What then, is not swine's 
flesh unclean? By no means, when it is received with thanksgiving, and with the seal; nor is anything else. It 
is your unthankful disposition to God that is unclean. 

Ver. 6. "If thou put the brethren in remembrance of these things, thou shall be a good minister of Jesus Christ, 
nourished up in the words of faith and of good doctrine, whereunto thou hast attained." 
What are the things here meant? The same which he had before mentioned, that "great is the mystery"; that 
to abstain from meats is the doctrine of devils, that they are "cleansed by the word of God and prayer." 
Ver. 7. "But refuse profane and old wives' fables, and exercise thyself rather unto godliness." 
"Putting them in remembrance," he says; here you observe no authority; but all is condescension: he does 
not say "commanding" or "enjoining," but reminding them: that is, suggest these things as matter of advice, 
and so enter into discourses with them concerning the faith, "being nourished up," he says, meaning to imply 
constancy in application to these things. 

For as we set before us day by day this bodily nourishment, so he means, let us be continually receiving 
discourses concerning the faith, and ever be nourished with them. What is this, "being nourished up"? 
Ruminating upon them; attending ever to the same things, and practicing ever the same, for it is no common 
nourishment that they supply. 

"But refuse profane and old wives' fables." By these are meant Jewish traditions, and he calls them "fables," 
either because of their falsehood or their unseasonableness. For what is seasonable is useful, but what is 
unseasonable is not only useless but injurious. Suppose a man of adult age to be suckled by a nurse, 
would he not be ridiculous, because it is unseasonable? "Profane and old wives' fables," he calls them, 
partly because of their obsoleteness, and partly because they are impediments to faith. For to bring souls 
under fear, that are raised above these things, is an impious commandment. "Exercise thyself unto 
godliness." That is, unto a pure faith and a moral life; for this is godliness. So then we need "exercise." Ver. 
8. "For bodily exercise(2) profiteth little." This has by some been referred to fasting; but away with such a 
notion! for that is not a bodily but a spiritual exercise. If it were bodily it would nourish the body, whereas it 
wastes and makes it lean, so that it is not bodily. Hence he is not speaking of the discipline^) of the body. 
What we need, therefore, is the exercise(4) of the soul. For the exercise of the body hath no profit, but may 
benefit the body a little, but the exercise(5) of godliness yields fruit and advantage both here and hereafter. 
"This is a faithful saying," that is, it is true that godliness is profitable both here and hereafter. Observe how 
everywhere he brings in this, he needs no demonstration, but simply declares it, for he was addressing 
Timothy. 

So then even here, we have good hopes? For he who is conscious to himself of no evil, and who has been 
fruitful in good, rejoices even here: as the wicked man on the other hand is punished here as well as 
hereafter. He lives in perpetual fear, he can look no one in the face with confidence, he is pale, trembling, 
and full of anxiety. Is it not so with the fraudulent, and with thieves, who have no satisfaction even in what they 
possess? Is not the life of murderers and adulterers most wretched, who look upon the sun itself with 
suspicion? Is this to be called life? No; rather a horrid death! 

Ver. 1 0. "For therefore we both labor and suffer reproach, because we trust in the living God, who is the 
Saviour of all men, specially of them that believe." 

This in effect is to say, wherefore do we mortify ourselves, unless we expect future blessings? Have we 
endured so many evils, submitted to so many reproaches, suffered such insults and calumnies, and such 
numerous calamities in vain? For if we did not trust in the living God, on what account did we submit to these 
things? But if God is here the Saviour(1) of the unbelieving, much more is He of the faithful hereafter. What 
salvation does he speak of? That to come?(2) "Who is the Saviour," he says, "of all men, specially of them 
that believe." At present he is speaking of that which is here. But how is He the Saviour of the faithful? Had 
he not been so, they must long since have been destroyed, for all men have made war upon them. He calls 
him here to endure perils, that having God for his Saviour he may not faint nor need any aid from others, but 
willingly and with fortitude endure all things. Even those who eagerly grasp at worldly advantages, 
supported by the hope of gain, cheerfully undertake laborious enterprises. 

It is then the last time. For "in the latter times," he says, "some shall depart from the faith." "Forbidding to 
marry." And do not we forbid to marry? God forbid. We do not forbid those who wish to marry, but those who 
do not wish to marry, we exhort to virginity. It is one thing to forbid, and another to leave one to his own free 
choice. He that forbids, does it once for all, but he who recommends virginity as a higher state, does not 
forbid marriage, because he prefers virginity. 

"Forbidding to marry," he says, "and commanding to abstain from meats, which God hath created to be 
received with thanksgiving of them which believe and know the truth." It is well said, "who know the truth." The 
former things then were a type. For nothing is unclean by nature, but it becomes so through the conscience 
of him that partakes of it. And what was the object of the prohibition of so many meats? To restrain 
excessive luxury. But had it been said, "eat not for the sake of luxury," it would not have been borne. They 

were therefore shut up under the necessity of the law, that they might abstain from the stronger principle of 
fear. The fish was not forbidden, though it was manifestly more unclean than the swine. But they might have 
learned how pernicious luxury was from that saying of Moses, "Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked." (Deut. xxxii. 
15.) Another cause of these prohibitions might be, that being straitened for other food, they might be reduced 
to slaughter sheep and oxen; he therefore restrained them from other things, on account of Apis and the calf, 
which was an abomination, ungrateful, polluted, and profane. (3) 

"Put them in remembrance of these things, meditate upon(4) these things," for by the expression, "nourished 
up in the words of faith and sound doctrine," is implied that he should not only recommend these things to 
others, but himself practice them. For he says, "Nourished up in the words of faith, and of good doctrine, 
whereunto thou hast attained. But refuse profane and old wives' fables." Why does he not say, abstain from 
them, but "refuse"? He thus intimates that they should be utterly rejected. His meaning is, that he should not 
enter into any disputation with the teachers of them, but recommend to his own people the things prescribed 
above. For nothing is to be gained by contending with perverse men, unless where it might have an injurious 
effect, if we were supposed from weakness to decline arguing with them. 

"But exercise thyself unto godliness," that is, unto a pure life, and the most virtuous conversation. He that 
exerciseth himself, even when it is not the season of contest, acts always as if he were contending, practices 
abstinence, endures all toils, is always anxious, endures much labor. "Exercise thyself," he saith, "unto 
godliness; for bodily exercise profiteth little, but godliness is profitable for all things, having the promise of 
the life that now is, and of that which is to come." And why, says one, does he mention this bodily exercise? 
To show by comparison the superiority of the other, in that the former is of no solid advantage, though it is 
attended with many toils, whilst the latter has a lasting and abundant good. As when he bids women "adorn 
themselves, not with broidered hair, or gold, or costly array: but which becometh women possessing 
godliness; with good works." (1 Tim. ii. 9, 10.) 

MORAL. "This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation. For therefore we both labor and suffer 
reproach." Did Paul then suffer reproach, and art thou impatient? Did Paul labor, and wouldestthou live 
luxuriously? But had he lived luxuriously, he would never have attained such great blessings. For if worldly 
goods, which are uncertain and perishable, are never gained by men without labor and pains, much less 
are spiritual. Well, saith one, but some inherit them. Yet even when inherited they are not guarded and 
preserved without labor, and care, and trouble, no less than those have that have gained them. And I need 
not say that many who have toiled and endured hardships have been disappointed at the very entrance of 
the harbor, and an adverse wind has caused the wreck of their hopes, when they were upon the point of 
possession. But with us there is nothing like this. For it is God who promised, and that "hope maketh not 
ashamed." (Rom. v. 5.) Ye who are conversant with worldly affairs, know ye not how many men, after infinite 
toils, have not enjoyed the fruit of their labors, either being previously cut off by death, or overtaken by 
misfortune, or assailed by disease, or ruined by false accusers, or some other cause, which amidst the 
variety of human casualties, has forced them to go with empty hands? 

But do you not see the lucky men, says one, who with little labor acquire the good things of life? What good 
things? Money, houses, so many acres of land, trains of servants, heaps of gold and silver? Can you call 
these good things, and not hide your head for shame? A man called to the pursuit of heavenly wisdom, and 
gaping after worldly things, and calling them "goods," which are of no value! If these things are good, then 
the possessors of them must be called good. For is not he good, who is the possessor of what is good? But 
when the possessors of these things are guilty of fraud and rapine, shall we call them good? For if wealth is 
a good, but is increased by grasping, the more it is increased, the more will its possessor be considered to 
be good. Is the grasping man then good? But if wealth is good, and increases by grasping, the more a man 
grasps, the better he must be. Is not this plainly a contradiction? But suppose the wealth is not gained 
wrongfully. And how is this possible? So destructive a passion is avarice, that to grow rich without injustice is 
impossible. This Christ declared, saying, "Make to yourselves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness." 
(Lukexvi. 19.) But what if he succeeded to his father's inheritance? Then he received what had been 
gathered by injustice. For it was not from Adam that his ancestor inherited riches, but, of the many that were 
before him, some one must probably have unjustly taken and enjoyed the goods of others. What then? he 
says, did Abraham hold unrighteous wealth; and Job, that blameless, righteous, and faithful man, who 
"feared God and eschewed evil"? Theirs was a wealth that consisted not in gold and silver, nor in houses, 
but in cattle. Besides this, he was enriched by God.(1) And the author of that book, relating what happened 
to that blessed man, mentions the loss of his camels, his mares and asses, but does not speak of treasures 
of gold or silver being taken away. The riches of Abraham too were his domestics. What then? Did he not 
buy them? No, for to this very point the Scripture says, that the three hundred and eighteen were born in his 
house. (Gen. xix. 14.) He had also sheep and oxen. Whence then did he send gold to Rebekah? (Gen. xxiv. 
22; xii. 16.) From the gifts which he received from Egypt without violence or wrong. 

Tell me, then, whence art thou rich? From whom didst thou receive it, and from whom he who transmitted it to 
thee? From his father and his grandfather. But canst thou, ascending through many generations, show the 

acquisition just? It cannot be. The root and origin of it must have been injustice. Why? Because God in the 
beginning made not one man rich, and another poor. Nor did He afterwards take and show to one treasures 
of gold, and deny to the other the right of searching for it: but He left the earth free to all alike. Why then, if it is 
common, have you so many acres of land, while your neighbor has not a portion of it? It was transmitted to 
me by my father. And by whom to him? By his forefathers. But you must go back and find the original owner. 
Jacob had wealth, but it was earned as the hire of his labors. 

But I will not urge this argument too closely. Let your riches be justly gained, and without rapine. For you are 
not responsible for the covetous acts of your father. Your wealth may be derived from rapine; but you were 
not the plunderer. Or granting that he did not obtain it by robbery, that his gold was cast up somewhere out of 
the earth. What then? Is wealth therefore good? By no means. At the same time it is not bad, he says, if its 
possessor be not covetous; it is not bad, if it be distributed to the poor, otherwise it is bad, it is ensnaring. 
"But if he does not evil, though he does no good, it is not bad," he argues. True. But is not this an evil, that 
you alone should have the Lord's property, that you alone should enjoy what is common? Is not "the earth 
God's, and the fullness thereof? If then our possessions belong to one common Lord, they belong also to 
our fellow-servants. The possessions of one Lord are all common. Do we not see this the settled rule in 
great houses? To all is given an equal portion of provisions, for it proceeds from the treasures of their Lord. 
And the house of the master is opened to all. The king's possessions are all common, as cities, 
market-places, and public walks. We all share them equally. 

Mark the wise dispensation of God. That He might put mankind to shame, He hath made certain things 
common, as the sun, air, earth, and water, the heaven, the sea, the light, the stars; whose benefits are 
dispensed equally to all as brethren. We are all formed with the same eyes, the same body, the same soul, 
the same structure in all respects, (1) all things from the earth, all men from one man, and all in the same 
habitation. But these are not enough to shame us. Other things then (as we have said) He hath made 
common, as baths, cities, market-places, walks. And observe, that concerning things that are common there 
is no contention, but all is peaceable. But when one attempts to possess himself of anything, to make it his 
own, then contention is introduced, as if nature herself were indignant, that when God brings us together in 
every way, we are eager to divide and separate ourselves by appropriating things, and by using those cold 
words "mine and thine." Then there is contention and uneasiness. But where this is not, no strife or 
contention is bred. This state therefore is rather our inheritance, and more agreeable to nature. Why is it, that 
there is never a dispute about a market-place? Is it not because it is common to all? But about a house, and 
about property, men are always disputing. Things necessary are set before us in common; but even in the 
least things we do not observe a community. Yet those greater things He hath opened freely to all, that we 
might thence be instructed to have these inferior things in common. Yet for all this, we are not instructed. 
But as I said, how can he, who is rich, be a good man? When he distributes his riches, he is good, so that he 
is good when he has ceased to have it, when he gives it to others; but whilst he keeps it himself, he is not 
good. How then is that a good which being retained renders men evil, being parted with makes them good? 
Not therefore to have wealth, but to have it not, makes one appear to be good. Wealth therefore is not a 
good. But if, when you can receive it, you receive it not, again you are good. 

If then we are good, when having it, we distribute it to others; or when offered to us we refuse it, and if we are 
not good, when we receive or gain it, how can it be a good thing in itself? Call it not therefore a good. You 
possess it not, because you think it a good, because you are anxious to possess it. Cleanse thy mind, and 
rectify thy judgment, and then thou wilt be good. Learn what are really goods. What are they? Virtue and 
benevolence. These and not that, are truly good. According to this rule, the more charitable thou art, the 
more good thou wilt be considered. But if thou art rich, thou art no longer good. Let us therefore become thus 
good, that we may be really good, and may obtain the good things to come in Jesus Christ, with whom, &c. 

HOMILY XIII. 

1 TIMOTHY iv. 11—14. 

"These things command and teach. Let no man despise thy youth; but be thou an example of the believers, 
in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity. Till I come, give attendance to reading, to 
exhortation, to doctrine. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with the laying 
on of the hands of the presbytery." 

IN some cases it is necessary to command, in others to teach; if therefore you command in those cases 
where teaching is required, you will become ridiculous. Again, if you teach where you ought to command, 
you are exposed to the same reproach. For instance, it is not proper to teach a man not to be wicked, but to 
command; to forbid it with all authority. Not to profess Judaism, should be a command, but teaching is 
required, when you would lead men to part with their possessions, to profess virginity, or when you would 
discourse of faith. Therefore Paul mentions both: "Command and teach." When a man uses amulets, or 

does anything of that kind, knowing it to be wrong, he requires only a command; but he who does it 

ignorantly, is to be taught his error. "Let no one despise thy youth." 

Observe that it becomes a priest to command and to speak authoritatively, and not always to teach. But 

because, from a common prejudice, youth is apt to be despised, therefore he says, "Let no man despise 

thy youth." For a teacher ought not to be exposed to contempt. But if he is not to be despised, what room is 

there for meekness and moderation? Indeed the contempt that he fails into personally he ought to bear; for 

teaching is commended by longsuffering. But not so, where others are concerned; for this is not meekness, 

but coldness. If a man revenge insults, and ill language, and injuries offered to himself, you justly blame him. 

But where the salvation of others is concerned, command, and interpose with authority. This is not a case for 

moderation, but for authority, lest the public good suffer. He enjoins one or the other as the case may 

require. Let no one despise thee on account of thy youth. For as long as thy life is a counterpoise, thou wilt 

not be despised for thy youth, but even the more admired: therefore he proceeds to say, 

"But be thou an example of the believers in word, in conversation, in charity, in faith, in purity." In all things 

showing thyself an example of good works: that is, be thyself a pattern of a Christian life, as a model set 

before others, as a living law, as a rule and standard of good living, for such ought a teacher to be. "In word," 

that he may speak with facility, "in conversation, in charity, in faith, in "true "purity, in temperance." 

"Till I come give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine." 

Even Timothy is commanded to apply to reading. Let us then be instructed not to neglect the study of the 

sacred writings. Again, observe, he says, "Till I come." Mark how he consoles him, for being as it were an 

orphan, when separated from him, it was natural that he should require such comfort. "Till I come," he says, 

give attendance to reading the divine writings, to exhortation of one another, to teaching of all. 

"Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy." 

Here he calls teaching prophecy. (1) 

"With the laying on of the hands of the presbytery." He speaks not here of Presbyters, but of Bishops. For 

Presbyters cannot be supposed to have ordained a Bishop. 

Ver. 15. "Meditate upon these things; give thyself wholly to them." 

Observe how often he gives him counsel concerning the same things, thus showing that a teacher ought 

above all things to be attentive to these points. 

Ver. 16. "Take heed," he says, "unto thyself, and unto the doctrine: continue in them." That is, take heed to 

thyself, and teach others also. 

"For in so doing thou shalt both save thyself and them that hear thee." 

It is well said, "Thou shalt save thyself." For he that is "nourished up in the words of sound doctrine," first 

receives the benefit of it himself. From admonishing others, he is touched with compunction himself. For 

these things are not said to Timothy only, but to all. And if such advice is addressed to him, who raised the 

dead, what shall be said to us? Christ also shows the duty of teachers, when He says, "The kingdom of 

heaven is like unto an householder, who bringeth forth out of his treasure things new and old." ( Matt. xiii. 52.) 

And the blessed. Paul gives the same advice, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might 

have hope." (Rom. xv. 4.) This he practiced above all men, being brought up in the law of his fathers, at the 

feet of Gamaliel, whence he would afterwards naturally apply to reading: for he who exhorted others would 

himself first follow the advice he gave. Hence we find him continually appealing to the testimony of the 

prophets, and searching into their writings. Paul then applies to reading, for it is no slight advantage that is to 

be reaped from the Scriptures. But we are indolent, and we hear with carelessness and indifference. What 

punishment do we not deserve! 

"That thy profiting may appear," he says, "to all." 

Thus he would have him appear great and admirable in this respect also, showing that this was still 

necessary for him, for he wished that his "profiting should appear" not only in his life, but in the word of 

doctrine. 

Cha p. v. ve r. 1 . "Rebuke not an elder." 

Is he now speaking of the order? I think not, but of any elderly man. What then if he should need correction? 

Do not rebuke him, but address him as you would a father offending. 

Ver. 1 . "The elder women as mothers, the younger men as brethren; the younger women as sisters, with all 

purity." 

Rebuke is in its own nature offensive, particularly when it is addressed to an old man, and when it proceeds 

from a young man too, there is a threefold show of forwardness. By the manner and the mildness of it, 

therefore, he would soften it. For it is possible to reprove without offense, if one will only make a point of this: 

it requires great discretion, but it may be done. 

"The younger men as brethren." Why does he recommend this too here? With a view to the high spirit 

natural to young men, whence it is proper to soften reproof to them also with moderation. 

"The younger women as sisters"; he adds, "with all purity." Tell me not, he means, of merely avoiding sinful 

intercourse with them There should not be even a suspicion. For since intimacy with young women is always 

suspicious, and yet a Bishop cannot always avoid it, he shows by adding these words, that "all purity" is 
required in such intimacy. But does Paul give this advice to Timothy? Yes, he says, for I am speaking to the 
world through him. But if Timothy was thus advised, let others consider what sort of conduct is required of 
them, that they should give no ground for suspicion, no shadow of pretext, to those who wish to calumniate. 
Ver. 3. "Honor widows, that are widows indeed." 

Why does he say nothing of virginity, nor command us to honor virgins? Perhaps there were not yet any 
professing that state, or they might have fallen from it. "For some," he says, "are already turned aside after 
Satan." (1 Tim. v. 15.) For a woman may have lost her husband, and yet not be truly a widow. As in order to 
be a virgin, it is not enough to be a stranger to marriage, but many other things are necessary, as 
blamelessness and perseverance; so the loss of a husband does not constitute a widow, but patience, with 
chastity and separation from all men. Such widows he justly bids us honor, or rather support. For they need 
support, being left desolate, and having no husband to stand up for them. Their state appears to the 
multitude despicable and inauspicious. Therefore he wishes them to receive the greater honor from the 
Priest, and the more so, because they are worthy of it. 

Ver. 4. "But if any widow have children or grandchildren, let them learn first to show piety at home, and to 
requite their parents." 

Observe the discretion of Paul; how often he urges men from human considerations. For he does not here 
lay down any great and lofty motive, but one that is easy to be understood: "to requite their parents." How? 
For bringing them up and educating them. As if he should say, Thou has received from them great care. 
They are departed. Thou canst not requite them. For thou didst not bring them forth, nor nourish them. 
Requite them(1) in their descendants, repay the debt through the children. "Let them learn first to show piety 
at home." Here he more simply exhorts them to acts of kindness; then to excite them the more, he adds, 
"For that is good and acceptable before God." And as he had spoken of those "who are widows indeed," 
he declares who is indeed a widow. 

Ver. 5. "Now she that is a widow indeed, and desolate, trusteth in God, and continueth in supplications and 
prayers night and day. But she that liveth in pleasure is dead while she liveth." 

She who being a widow has not made choice of a worldly life, is a widow indeed; she who trusts in God as 
she ought, and continues instant in prayer night and day, is a widow indeed. Not that she, who has children, 
is not a widow indeed. For he commends her who brings up children as she ought. But if any one has not 
children, he means, she is desolate, and her he consoles, saying, that she is most truly a widow, who has 
lost not only the consolation of a husband, but that arising from children, yet she has God in the place of all. 
She is not the worse for not having children, but He fills up her need with consolation, in that she is without 
children. What he says amounts to this. Grieve not, when it is said that a widow ought to bring up children, as 
if, because thou hast no children thy worth were on that account inferior. Thou art a widow indeed, whereas 
she who liveth in pleasure is dead while she liveth. 

But since many who have children choose(1) the state of widowhood, not to cut off the occasions of a 
worldly life, but rather to enhance them, that they may do what they will with the greater license, and indulge 
the more freely in worldly lusts: therefore he says, "She that liveth in pleasure is dead while she liveth." 
Ought not a widow then to live in pleasure? Surely not. If then when nature and age is weak, a life of pleasure 
is not allowable, but leads to death, eternal death; what have men to say, who live a life of pleasure? But he 
says with reason, "She that liveth in pleasure is dead while she liveth." But that thou mayest see this, let us 
now see what is the state of the dead, and what of the living, and in which shall we place such an one? The 
living perform the works of life, of that future life, which is truly life. And Christ has declared what are the works 
of that future life, with which we ought always to be occupied. "Come, inherit the kingdom prepared for you 
from the foundation of the world. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat. I was thirsty, and ye gave me 
drink." (Matt. xxv. 34, 35.) The living differ from the dead, not only in that they behold the sun, and breathe the 
air, but in that they are doing some good. For if this be wanting, the living are not better than the dead. That 
you may learn this, hear how it is possible that even the dead should live. For it is said, "God is not the God 
of the dead, but of the living." (Matt. xxii. 32.) But this again you say is a riddle. Let us therefore solve them 
both. A man who liveth in pleasure, is dead whilst he liveth. For he liveth only to his belly. In his other senses 
he lives not. He sees not what he ought to see, he hears not what he ought to hear, he speaks not what he 
ought to speak. Nor does he perform the actions of the living. But as he who is stretched upon a bed, with his 
eyes closed, and his eyelids fast, perceives nothing that is passing; so it is with this man, or rather not so, 
but worse. For the one is equally insensible to things good and evil, but the latter is sensible to things evil 
only, but as insensible as the former to things good. Thus he is dead. For nothing relating to the life to come 
moves or affects him. For intemperance, taking him into her own bosom, as into some dark and dismal 
cavern, full of all uncleanness, causes him to dwell altogether in darkness, like the dead. For when all his 
time is spent between feasting and drunkenness, is he not dead, and buried in darkness? Even in the 
morning when he seems to be sober, he is not sober in reality, since he has not yet rid and cleansed himself 
of yesterday's excess and is still longing for a repetition, and in that his evening and noon he passes in 

revels, and all the night, and most of the morning in deep sleep. 

Is he then to be numbered with the living? Who can describe that storm that comes of luxury, that assails his 
soul and body? For as a sky continually clouded admits not the sunbeams to shine through it, so the fumes 
of luxury and wine enveloping his brain, as if it were some rock, and casting over it a thick mist, suffer not 
reason to exert itself, but overspread the drunken man with profound darkness. With him who is thus 
affected, how great must be the storm within, how violent the tumult. As when a flood of water has risen, and 
has surmounted the entrances of the workshops, (1) we see all the inmates in confusion, and using tubs and 
pitchers and sponges, and many other contrivances to bale it out, that it may not both undermine the 
building, and spoil all that is contained in it: so it is when luxury overwhelms the soul; its reasonings within are 
disturbed. What is already collected, cannot be discharged, and by the introduction of more, a violent storm 
is raised. For look not at the cheerful and merry countenance, but examine the interior, and you will see it full 
of deep dejection. If it were possible to bring the soul into view, and to behold it with our bodily eyes, that of 
the luxurious would seem depressed, mournful, miserable, and wasted with leanness; for the more the body 
grows sleek and gross, the more lean and weakly is the soul; and the more one is pampered, (8) the more is 
the other hampered. (4) As, when the pupil of the eye has the external coats over it too thick, it cannot put forth 
the power of vision, (5) and look out, because the light is excluded by the thick covering, and darkness often 
ensues; so when the body is constantly full fed, the soul must be invested with grossness. But the dead rot, 
and are corrupted, you say; and an unwholesome moisture distills from them. So in her "that liveth in 
pleasure," may be seen rheums, and phlegm, catarrh, hiccough, vomitings, eructations, and the like, which, 
as too unseemly, I forbear to name, For such is the dominion of luxury, that it makes one endure things, 
which we do not even think proper to mention. 

But you still ask, how is the body dissolved whilst it yet eats and drinks? Surely this is no sign of human life, 
since creatures without reason too eat and drink. Where the soul lies dead, what do eating and drinking 
avail? The dead body, that is invested with a flowery garment, is not benefited by it, and when a blooming 
body invests a dead soul, the soul is not benefited. For when its whole discourse is of cooks, and caterers, 
and confectioners, and it utters nothing pious, (1) is it not dead? For let us consider what is man? The 
Heathens say that he is a rational animal, mortal, capable of intelligence and knowledge. But let us not take 
our definition from them, but whence? From the sacred writings. Where then has the Scripture given a 
definition of man? Hear its words. "There was a man perfect and upright, one that feared God, and 
eschewed evil." (Job i. 2.) This was indeed a man! Again, another says, "Man is great, and the merciful man 
is precious." (Prov. xx. 6, Sept.) Those who answer not to this description, though they partake of mind, and 
are never so capable of knowledge, the Scripture refuses to acknowledge them as men, but calls them 
dogs, and horses, and serpents, and foxes, and wolves, and if there be any animals more contemptible. If 
such then is man, he that liveth in pleasure is not a man; for how can he be, who never thinks of anything that 
he ought? Luxury and sobriety cannot exist together: they are destructive of one another. Even the Heathens 
say, 

"A heavy paunch bears not a subtle mind. "(2) Such as these the Scripture calls men without souls. "My Spirit 
(it is said) shall not always abide in these men, because they are flesh." (Gen. vi. 3, Sept.) Yet they had a 
soul, but because it was dead in them, He calls them flesh. For as in the case of the virtuous, though they 
have a body, we say, "he is all soul, he is all spirit," so the reverse is said of those who are otherwise. So 
Paul also said of those, who did not fulfill the works of the flesh, "Ye are not in the flesh." (Rom. viii. 9.) Thus 
those who live in luxury are not in the soul or in the spirit. 

MORAL. "She that liveth in pleasure is dead while she liveth." Hear this, ye women, that pass your time in 
revels and intemperance, and who neglect the poor, pining and perishing with hunger, whilst you are 
destroying yourself with continual luxury. Thus you are the causes of two deaths, of those who are dying of 
want, and of your own, both through ill measure. But if out of your fullness you tempered their want, you would 
save two lives. Why do you thus gorge your own body with excess, and waste that of the poor with want; why 
pamper this above measure, and stint that too beyond measure? Consider what comes of food, into what it 
is changed. Are you not disgusted at its being named? Why then be eager for such accumulations? The 
increase of luxury is but the multiplication of dung! For nature has her limits, and what is beyond these is not 
nourishment, but injury, and the increase of ordure. Nourish the body, but do not destroy it. Food is called 
nourishment, to show that its design is not to injure the body, but to nourish it. For this reason perhaps food 
passes into excrement, that we may not be lovers of luxury. For if it were not so, if it were not useless and 
injurious to the body, we should not cease from devouring one another. If the belly received as much as it 
pleased, digested it, and conveyed it to the body, we should see wars and battles innumerable. Even now 
when part of our food passes into ordure, part into blood, part into spurious and useless phlegm, we are 
nevertheless so addicted to luxury, that we spend perhaps whole estates on a meal. What should we not 
do, if this were not the end of luxury? The more luxuriously we live, the more noisome are the odors with 
which we are filled. The body is like a swollen bottle, running out every way. The eructations are such as to 
pain the head of a bystander. From the heat of fermentation within, vapors are sent forth, as from a furnace, if 

bystanders are pained, what, think you, is the brain within continually suffering, assailed by these fumes? to 
say nothing of the channels of the heated and obstructed blood, of those reservoirs, the liver and the 
spleen, and of the canals by which the faeces are discharged. The drains in our streets we take care to 
keep unobstructed. We cleanse our sewers with poles and drags, that they may not be stopped, or 
overflow, but the canals of our bodies we do not keep clear, but obstruct and choke them up, and when the 
filth rises to the very throne of the king, I mean the brain, we do not regard it, treating it not like a worthy king, 
but like an unclean brute. God hath purposely removed to a distance those unclean members, that we might 
not receive offense from them. But we suffer it not to be so, and spoil all by our excess. And other evils might 
be mentioned. To obstruct the sewers is to breed a pestilence; but if a stench from without is pestilential, that 
which is pent up within the body, and cannot find a vent, what disorders must it not produce both to body and 
soul? Some have strangely complained, wondering why God has ordained that we should bear a load of 
ordure with us. But they themselves increase the load. God designed thus to detach us from luxury, and to 
persuade us not to attach ourselves to worldly things. But thou art not thus to be persuaded to cease from 
gluttony, but though it is but as far as the throat, and as long as the hour of eating, nay not even so long, that 
the pleasure abides, thou continuest in thine indulgence. Is it not true that as soon as it has passed the 
palate and the throat, the pleasure ceases? For the sense of it is in the taste, and after that is gratified, a 
nausea succeeds, the stomach not digesting the food, or not without much difficulty. Justly then is it said, that 
"she that liveth in pleasure is dead while she liveth." For the luxurious soul is unable to hear or to see 
anything. It becomes weak, ignoble, unmanly, illiberal, cowardly, full of impudence, servility, ignorance, 
rage, violence, and all kinds of evil, and destitute of the opposite virtues. Therefore he says, 
Ver. 7. "These things give in charge, that they may be blameless." 

He does not leave it to their choice. Command them, he says, not to be luxurious, assuming it to be 
confessedly an evil, as not holding it lawful or admissible for the luxurious to partake of the Holy Mysteries. 
"These things command," he says, "that they may be blameless." Thus you see it is reckoned among sins. 
For if it were a matter of choice, though it were left undone, we might still be blameless. Therefore in 
obedience to Paul, let us command the luxurious widow not to have place in the list of widows. (1) For if a 
soldier, who frequents the bath, the theater, the busy scenes of life, is judged to desert his duty, much more 
the widows. Let us then not seek our rest here, that we may find it hereafter. Let us not live in pleasure here, 
that we may hereafter enjoy true pleasure, true delight, which brings no evil with it, but infinite good. Of which 
God grant that we may all be partakers, in Jesus Christ, with whom, &c. 

HOMILIES OF ST. JOHN CHRYSOSTOM ON THE FIRST 
EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL THE APOSTLE TO TIMOTHY, 
HOMILIES XIV TO XVIII (CHAPTERS 5 & 6) 

HOMILY XIV. 

1 TIMOTHY V. 8. 

"But if any provide not for his own, and especially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith, and is 
worse than an infidel." 

MANY consider that their own virtue is sufficient for their salvation, and if they duly regulate their own life, that 
nothing further is wanting to save them. But in this they greatly err, which is proved by the example of him who 
buried his one talent, for he brought it back not diminished but entire, and just as it had been delivered to 
him. It is shown also by the blessed Paul, who says here, "If any one provide not for his own." The provision 
of which he speaks is universal, and relates to the soul as well as the body, since both are to be provided 
for. 

"If any provide not for his own, and especially for those of his own house," that is, those who are nearly 
related to him, "he is worse than an infidel." And so says Isaiah, the chief of the Prophets, "Thou shalt not 
overlook thy kinsmen of thy own seed." (Isa. Iviii. 7, Sept.) For if a man deserts, those who are united by ties 
of kindred and affinity, how shall he be affectionate towards others? Will it not have the appearance of 
vainglory, when benefiting others he slights his own relations, and does not provide for them? And what will 
be said, if instructing others, he neglects his own, though he has greater facilities; and a higher obligation to 
benefit them? Will it not be said, These Christians are affectionate indeed, who neglect their own 
relatives?(2) "He is worse than an infidel." Wherefore? Because the latter, if he benefits not aliens, does not 
neglect his near kindred. What is meant is this: The law of God and of nature is violated by him who 
provides not for his own family. But if he who provides not for them has denied the faith, and is worse than an 
infidel, where shall he be ranked who has injured his relatives? With whom shall he be placed? But how has 
he denied the faith? Even as it is said, "They profess that they know God, but in works they deny Him." (Tit. i. 
16.) What has God, in whom they believe, commanded? "Hide not thyself from thine own flesh." (Isa. Iviii. 7.) 
How does he then believe who thus denies God? Let those consider this, who to spare their wealth neglect 
their kindred. It was the design of God, in uniting us by the ties of kindred, to afford us many opportunities of 
doing good to one another. When therefore thou neglectest a duty which infidels perform, hast thou not 
denied the faith? For it is not faith merely to profess belief, but to do works worthy of faith. And it is possible in 
each particular to believe and not to believe. (3) For since he had spoken of luxury and self-indulgence, he 
says that it is not for this only that such a woman is punished, because she is luxurious, but because her 
luxury compels her to neglect her household. This he says with reason; for she that liveth to the belly, 
perishes hereby also, as "having denied the faith." But how is she worse than an infidel? Because it is not 
the same thing to neglect our kindred, as to neglect a stranger. How should it be? But the fault is greater 
here, to desert one known than one who is unknown to us, a friend than one who is not a friend. 
Ver. 9, 10. "Let not a widow be taken into the number under threescore years old, having been the wife of 
one man. Well reported of for good works." 

He had said, "Let them learn first to show piety at home, and to requite their parents." He had also said, 
"She that liveth in pleasure is dead whilst she liveth." He had said, "If she(1) provides not for her own she is 
worse than an infidel." Having mentioned the qualities which not to have would render a woman unworthy to 
be reckoned among the widows, he now mentions what she ought to have besides. What then? are we to 
receive her for her years? What merit is there in that? It is not her own doing that she is threescore years old. 
Therefore he does not speak of her age merely, as, if she has even reached those years, she may not yet, 
he says, without good works, be reckoned among the number. But why then is he particular about the age? 
He afterwards assigns a cause not originating with himself, but with the widows themselves. Meanwhile let 
us hear what follows. "Well reported of for good works, if she have brought up children." Truly, it is no 
unimportant work to bring up children; but bringing them up is not merely taking care of them; they must be 
brought up well; as he said before, "If they continue in faith, and charity, and holiness." (1 Tim. ii. 15.) 
Observe how constantly he sets kindnesses to our own relatives before those to strangers. First he says, "If 
she have brought up children," then, "If she have lodged strangers, if she have washed the Saints' feet, if 

she have relieved the afflicted, if she have diligently followed every good work." But what if she be poor? 
Not even in that case is she debarred from bringing up children, lodging strangers, relieving the afflicted. 
She is not more destitute than the widow who gave the two mites. Poor though she be, she has an house, 
she does not lodge in the open air. "If," he says, "she have washed the Saints' feet." This is not a costly 
work. "If she have diligently followed every good work." What precept does he give here? He exhorts them 
to contribute bodily service, for women are peculiarly fitted for such attendance, for making the bed of the 
sick, and composing them to rest. 

Strange! what strictness does he require of widows; almost as much as of the Bishop himself. For he says, 
"If she have diligently followed every good work." This is as though he meant that, if she could not of herself 
perform it, she shared and cooperated in it. When he cuts off luxury, he would have her provident, a good 
economist, and at the same time continually persevering in prayer. Such was Anna. Such strictness does he 
require of widows. Greater even than of virgins, from whom he yet requires much strictness, and eminent 
virtue. For when he speaks of "that which is comely," and "that she may attend upon the Lord without 
distraction" (1 Cor. vii. 35), he gives, in a manner, a summary of all virtue. You see that it is not merely the not 
contracting a second marriage that is enough to make a widow, many other things are necessary. But why 
does he discourage second marriages? Is the thing condemned? By no means. That is heretical. Only he 
would have her henceforth occupied in spiritual things, transferring all her care to virtue. For marriage is not 
an impure state, but one of much occupation. He speaks of their having leisure, not of their being more pure 
by remaining unmarried. For marriage certainly implies much secular engagement. If you abstain from 
marriage that you may have leisure for the service of God, and yet do not so employ that leisure, it is of no 
advantage to you, (if you do not use your leisure,) to perform all services to strangers, and to the Saints. (2) If 
you do not thus, you abstain from marriage not for any good end, but as though you condemned the state. 
So the virgin, who is not truly crucified to the world, by declining marriage, appears to condemn it as 
accursed and impure. 

Observe, the hospitality here spoken of is not merely a friendly reception, but one given with zeal and 
alacrity, with readiness, and going about it as if one were receiving Christ Himself. The widows should 
perform these services themselves, not commit them to their handmaids. For Christ said, "If I your Master 
and Lord have washed your feet, ye ought also to wash one another's feet." (John xiii. 14.) And though a 
woman may be very rich, and of the highest rank, vain of her birth and noble family, there is not the same 
distance between her and others, as between God and the disciples. If thou receivest the stranger as Christ, 
be not ashamed, but rather glory: but if you receive him not as Christ, receive him not at all. "He that 
receiveth you," He said, "receiveth Me." (Matt. x. 40.) If you do not so receive him, you have no reward. 
Abraham was receiving men that passed as travelers, as he thought, and he did not leave to his servants to 
make the preparations for their entertainment, but took the greater part of the service upon himself, and 
commanded his wife to mix the flour, though he had three hundred and eighteen servants born in his house, 
of whom there must have been many(1) maidservants; but he wished that himself and his wife should have 
the reward, not of the cost only, but of the service. Thus ought we ever to exercise hospitality by our own 
personal exertions, that we may be sanctified, and our hands be blessed. And if thou givestto the poor, 
disdain not thyself to give it, for it is not to the poor that it is given, but to Christ; and who is so wretched, as to 
disdain to stretch out his own hand to Christ? 

This is hospitality, this is truly to do it for God's sake. But if you give orders with pride, though you bid him 
take the first place, it is not hospitality, it is not done for God's sake. The stranger requires much attendance, 
much encouragement, and with all this it is difficult for him not to feel abashed; for so delicate is his position, 
that whilst he receives the favor, he is ashamed. That shame we ought to remove by the most attentive 
service, and to show by words and actions, that we do not think we are conferring a favor, but receiving one, 
that we are obliging less than we are obliged. So much does good will multiply the kindness. For as he who 
considers himself a loser, and thinks that he is doing a favor, destroys all the merit of it; so he who looks 
upon himself as receiving a kindness, increases the reward. "For God loveth a cheerful giver." (2 Cor. ix. 7.) 
So that you are rather indebted to the poor man for receiving your kindness. For if there were no poor, the 
greater part of your sins would not be removed. They are the healers of your wounds, their hands are 
medicinal to you. The physician, extending his hand to apply a remedy, does not exercise the healing art 
more than the poor man, who stretches out his hand to receive your alms, and thus becomes a cure(2) for 
your ills. You give your money, and with it your sins pass away. Such were the Priests of old, of whom it was 
said, "They eat up the sin of My people." (Hosea iv. 8.) Thus thou receivest more than thou givest, thou art 
benefited more than thou benefitest. Thou lendest to God, not to men. Thou increasest thy wealth, rather 
than diminishest it. But if thou dost not lessen it by giving, then it is indeed diminished! 
"If she have received strangers, if she have washed the Saints' feet." But who are these? The distressed 
saints, not any saints whatever. For there may be saints, who are much waited on by every one. Do not visit 
these, who are in the enjoyment of plenty, but those who are in tribulation, who are unknown, or known to few. 
He who hath "done it unto the least of these," He saith, "hath done it unto Me." (Matt. 

XXV. 40.) 

MORAL. Give not thy alms to those who preside in the Church to distribute. Bestow it thyself, that thou mayest 
have the reward not of giving merely, but of kind service. Give with thine own hands. Cast into the furrow 
thyself. Here it is not required to handle the plow, to yoke the ox, to wait the season, nor to break up the 
earth, or to contend with the frost. No such trouble is required here, where thou sowest for heaven, where 
there is no frost nor winter nor any such thing. Thou sowest in souls, where no one taketh away what is sown, 
but it is firmly retained with all care and diligence. Cast the seed thyself, why deprive thyself of thy reward. 
There is great reward in dispensing(3) even what belongs to others. There is a reward not only for giving, 
but for dispensing well the things that are given. Why wilt thou not have this reward? For that there is a reward 
for this, hear how we read that the Apostles appointed Stephen to the ministry of the widows. (Acts vi. 5-7.) 
Be thou the dispenser of thine own gifts. Thine own benevolence and the fear of God appoint thee to that 
ministry. Thus vainglory is excluded. This refreshes the soul, this sanctifies the hands, this pulls down pride. 
This teaches thee philosophy, this inflames thy zeal, this makes thee to receive blessings. Thy head, as 
thou departest, receives all the blessings of the widows. 

Be more earnest in thy prayers. Inquire diligently for holy men, men that are truly such, who, in the retirement 
of the desert, cannot beg, but are wholly devoted to God. Take a long journey to visit them, and give with 
thine own hand. For thou mayest profit much in thine own person, if thou givest. Dost thou see their tents, their 
lodging? dost thou see the desert? dost thou see the solitude? Often when thou hast gone to bestow money, 
thou givest thine whole soul. Thou art detained, and hast become his fellow-captive, and hast been alike 
estranged from the world. 

It is of great benefit even to see the poor. "It is better," he saith, "to go to the house of mourning, than to the 
house of feasting." (Eccles. vii. 2.) By the latter the soul is inflamed. For if thou canst imitate the luxury, then 
thou art encouraged to self-indulgence, and if thou canst not, thou art grieved. In the house of mourning there 
is nothing of this kind. If thou canst not afford to be luxurious, thou art not pained; and if thou canst, thou art 
restrained. Monasteries are indeed houses of mourning. There is sackcloth and ashes, there is solitude, 
there is no laughter, no pressure of worldly business. There is fasting, and lying upon the ground; there is no 
impure savor of rich food, no blood shed,(1) no tumult, no disturbance, or crowding. There is a serene 
harbor. They are as lights shining from a lofty place to mariners afar off. They are stationed at the port, 
drawing all men to their own calm, and preserving from shipwreck those who gaze on them, and not letting 
those walk in darkness who look thither. Go to them, and make friends with them, embrace their holy feet, 
more honorable to touch than the heads of others. If some clasp the feet of statues, because they bear but a 
likeness of the king, wilt thou not clasp his feet who has Christ within him, and be saved? The Saints' feet are 
holy, though they are poor men, but not even the head of the profane is honorable. Such efficacy is there in 
the feet of the Saints, that when they shake off the dust of their feet, they inflict punishment. When a saint is 
among us, let us not be ashamed of anything that belongs to him. (2) And all are saints, who unite a holy life 
with a right faith and though they do not work miracles nor cast out devils, still they are saints. 
Go then to their tabernacles. To go to the monastery of a holy man a is to pass, as it were from earth to 
heaven. Thou seest not there what is seen in a private house. That company is free from all impurity. There 
is silence and profound quiet. The words "mine and thine" are not in use among them. And if thou remainest 
there a whole day or even two, the more pleasure thou wilt enjoy. There, as soon as it is day, or rather 
before day, the cock crows, and you see it not as you may see it(4) in a house, the servants snoring, the 
doors shut, all sleeping like the dead, whilst the muleteer without is ringing his bells. There is nothing of all 
this. All, immediately shaking off sleep, reverently rise when their President calls them, and forming 
themselves into a holy choir, they stand, and lifting up their hands all at once sing the sacred hymns. For 
they are not like us, who require many hours to shake off sleep from our heavy heads. We indeed, as soon 
as we are waked, sit some time stretching our limbs, go as nature calls, then proceed to wash our face and 
our hands; afterwards we take our shoes and clothes, and a deal of time is spent. 
It is not so there. No one calls for his servant, for each waits upon himself: neither does, he require many 
clothes, nor need to shake off sleep. For as soon as he opens his eyes, he is like one who has been long 
awake in collectedness.(5) For when the heart is not stifled within by excess of food, it soon recovers itself, 
and is immediately wakeful. The hands are always pure; for his sleep is composed and regular. No one 
among them is found snoring or breathing hard, or tossing about in sleep, or with his body exposed; but they 
lie in sleep as decently as those who are awake, and all this is the effect "of the orderly state of their souls. 
These are truly saints and angels among men. And marvel not when you hear these things. For their great 
fear of God suffers them not to go down into the depths of sleep, and to drown their minds, but it falls lightly 
upon them, merely affording them rest. And as their sleep is, such are their dreams, not full of wild fancies 
and monstrous visions. 

But, as I said, at the crowing of the cock their President comes, and gently touching the(6) sleeper with his 
foot, rouses them all. For there are none sleeping naked. Then as soon as they have arisen they stand up, 
and sing the prophetic hymns with much harmony, and well composed tunes. And neither harp nor pipe nor 

other musical instrument utters such sweet melodies, as you hear from the singing of these saints in their 
deep and quiet solitudes. And the songs themselves too are suitable, and full of the love of God. "In the 
night," they say, "lift up your hands unto God. With my soul have I desired Thee in the night, yea with my spirit 
within me will I seek Thee early," (Isa. xxvi. 9.) And the Psalms of David, that cause fountains of tears to flow. 
For when he sings, "I am weary with my groaning, all the night make I my bed to swim; I water my couch with 
my tears" (Ps. vi. 6): and, again, "I have eaten ashes like bread." (Ps. cii. 9.) "What is man that thou art 
mindful of him?" (Ps. viii. 4.) "Man is like to vanity, his days are as a shadow that passeth away." (Ps. cxliv. 4.) 
"Be not afraid when one is made rich, when the glory of his house is increased" (Ps. xlix. 16); and, "Who 
maketh men to be of one mind in a house" (Ps. Ixviii. 6): and, "Seven times a day do I praise Thee, because 
of Thy righteous judgments" (Ps. cxix. 164): and, "At midnight will I rise to give thanks unto Thee, because of 
Thy righteous judgments" (Ps. cxix. 62): and, "God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave" (Ps. xlix. 
15): and, "Though I walkthrough the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for Thou art with me" 
(Ps. xxiii. 4): and, "I will not be afraid for the terror by night, nor for the arrow that flieth by day, nor for the 
pestilence that walketh in darkness, nor for the destruction that wasteth at noonday" (Ps. xci. 5, 6): and, "We 
are counted as sheep for the slaughter" (Ps. xliv. 22): he expresses their ardent love to God. And again, 
when they sing with the Angels, (for Angels too are singing then,) "Praise ye the Lord from the Heavens." 
(Ps. cxlviii. 1 .) And we meanwhile are snoring, or scratching our heads, or lying supine meditating endless 
deceits. (1) Think what it was for them to spend the whole night in this employment. 

And when the day is coming on, they take rest again; for when we begin our works, they have a season of 
rest. (2) But each of us, when it is day, calls upon his neighbor, takes account of his outgoings, then(3) goes 
into the forum; trembling he appears before the magistrate, and dreads a reckoning. Another visits the 
stage, another goes about his own business. But these holy men, having performed their morning prayers 
and hymns, proceed to the reading of the Scriptures. There are some too that have learned to write out 
books, each having his own apartment assigned to him, where he lives in perpetual quiet; no one is trifling, 
not one speaks a word. Then at the third, sixth, and ninth hours, and in the evening, they perform their 
devotions, having divided the day into four parts, and at the conclusion of each they honor God with psalms 
and hymns, and whilst others are dining, laughing, and sporting, and bursting with gluttony, they are 
occupied with their hymns. For they have no time for the table nor for these things of sense. After their 
meal(4) they again pursue the same course, having previously given themselves a while to sleep. The men 
of the world sleep during the day: but these watch during the night. Truly children of light are they! And while 
the former, having slept away the greater part of the day, go forth oppressed with heaviness, these are still 
collected, (5) remaining without food(6) till the evening, and occupied in hymns. Other men, when evening 
overtakes them, hasten to the baths, and different recreations, but these, being relieved from their labors, 
then betake themselves to their table, not calling up a multitude of servants, nor throwing the house into 
bustle and confusion, nor setting before them high-seasoned dishes, and rich-steaming viands, but some 
only partaking of bread and salt, to which others add oil, whilst the weakly have also herbs and pulse. Then 
after sitting a short time, or rather after concluding all with hymns, they each go to rest upon a bed made for 
repose only and not for luxury. There is no dread of magistrates, no lordly arrogance, no terror of slaves, no 
disturbance of women or children, no multitudes of chests, or superfluous laying by of garments, no gold or 
silver, no guards and sentinels, no storehouse. Nothing of all these, but all there is full of prayer, of hymns, 
and of a spiritual savor. Nothing carnal is there. They fear no attacks of robbers, having nothing of which 
they can be deprived, no wealth, but a soul and body, of which if they are robbed, it is not a loss but a gain. 
For it is said, "To me to live is Christ, and to die is gain." (Phil. i. 21 .) They have freed themselves from all 
bonds. Truly, "The voice of gladness is in the tabernacles of the righteous." (Ps. cxviii. 15.) 
There is no such thing to be heard there as wailing and lamentation. Their roof is free from that melancholy 
and those cries. Deaths happen there indeed, for their bodies are not immortal, but they know not death, as 
death. The departed are accompanied to the grave with hymns. This they call a procession, (7) not a 
burial;(8) and when it is reported that any one is dead, great is their cheerfulness, great their pleasure; or 
rather not one of them can bear to say that one is dead, but that he is perfected. Then there is thanksgiving, 
and great glory, and joy, every one praying that such may be his own end, that so his own combat may 
terminate, and he may rest from his labor and struggles, and may see Christ. And if any is sick, instead of 
tears and lamentations they have recourse to prayers. Often not the care of physicians, but faith alone 
relieves the sick. And if a physician be necessary, then too there is the greatest firmness and philosophy. 
There is no wife tearing her hair, nor children bewailing their orphan state before the time, nor slaves 
entreating the dying man to give them an assurance that they shall be committed to good hands. Escaping 
from all these, the soul looks but to one thing at its last breath, that it may depart in favor with God. And if 
disease occurs, the causes of it are matter of glory rather than of reproach, as in other cases. For it 
proceeds not from gluttony nor fullness of the head, but from intense watchfulness and fasting, or the like 
causes; and hence it is easily removed, for it is sufficient for its removal to abate the severity of these 
exercises. 

Tell me then, you will say, whether any one could wash the Saints' feet in the Church? Whether such are to 
be found among us? Yes: undoubtedly they are such. Let us not, however, when the life of these saints is 
described despise those that are in the Churches. There are many such often among us, though they are in 
secret. Nor let us despise them, because they go from house to house, or go into the forum, or stand forth in 
public. (1) God hath even commanded such services, saying, "Judge the fatherless, plead for the widow." 
(Isa. i. 17.) Many are the ways of being virtuous, as there are many varieties of jewels, (2) though all are 
called jewels; one is bright and round on all sides, another has some different beauty. And how is this? As 
coral has, by a kind of art, its line extended, and its angles shaped off, and another color more delicious 
than white, and the prasius above every green, another has the rich color of blood, another an azure 
surpassing the sea, another is more brilliant than the purple, and thus rivaling in their varieties all the colors 
of flowers or of the sun. Yet all are called jewels. So it is with the Saints. Some discipline^) themselves, 
some the Churches. Paul therefore has well said, "If she have washed the Saints' feet, if she have relieved 
the afflicted." For he speaks thus, that he may excite us all to imitation. Let us hasten then to perform such 
actions, that we may be able hereafter to boast that we have washed the Saints' feet. For if we ought to wash 
their feet, much more ought we to give them our money with our own hands, and at the same time study to be 
concealed. "Let not thy left hand know," He says, "what thy right hand doeth."(Matt. vi. 3.) 
Why takest thou so many witnesses? Let not thy servant know it, nor, if possible, thy wife. Many are the 
impediments of the deceitful one. Often she who never before interfered, will impede such works, either from 
vainglory, or some other motive. Even Abraham, who had an admirable wife, when he was about to offer up 
his son, concealed it from her, though he knew not what was to happen, but was fully persuaded that he must 
slaughter his son. What then, would any one that was but an ordinary man have said? Would it not be, "Who 
is this that perpetrates such acts?" Would he not have accused him of cruelty and brutality? His wife was not 
even allowed to see her son, to receive his last words, to witness his dying struggles. But he led him away 
like a captive. That just man though not of any such thing, inebriated as he was with zeal, (4) so that he 
looked only how to fulfill that which was commanded. No servant, no wife was present, nay, he himself knew 
not what would be the issue. But intent upon offering up a pure victim, he would not defile it with tears, or with 
any opposition. Mark too with what gentleness Isaac asks, "Behold the fire and the wood, but where is the 
lamb for a burnt offering?": and what was the father's answer? "My son, God will provide Himself a lamb for a 
burnt offering." (Gen. xxii. 7, 8.) In this he uttered a prophecy that God would provide Himself a burnt offering 
in His Son, and it also came true at the time. But why did he conceal it from him who was to be sacrificed? 
Because he feared lest he should be astounded, (5) lest he should prove unworthy. With such care and 
prudence did he act throughout this affair! Well then hath the Scripture said, "Let not thy left hand know what 
thy right hand doeth." If we have one dear to us as one of our own members, let us not be anxious to show to 
him our charitable works, unless it be necessary. For many evils may arise from it. A man is excited to 
vainglory, and impediments are often raised. For this reason let us conceal it, if possible, from our own 
selves, that we may attain the blessings promised, through the grace and lovingkindness of Jesus Christ 
our Lord, with whom, &c. 

HOMILY XV. 

1 TIMOTHY v. 11-15. 

"But the younger widows refuse: for when they have begun to wax wanton against Christ, they will marry; 
having condemnation, because they have cast off their first faith. And withal they learn to be idle, wandering 
about from house to house; and not only idle, but tattlers also and busybodies, speaking things which they 
ought not. I will therefore that the younger widows marry, bear children, guide the house, give none occasion 
to the adversary to speak reproachfully. For some are already turned aside after Satan." 
PAUL having discoursed much concerning widows, and having settled the age at which they were to be 
admitted, saying, "Let not a widow be taken into the number under threescore years old," and having 
described the qualifications of a widow, "If she have brought up children, if she have lodged strangers, if she 
have washed the Saints' feet," proceeds now to say, "But the younger widows refuse." But concerning 
virgins, though the case of their falling is a much more gross one, he has said nothing of this kind, and rightly. 
For they had enrolled themselves on higher views, and the work with them proceeded from a greater 
elevation of mind. Therefore the receiving of strangers, and the washing of the Saints' feet, he has 
represented by "attending upon the Lord without distraction"(1) (1 Cor. vii. 34, 35), and by saying, "The 
unmarried careth for the things that belong to the Lord." (1 Cor. vii. 34, 35.) And if he has not limited a 
particular age for them, it is most likely because that point is settled by what he has said in this case. But 
indeed, as I said, the choice of virginity proceeded from a higher purpose. Besides, in this case there had 
been falls, and thus they had given occasion for his rule, but nothing of that kind had occurred among the 
virgins. For that some had already fallen away is plain, in that he says, "When they have begun to wax 

wanton against Christ, they will(2) marry"; and again, "For some have already turned aside after Satan." 
"The younger widows refuse, for when they have begun to wax wanton against Christ, they will marry"; that is, 
when they have become scornful(3) and luxurious. For as in the case of a just man, we might say, "Let her 
depart, for she has become another's. "(4) He shows therefore that though they chose widowhood, it was not 
the choice of their judgment. So then a widow, by the state of widowhood, is espoused to Christ. For He has 
said," I am the defender of the widows and the father of the orphans." (Ps. Ixviii. 5.) He shows that they do not 
choose widowhood as they ought, but wax wanton: however he bears with them. Elsewhere indeed he says, 
"I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ." (2 Cor. xi. 2.) After 
having given their names to Him, (5) "they will marry," he says, "having condemnation, because they have 
cast off their first faith." By faith he means, fidelity to their covenant. As if he had said, They have been false 
to Christ, they have dishonored Him, and transgressed His covenant. "And withal they learn to be idle." 
Thus he commands not only men, but women also, to work. For idleness is the teacher of every sin. And not 
only are they exposed to this condemnation, but to other sins. If therefore it is unbecoming for a married 
woman "to go from house to house," much more is it for a virgin. "And not only idle, but tattlers also and 
busybodies, speaking things which they ought not. I will therefore that the younger widows marry, bear 
children, guide the house." 

What then happens, when the care for the husband is withdrawn, and the care to please God does not 
constrain them? They naturally become idlers, tattlers, and busybodies. For he who does not attend to his 
own concerns will be meddling with those of others, even as he who minds his own business will take no 
account of and have no care about the affairs of another. And nothing is so unbecoming to a woman, as to 
busy herself in the concerns of others, and it is no less unbecoming to a man. This is a great sign of 
impudence and forwardness. 

"I will therefore," he says, (since they themselves wish it,) "that the younger widows marry, bear children, 
guide the house." 

This course is at least preferable to the other. They ought indeed to be concerned for the things of God, they 
ought to preserve their faith. But since they do not this, it is better to avoid a worse course. God is not 
dishonored by their marrying again, and they do not fall into those practices, which have been censured. 
From such a widowhood, no good could arise, but good may come out of this marriage. Hence the women 
will be able to correct that indolence and vanity of mind. 

But why, since some have fallen away, does he not say that much care is to be taken of them, that they may 
not fall into the error he has mentioned? Why has he commanded them to marry? Because marriage is not 
forbidden, and it is a safeguard to them. Wherefore he adds, that they "give none occasion," or handle, "to 
the adversary to speak reproachfully. For some are already turned aside after Satan." Such widows as 
these then he would have refused, not meaning that there should be no younger widows, but that there 
should be no adulteresses, that none should be idle, busy-bodies, speaking things that they ought not, that 
no occasion should be given to the adversary. Had nothing of this kind taken place, he would not have 
forbidden them. 

Ver. 16. "If any man or woman that believeth have widows, let them relieve them, and let not the Church be 
charged, that it may relieve them that are widows indeed." 

Observe how again he speaks of those as "widows indeed," who are left destitute, and have no resource 
from any other quarter. It was better to have it so. For thus two great objects were attained. Those(1) had an 
opportunity of doing good, whilst these were honorably maintained, and the Church not burdened. And he 
has well said, "If any believer." For it is not fit that believing women should be maintained by unbelievers, 
lest they should seem to stand in need of them. And observe how persuasively he speaks; he has not said, 
"let them maintain them expensively," but "let them relieve them." "That the Church," he says, "may relieve 
them that are widows indeed." She therefore has the reward of this help also, for she that helps the Church, 
helps not her only, but those widows too whom the Church is thus enabled to maintain more bountifully. "I will 
therefore that the younger widows"-do what? live in luxury and pleasure? By no means; but-"marry, bear 
children, guide the house." That he may not be supposed to encourage them to live luxuriously, he adds, 
that they give no occasion to the adversary to speak reproachfully. They ought indeed to have been 
superior to the things of this world, but since they are not, let them abide in them at least upright. 
Ver. 17, 18. "Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor, especially they who labor in the 
word and doctrine. For the Scripture saith, Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn. And, The 
laborer is worthy of his reward." 

The "honor" of which he here speaks is attention to them, and the supply of their necessities, as is shown by 
his adding, "Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn" (Deut. xxv. 4); and, "The laborer is worthy 
of his reward." (Luke x. 7.) So when he says, "Honor widows," he means, "support" them in all that is 
necessary. Thus he says, "That it may relieve those that are widows indeed"; and again, "Honor widows 
that are widows indeed," that is, who are in poverty, for the greater their poverty, the more truly are they 
widows. He alleges the Law, he alleges the words of Christ, both agreeing herein. For the Law says, "Thou 

shall not muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn." See how he would have the teacher labor! For there is not, 
indeed there is not, any other labor such as his. But this is from the Law. But how does he quote from Christ? 
"The laborer is worthy of his reward." Let us not then look only to the reward, but to the terms of the 
commandment. "The laborer," he says, "is worthy of his reward." So that if any one lives in sloth and luxury, 
he is unworthy of it. Unless he is as the ox treading out the corn, and bearing the yoke, in spite of heat and 
thorns, and ceases not till he has carried the corn into the granary, he is not worthy. Therefore to teachers 
should be granted a supply of their necessities without grudging, that they may not faint nor be discouraged, 
nor by attention to inferior things deprive themselves of greater; that they may labor for spiritual things, 
paying no regard to worldly things. It was thus with the Levites; they had no worldly concerns, because the 
laity took care to provide for them, and their revenues were appointed by the law, as tythes, offerings of 
gold, (2) first-fruits, vows, and many other things. And the law properly assigned these things to them, as 
seeking things present. But I shall say no more than that those who preside ought to have food and raiment, 
that they may not be distracted by care for these things. But what is double support? Double that of the 
widows, or of the deacons, or simply, liberal support. Let us not then think only of the double maintenance 
granted them, but of what is added, "Those who rule well." And what is it to rule well? Let us hear Christ, Who 
says, "The good shepherd giveth his life for his sheep." (John x. 11.) Thus to rule well is, from our concern for 
them, never to spare ourselves. 

"Especially those who labor in the word and doctrine." Where then are those who say that there is no 
occasion for the word and doctrine? Whereas he says to Timothy, "Meditate upon these things; give thyself 
wholly to them"; and, "Give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine; for in doing this thou shalt save 
both thyself, and them that hear thee." (1 Tim. iv. 15, 16.) These are the men whom he wishes to be honored 
most of all, and he adds the reason, for they sustain great labor. For when one is neither watchful, nor 
diligent, but merely sits in his stall easy and unconcerned, (1) whilst another wears himself out with anxiety 
and exertion, (2) especially if he is ignorant of profane literature, ought not the latter to be honored above all 
others, who more than others gives himself up to such labors? For he is exposed to numberless tongues. 
One censures him, another praises him, a third mocks him, another finds fault with his memory and his 
composition, and it requires great strength of mind to endure all this. It is an important point, and contributes 
much to the edification of the Church, that the rulers of it should be apt to teach. If this be wanting, many things 
in the Church go to ruin. Therefore in addition to the qualifications of hospitality, moderation, and a 
blameless life, he enumerates this also, saying, "Apt to teach." For why else indeed is he called a teacher? 
Some say that he may teach philosophy by the example of his life, so that all else is superfluous, and there 
is no need of verbal instruction in order to proficiency. But why then does Paul say, "especially they who 
labor in the word and doctrine"? For when doctrines are concerned, what life will answer the purpose? And 
of what word is he speaking? Not of pompous language, nor of discourse set off with externals decorations, 
but that which possesses the mighty power of the Spirit, and abounds with wisdom and understanding. It 
needs not set phrases, but thoughts to give it utterance, not skill in composition, but power of mind. 
Ver. 19. "Against an elder receive not an accusation, but before two or three witnesses." 
May we then receive an accusation against a younger man, or against any one at all without witnesses? 
Ought we not in all cases to come to our judgments with the greatest exactness? What then does he mean? 
Do not so, he means, with any, but especially in the case of an elder. For he speaks of an eider not with 
respect to office, but to age, since the young more easily fall into sin than their elders, And it is manifest from 
hence that the Church, and even the whole people of Asia, had been now intrusted to Timothy, which is the 
reason why he discourses with him concerning elders. 
Ver. 20. "Them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear." 

Do not, be says, hastily cut them off, but carefully enquire into all the circumstances, and when thou hast 
thoroughly informed thyself, then proceed against the offender with rigor, that others may take warning. For 
as it is wrong to condemn hastily and rashly, so not to punish manifest offenses is to open the way to others, 
and embolden them to offend. 

"Rebuke," he says, to show that it is not to be done lightly, but with severity. For thus others will be deterred. 
How is it then that Christ says, "Go and tell him his fault between him and thee alone, if one sin against thee." 
(Matt, xviii. 15.) But Christ Himself permits him to be censured in the Church. What then? is it not a greater 
scandal, that one should be rebuked before all? How so? For it is a much greater scandal, that the offense 
should be known, and not the punishment. For as when sinners go unpunished, many commit crimes; so 
when they are punished, many are made better. God Himself acted in this manner. He brought forth 
Pharaoh, and punished him openly. And Nebuchadnezzar too, and many others, both cities and individuals, 
we see visited with punishment. Paul therefore would have all stand in awe of their Bishop, and sets him 
over all. 

And because many judgments are formed upon suspicion, there ought, he says, to be witnesses, and men 
to convict the offender according to the ancient law. "At the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every 
matter be established. Against an elder receive not an accusation." (Deut. xix. 15.) He does not say, "do not 

condemn," but "receive not an accusation," bring him not to judgment at all. But what if the two witnesses are 
false? This rarely happens, and it may be discovered upon examination on the trial. For since offenses are 
committed in secret, we ought to be satisfied with two witnesses, and this is sufficient proof of investigation. 
But what if the offenses be notorious, and yet there are no witnesses, only a strong suspicion? It has been 
said above that he ought "to have a good report of them which are without." (1 Tim. iii. 7.) 
Let us therefore love God with fear. The law indeed is not made for a righteous man; but since the greater 
part are virtuous from constraint rather than from choice, the principle of fear is of great advantage to them in 
eradicating their desires. Let us therefore listen to the threatenings of hell fire, that we may be benefited by 
the wholesome fear of it. For if God, intending to cast sinners into it, had not previously threatened them with 
it, many would have plunged into it. For, if with this terror agitating our souls, some sin as readily as if there 
were no such thing in existence, what enormities should we not have committed, if it had not been declared 
and threatened? So that, as I have ever said, the threatenings of hell show the care of God for us no less 
than the promises of heaven. For the threat cooperates with the promise, and drives men into the kingdom 
by means of terror. Let us not think it a matter of cruelty, but of pity and mercy; of God's concern and love for 
us. If in the days of Jonah the destruction of Nineveh had not been threatened, that destruction had not been 
averted. Nineveh would not have stood but for the threat, "Nineveh shall be overthrown." (Jonah iii. 4.) And if 
hell had not been threatened, we should all have fallen into hell. If the fire had not been denounced, no one 
would have escaped the fire. God declares that He will do that which He desires not to do, that He may do 
that which He desires to do. He willeth not the death of a sinner, and therefore He threatens the sinner with 
death, that He may not have to inflict death. And not only has He spoken the word, but He has exhibited the 
thing itself, that we may escape it. And lest it should be supposed to be a mere threat, He has manifested 
the reality of it by what He has already done on earth. Dost thou not see in the flood a symbol of hell, in that 
rain of all-destroying water an image of the all-devouring fire?(1) "For as it was in the days of Noah," He 
says, "they were marrying and giving in marriage" (Matt. xxiv. 38), so is it even now. It was then predicted(2) 
long before it took place, and it is now predicted four hundred years or more beforehand: (3) but no one 
heeds it. It is looked upon as a mere fable, as a matter of derision; no one fears it, no one weeps or beats 
his breast at the thought of it. The stream of fire is boiling up, the flame is kindled, and we are laughing, 
taking our pleasure, and sinning without fear. No one even bears in mind That Day. No one considers that 
present things are passing away, and that they are but temporal, though events are every day crying out 
and uttering a fearful voice. The untimely deaths, the changes that take place in our lives, our own infirmities 
and diseases, fail to instruct us. And not only in our own bodies are these changes visible, but in the 
elements themselves. Every day in our different ages we experience a kind of death, and in every case 
instability is the characteristic of things we see. Neither winter, nor summer, nor spring, nor autumn, is 
permanent; all are running, flying, and flowing past. Why should I speak of fading flowers, of dignities, of 
kings that are to-day, and to-morrow cease to be, of rich men, of magnificent houses, of night and day, of the 
sun and the moon? for the moon wanes, and the sun is sometimes eclipsed, and often darkened with 
clouds? Of things visible, in short, is there anything that endures for ever? Nothing! No, nor anything in us but 
the soul, and that we neglect. Of things subject to change we take abundant care, as if they were permanent: 
but that which is to endure for ever we neglect, as if it were soon to pass away. Some one is enabled to 
perform mighty actions, but they shall last till to-morrow, and then he perishes, as we see in the instances of 
those who have had yet greater power, and are now to be seen no more. Life is a dream, and a scene; and 
as on the stage when the scene is shifted the various pageants disappear, and as dreams flit away when 
the sunbeams rise, so here when the end comes, whether the universal or that of each one, all is dissolved 
and vanishes away. The tree that you have planted remains, and the house that you have built, it too stands 
on. But the planter and the builder go away, and perish. Yet these things happen without our regarding it, 
and we live on in luxury and pleasure, and are ever furnishing ourselves with such things, as if we were 
immortal. 

Hear what Solomon says, who knew the present world by actual experience. "I builded me houses, I 
planted me vineyards, I made me gardens, and orchards and pools of water. I gathered me also silver and 
gold. I gat myself men-singers, and women-singers, and flocks, and herds." (Eccles. ii. 4, 5.) There was no 
one who lived in greater luxury, or higher glory. There was no one so wise or so powerful, no one who saw 
all things so succeeding to his heart's desire. What then? He had no enjoyment from all these things. What 
after all does he say of it himself? "Vanity of vanities, all is vanity." (Eccles. xii. 8.) Vanity not simply but 
superlatively. Let us believe him, and lay hold on that in which there is no vanity, in which there is truth; and 
what is based upon a solid rock, where there is no old age, nor decline, but all things bloom and flourish, 
without decay, or waxing old, or approaching dissolution. Let us, I beseech you, love God with genuine 
affection, not from fear of hell, but from desire of the kingdom. For what is comparable to seeing Christ? 
Surely nothing! What to the enjoyment of those good things? Surely nothing! Well may there be nothing; for 
"eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man the things which God hath 
prepared for them that love Him." (1 Cor. ii. 9.) Let us be anxious to obtain those things, and let us despise all 

these. Are we not continually complaining that human life is nothing? Why art thou solicitous for what is 
nothing? Why dost thou sustain such toils, for what is nothing? Thou seest splendid houses, does the sight 
of them delude thee? Look up to heaven. Raise thy view from pillars of stone to that beautiful fabric, 
compared with which the others are as the works of ants and pismires. Learn philosophy from that 
spectacle, ascend to heavenly things, and look thence upon our splendid buildings, and see that they are 
nothing, the mere toys of little children. Seest thou not how much finer, how much lighter, how much purer, 
how much more translucent, is the air the higher thou ascendest? There have they that do aims their 
mansions and their tabernacles. These that are here are dissolved at the resurrection, or rather before the 
resurrection destroyed by the stroke of time. Nay often in their most flourishing state and period an 
earthquake overthrows, or fire entirely ruins them. For not only the bodies of men, but their very buildings are 
liable to untimely deaths. Nay, sometimes things decayed by time stand firm under the shock of an 
earthquake, whilst glittering edifices, firmly fixed, and newly constructed, are struck but by lightning and 
perish. And this, I believe, is the interposition of God, that we may not take pride in our buildings. 
Would you again have another ground for cheerfulness? Go to the public buildings, in which you share 
equally with others. For the most magnificent private houses, after all, are less splendid than the public 
edifices. There you may remain, as long as you please. They belong to you as much as to others, since 
they are common to you with others; they are common, and not private. But those, you say, delight you not. 
They delight you not, partly because you are familiar with them, and partly from your covetousness. So the 
pleasantness is not in the beauty, but in the appropriating! So the pleasure is in greediness, and in the wish 
to make every man's goods your own! How long are we to be nailed to these things? How long are we to be 
fastened to the earth, and grovel, like worms, in the dirt? God hath given us a body of earth, that we might 
carry it with us up to heaven, not that we should draw our soul down with it to earth. Earthy it is, but if we 
please, it may be heavenly. See how highly God has honored us, in committing to us so excellent a frame. I 
made heaven and earth, He says, and to you I give the power of creation. Make your earth heaven. For it is 
in thy power. "I am He that maketh and transformeth all things" (Amos v. 8, Sept.), saith God of Himself. And 
He hath given to men a similar power; as a painter, being an affectionate father, teaches his own art to his 
son. I formed thy body beautiful, he says, but I give thee the power of forming something better. Make thy 
soul beautiful. I said, "Let the earth bring forth grass, and every fruitful tree." (Gen. i. 1 1 .) Do thou also say, Let 
this earth(1) bring forth its proper fruit, and what thou wiliest to produce will be produced. "I make the summer 
and the cloud. I create the lightning and the wind." (Amos iv. 13; Ps. Ixxiv. 17.) I formed the dragon, that is, the 
devil, (2) to make sport with him. (Ps. civ. 26.) Nor have I grudged thee the like power. Thou, if thou wilt, canst 
sport with him, and bind him as thou wouldest a sparrow. I make the sun to rise upon the evil and the good: 
do thou imitate Me, by imparting of that is thine to the good and the evil. When mocked I bear with it, and do 
good to those who mock Me: do thou imitate Me, as thou canst. I do good, not to be requited; do thou imitate 
Me, and do good, not to be repaid. I have lighted luminaries in the heavens. Do thou light others brighter 
than these, for thou canst, by enlightening those that are in error. For to know Me is a greater benefit than to 
behold the sun. Thou canst not create a man, but thou canst make him just and acceptable to God. I formed 
his substance, do thou beautify his will. See how I love thee, and have given thee the power in the greater 
things. 

Beloved, see how we are honored! yet some are so unreasonable and so ungrateful as to say, "Why are 
we endowed with free will?" But how in all the particulars which we have mentioned could we have imitated 
God, if there had been no free will? I rule Angels, He says, and so dost thou, through Him who is the 
First-fruits. (1 Cor. xv. 23.) I sit on a royal throne, and thou art seated with Me in Him who is the First-fruits. As it 
is said, "He hath raised us up together and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus." (Eph. ii. 
6.) Through Him who is the First-fruits, Cherubim and Seraphim adore thee, with all the heavenly host, 
principalities and powers, thrones and dominions. Disparage not thy body, to which such high honors 
appertain, that the unbodied Powers tremble at it. 

But what shall I say? It is not in this way only that I have shown My love to thee, but by what I have suffered. 
For thee I was spit upon, I was scourged. I emptied myself of glory, I left My Father and came to thee, who 
dost hate Me, and turn from Me, and art loath to hear My Name. I pursued thee, I ran after thee, that I might 
overtake thee. I united and joined thee to myself, "eat Me, drink Me," I said. Above I hold thee, and below I 
embrace thee. Is it not enough for thee that I have thy First-fruits above? Doth not this satisfy thy affection? I 
descended below: I not only am mingled with thee I am entwined in thee. I am masticated broken into minute 
particles, that the interspersion,(2) and commixture, and union may be more complete. Things united remain 
yet in their own limits, but I am interwoven with thee. I would have no more any division between us. I will that 
we both be one. 

Therefore knowing these things and remembering His abundant care for us, let us do all things which may 
prove us not unworthy of His great gift, which God grant that we may all obtain, through the grace and 
lovingkindness of Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom, &c. 

HOMILY XVI. 

1 TIMOTHY v. 21-23. 

"I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ and the elect angels, that thou observe these things 
without preferring one before another, doing nothing by partiality. Lay hands hastily on no man, neither be 
partaker of other men's sins: keep thyself pure. Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for thy stomach's 
sake and three often infirmities." 

HAVING spoken of Bishops and Deacons, of men, and women, of widows and elders, and of all others, and 
having shown how great was the authority of a Bishop, now he was speaking of judgment, he has added, "I 
charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ and the elect angels, that thou observe these things 
without preferring one before another, doing nothing by partiality." Thus fearfully he charges him. For though 
Timothy was his beloved son, he did not therefore stand in awe of him. For as he was not ashamed to say of 
himself, "Lest by any means when I have preached to others, I myself should be a cast-away" (1 Cor. ix. 27); 
much less would he be afraid or ashamed in the case of Timothy. He called the Father and the Son to 
witness. But wherefore the elect Angels? From great moderation, as Moses said, "I call heaven and earth to 
witness" (Deut. iv. 26); and again, "Hear ye, O mountains, and strong foundations of the earth." (Mic. vi. 2.) He 
calls the Father and the Son to witness what he has said, making his appeal to Them against that future 
Day, that if anything should be done that ought not to be done, he was clear from the guilt of it. 
"That thou observe these things without preferring one before another, doing nothing by partiality." That is, 
that thou deal impartially and equally between those who are upon trial and are to be judged by thee, that 
no one may pre-occupy thy mind, or gain thee over to his side beforehand. 

But who are the elect Angels? It is because there are some not elect. As Jacob calls to witness God and the 
heap (Gen. xxxi. 45), so we often take at once superior and inferior persons to witness; so great a thing is 
testimony. As if he had said, I call to witness God and His Son and His servants, that I have charged thee: 
so before them I charge thee. He impresses Timothy with fear; after which he adds, what was most vital, (3) 
and bears most on the maintenance of the Church, the matter of Ordinations. "Lay hands," he says, 
"suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's sins." What is "suddenly"? Not upon a first, nor a 
second, nor a third trial, but after frequent and strict examination and circumspection. For it is an affair of no 
common peril. For thou wilt be responsible for the sins committed by him, as well his past as his future sins, 
because thou hast delegated to him this power. For if thou overlook the past unduly, thou art answerable for 
the future also, as being the cause of them, by placing him in that station, and of the past too, for not leaving 
him to mourn over them, and to be in compunction. For as thou art a partaker of his good actions, so art thou 
of his sins. 

"Keep thyself pure." This he says with reference to chastity. 

"Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for thy stomach's sake and thy often infirmities." If one who had 
practiced fasting to such an extent, and used only water, so long that he had brought on "infirmities" and 
"frequent infirmities," is thus commanded to be chaste, and does not refuse the admonition, much less ought 
we to be offended when we receive an admonition from any one. But why did not Paul restore strength to his 
stomach? Not because he could not-for he whose garment had raised the dead was clearly able to do this 
too,-but because he had a design of importance in withholding such aid. What then was his purpose?(1) 
That even now, if we see great and virtuous men afflicted with infirmities, we may not be offended, for this 
was a profitable visitation. If indeed to Paul himself a "messenger of Satan" was sent that he should not be 
"exalted above measure" (2 Cor. xii. 11), much more might it be so with Timothy. For the miracles he wrought 
were enough to have rendered him arrogant. For this reason he is left to be subject to the rules of medicine, 
that he may be humbled, and others may not be offended, but may learn that they who performed such 
excellent actions were men of the same nature as themselves. In other respects also Timothy seems to 
have been subject to disease, which is implied by that expression, "Thy often infirmities," as well of other 
parts as of the stomach. He does not however allow him to indulge freely in wine, but as much as was for 
health and not for luxury. (2) 

Ver. 24. "Some men's sins are open beforehand, going before to judgment; and some they follow after." 
In speaking of ordination, he had said, "Be not partaker of other men's sins." But what, he might say, if I be 
ignorant of them? Why, "some men's sins are open beforehand, going before them to judgment, and some 
they follow after." Some men's, he means, are manifest, because the), go before, whilst others' are unknown, 
because they follow after. 

Ver. 25. "Likewise also the good works of some are manifest beforehand, and they that are otherwise 
cannot be hid." 

Cha p. vi. ve r. 1 . "Let as many servants as are under the yoke count their masters worthy of all honor, that 
the Name of God and His doctrine be not blasphemed." 
Let them count them "worthy of all honor," he says; for do not suppose, because thou art a believer, that thou 

art therefore a free man: since thy freedom is to serve the more faithfully. For if the unbeliever sees slaves 
conducting themselves insolently on account of their faith, he will blaspheme, as if the Doctrine produced 
insubordination. But when he sees them obedient, he will be more inclined to believe, and will the rather 
attend to our words. But God, and the Gospel we preach, will be blasphemed, if they are disobedient. But 
what if their own master be an unbeliever? Even in that case they ought 1 to submit, for God's Name's sake. 
Ver. 2. "And they that have believing masters, let them not despise them because they are brethren, but 
rather do them service, because they are faithful and beloved partakers of the benefit." 
As though he had said, If ye are thought worthy of so great a benefit, as to have your masters for your 
brethren, on this account ye ought more especially to submit. 

"Going before to judgment." This he had said, implying that of evil actions here some are concealed, and 
some are not; but there neither the good nor the bad can be concealed. And what is that going before to 
judgment? When one commits offenses that already condemn him, or when he is incorrigible, and when one 
thinks to set him right and cannot succeed. What then? 'What is the use of mentioning this? Because if here 
any escape detection, they will not hereafter. There all things are laid open; and this is the greatest 
consolation to those who do well. 

Then because he had said, "Do nothing by partiality," as if under the necessity of interpreting it, he adds, 
"As many servants as are under the yoke." But you will say, What has a Bishop to do with this? Much surely, 
for it is his office to exhort and to teach these too. And here he makes excellent regulations with respect to 
them. For we see him everywhere commanding the servants rather than their masters, showing them the 
ways of submission, and treating them with great regard? He exhorts them therefore to submit with great 
meekness. But the masters he recommends to forbear the use of terror. "Forbearing threatening" (Eph. vi. 
9), he says. And why does he thus command? In the case of unbelievers, naturally, because it would have 
been unreasonable to address those who would pay no heed to him; but where believers were concerned, 
what was his reason? Because masters contribute greater benefits to their servants, than servants to their 
masters. For the former furnish the money to purchase for them sufficient food and clothing; and bestow 
much care upon them in other respects, so that the masters pay them the larger service, which is here 
intimated, when he says, "they are faithful and beloved, partakers of the benefit."(4) They suffer much toil 
and trouble for your repose, ought they not in return to receive much honor from their servants? 
MORAL. But if he exhorts servants to render such implicit obedience, consider what ought to be our 
disposition towards our Master, who brought us into existence out of nothing, and who feeds and clothes us. 
If in no other way then, let us render Him service at least as our servants render it to us. Do not they order 
their whole lives to afford rest to their masters, and is it not their work and their life to take care of their 
concerns? Are they not all day long engaged in their masters' Work, and only a small portion of the evening 
in their own? But we, on the contrary, are ever engaged in our own affairs, in our Master's hardly at all, and 
that too, though He needs not our services, as masters need those of their servants, but those very acts 
redound to our own benefit. In their case the master is benefited by the ministry of the servant, but in ours the 
ministry of the servant profits not the Master, but is beneficial on the other hand to the servant. As the 
Psalmist says, "My goods are nothing unto Thee." (Ps. xvi. 2.) For say, what advantage is it to God, that I am 
just, or what injury, that I am unjust? Is not His nature incorruptible, incapable of injury, superior to all 
suffering? Servants having nothing of their own, all is their masters', however rich they may be. But we have 
many things of our own. 

And it is not merely so great honor,(1) that we enjoy from the King of the universe. What master ever gave his 
own son for his servant? No one, but all would rather choose to give their servants for their sons. Here on the 
contrary, "He spared not His own Son, but gave Him up for us all," for His enemies who hated Him. 
Servants, though very hard service is exacted of them, are not impatient; at least, not the well-disposed. But 
how many times do we utter discontent?(2) The master promises to his servants nothing like what God 
promises to us; but what? Freedom here, which is often worse than bondage; for it is often embittered by 
famine beyond slavery itself.(3) Yet this is their greatest boon. But with God there is nothing temporal, 
nothing mortal; but what? wouldest thou learn? Listen then, He says, "Henceforth I call you not servants. Ye 
are my friends." (John xv. 13, 14.) 

Beloved, let us be ashamed, let us fear. Let us only serve our Master, as our servants serve us. Rather not 
even(4) the smallest portion of service do we render! Necessity makes them philosophers. They have only 
food and lodging; but we, possessing much and expecting more, insult our Benefactor with our luxury. If from 
nothing else, from them at least let us learn the rules of philosophy. The Scripture is wont to send men not 
even to servants, but to irrational creatures, as when it bids us imitate the bee and the ant. But I advise you 
but to imitate servants: only so much as they do from fear of their masters, let us do from the fear of God; for I 
cannot find that you do even this. They receive many insults from fear of us, and endure them in silence with 
the patience of philosophers. Justly or unjustly they are exposed to our violence, and they do not resist, but 
entreat us, though often they have done nothing wrong. They are contented to receive no more and often 
less than they need; with straw(5) for their bed, and only bread for their food, they do not complain or murmur 

at their hard living, but through fear of us are restrained from impatience. When they are intrusted with 
money, they restore it all. For I am not speaking of the worthless, but of the moderately good. If we threaten 
them, they are at once awed. 

Is not this philosophy? For say not they are. under necessity, when thou too art under a necessity in the fear 
of hell. And yet dost thou not learn wisdom, nor render to God as much honor, as thou receivest from thy 
servants. Of thy servants each has the apartment assigned to him by thy rules, and he does not invade that 
of his neighbor, nor do any injury from a desire of more than he has. This forbearance the fear of their master 
enforces among domestics, and seldom will you see a servant robbing or injuring a fellow-servant. But 
among free men it is quite the reverse. We bite and devour one another. We fear not our Master: we rob and 
plunder our fellow-servants, we strike them in His very sight. This the servant will not do; if he strikes, it is not 
when his master sees him; if he reviles, it is not when his master hears him. But we dare do anything, though 
God sees and hears it all. 

The fear of their master is ever before their eyes, the fear of our Master never before ours. Hence the 
subversion of all order, hence all is confusion and destruction. And we never take into consideration the 
offenses we have committed, but if our servants do amiss, we call them to a rigorous account for everything, 
even to the least misdemeanor. I say not this to make servants remiss, but to chide our supineness, to rouse 
us from our sloth, that we may serve our God with as much zeal as servants do their master; our Maker, as 
faithfully as our fellow-creatures(6) serve us, from whom they have received no such gift. For they too are 
free by nature. To them also it was said, "Let them have dominion over the fishes." (Gen. i. 26.) For this 
slavery is not from nature: it is the result of some particular cause, or circumstances. Yet, notwithstanding, 
they pay us great honor; and we with great strictness exact services from them, whilst to God we hardly 
render the smallest portion, though the advantage of it would redound to ourselves. For the more zealously 
we serve God, the greater gainers we shall be. Let us not then deprive ourselves of such important benefits. 
For God is self-sufficient, and wants nothing; the recompense and the advantage reverts altogether to us. 
Let us therefore, I beseech you, be so affected, as serving not God but ourselves, and with fear and 
trembling let us serve Him, that we may obtain the promised blessings, through Jesus Christ our Lord, with 
whom, &c. 

HOMILY XVII. 

1 TIMOTHY vi. 2-7. 

"These things teach and exhort. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the 
words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness; he is proud, knowing 
nothing, but doting about questions and strifes of words, whereof cometh envy, strife, railings, evil 
surmisings, perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is 
godliness: from such withdraw thyself. But godliness with contentment is great gain. For we brought nothing 
into this world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out." 

A TEACHER has need not only of authority, but of gentleness, and not only of gentleness, but of authority. 
And all these the blessed Paul teaches, at one time saying, "These things command and teach" (1 Tim. iv. 
11); at another, "These things teach and exhort."(1) For if physicians entreat the sick, not for the benefit of 
their own health, but that they may relieve their sickness, and restore their prostrate strength, much more 
ought we to observe this method, of entreating those whom we teach. For the blessed Paul does not refuse 
to be their servant: "We preach not ourselves," he says; "but Christ Jesus the Lord; and ourselves your 
servants for Jesus' sake" (2 Cor. iv. 5); and again, "All things are yours, whether Paul or Apollos." (1 Cor. iii. 
12.) And in this service he serves with alacrity, for it is not slavery, but superior to freedom. For He says, 
"Whoever committeth sin is the servant of sin." (John viii. 34.) 

"If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
and to the doctrine which is according to godliness, he is proud, knowing nothing." Presumption therefore 
arises not from knowledge, but from "knowing nothing." For he that knows the doctrines of godliness is also 
the most disposed to moderation. He who knows sound words, is not unsound. For what inflammation is in 
the body, that pride is in the soul. And as we do not in the first case say that the inflamed part is sound, so 
neither do we here consider the arrogant. It is possible then to be knowing, and yet to know nothing. For he 
that knows not what he ought to know, knows nothing. And that pride arises from knowing nothing is manifest 
from hence. Christ "made Himself of no reputation" (Phil. ii. 7), he therefore who knows this will not be 
high-minded. Man hath nothing except from God, therefore he will not be high-minded. "For what hast thou 
that thou didst not receive?" (1 Cor. iv. 7.) He washed the feet of His disciples, how can he who knows this be 
setting himself up? Therefore He says, "When ye have done all, say we are unprofitable servants." (Luke 
xvii. 10.) The publican was accepted only from his humility, the Pharisee perished by his boastfulness. He 
who is puffed up knoweth none of these things. Again, Christ Himself says, "If I have spoken evil, bear 

witness of the evil; but if well, why smitest thou me?" (John xviii. 23.) 

"Doting(2) about questions." To question then is to dote. "And strifes of words"; this is justly said. For when 

the soul is fevered with reasonings, and stormy, then it questions, but when it is in a sound state, it does not 

question, but receives the faith. But from questionings and strifes of words nothing can be discovered. For 

when the things which faith only promises are received by an inquisitive spirit, it neither demonstrates them, 

nor suffers us to understand them. If one should close his eyes, he would not be able to find anything he 

sought: or if, again with his eyes open, he should bury himself, and exclude the sun, he would be unable to 

find anything, thus seeking. So without faith nothing can be discerned, but contentions must needs arise. 

"Whereof come railings, evil surmisings"; that is, erroneous opinions and doctrines arising froth 

questionings. For when we begin to question, then we surmise concerning God things that we ought not. 

"Perverse disputings,"(1) that is, leisure or conversation, or he may mean intercommunication, and that as 

infected sheep by contact(2) communicate disease to the sound, so do these bad 

men. 

"Destitute of the truth, thinking that gain is godliness." Observe what evils are produced by strifes of words. 

The love of gain, ignorance, and pride; for pride is engendered by ignorance. 

"From such withdraw thyself." He does not say, engage and contend with them, but "withdraw thyself," turn 

away from them; as elsewhere he says, "A man that is an heretic after the first and second admonition 

reject." (Tit. iii. 1 0.) He shows that they do not so much err from ignorance, as they owe their ignorance to 

their indolence. Those who are contentious for the sake of money you will never persuade. They are only to 

be persuaded, so long as you give, and even so you will never satisfy their desires. For it is said, "The 

covetous man's eye is not satisfied with a portion." (Ecclus. xiv. 9.) From such then, as being incorrigible, it is 

right to turn away. And if he who had much obligation to fight for the truth, is advised not to engage in 

contention with such men, much more should we(3) avoid it, who are in the situation of disciples. 

Having said, "They think that godliness is a means of gain," he adds: "But godliness with contentment is 

great gain, not when it possesses wealth, but when it has it not. For that he may not despond on account of 

his poverty, he encourages and revives his spirit. They think, he says, that godliness is a means of gain, (4) 

and so it is; only not in their way, but in a much higher. Then having demolished theirs he extols the other. For 

that worldly gain is nothing, is manifest, because it is left behind, and does not attend us, or go along with us 

at our departure. Whence is this plain? Because we had nothing when we came into this world, therefore we 

shall have nothing when we depart from it. For nature came naked into the world, and naked she will go out 

of it. Therefore we want no superfluities; if we brought nothing with us, and shall take nothing away with us. 

Ver. 8. "And having food and raiment, let us be therewith content." 

Such things, and so much ought we to eat, as will suffice to nourish us, and such things should we put on, as 

will cover us, and clothe our nakedness, and nothing more; and a common garment Will answer this 

purpose. Then he urges them from the consideration of things here, saying, 

Ver. 9. "But they that will be rich"; not those that are rich, but those who wish to be. For a man may have 

money and make a good use of it, not overvaluing it, but bestowing it upon the poor. Such therefore he does 

not blame, but the covetous. 

"They that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown 

men in destruction and perdition." 

He has justly said, "they drown men," since they cannot be raised from that depth. "In destruction and 

perdition." 

Ver. 10. "For the love of money is the root of all evil; which while some coveted after, they have erred from 

the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows." 

Two things he mentions, and that which to them might seem the more weighty he places last, their "many 

sorrows." And to learn how true this is, the only way is to sojourn with the rich, to see how many are their 

sorrows, how bitter their complaints. 

Ver. 1 1 . "But thou, O man of God." 

This is a title of great dignity. For we are all men of God, but the righteous peculiarly so, not by right of 

creation only, but by that of appropriation. (5) If then thou art a "man of God," seek not superfluous things, 

which lead thee not to God, but 

"Flee these things, and follow after righteousness." Both expressions are emphatic; he does not say turn 

from one, and approach the other, but "flee these things, pursue righteousness," so as not to be covetous. 

"Godliness," that is, soundness in doctrines. (6) "Faith," which is opposed to questionings. "Love," patience, 

meekness. 

Ver. 12. "Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life." Lo, there is thy reward, "whereunto thou art also 

called, and hast professed a good profession," in hope of eternal life, "before many witnesses." 

That is, do not put that confidence to shame. Why dost thou labor to no profit? But what is the "temptation 

and snare," which he says, those that would be rich fall into? It causes them to err from the faith, it involves 

them in dangers, it renders them less intrepid. "Foolish desires," he says. And is it not a foolish desire, when 

men like to keep idiots and dwarfs, not from benevolent motives, but for their pleasure, when they have 
receptacles for fishes in their halls, when they bring up wild beasts, when they give their time to dogs, and 
dress up horses, and are as fond of them as of their children? All these things are foolish and superfluous, 
nowise necessary, nowise useful. 

"Foolish and hurtful lusts!" What are hurtful lusts? When men live unlawfully, when they desire what is their 
neighbor's, when they do their utmost in(1) luxury, when they long for drunkenness, when they desire the 
murder and destruction of others. From these desires many have aimed at tyranny, and perished. Surely to 
labor with such views is both foolish and hurtful. And well has he said, "They have erred from the faith." 
Covetousness attracting their eyes to herself, and gradually stealing away their minds, suffers them not to 
see their way. For as one walking on the straight road, with his mind intent on something else, proceeds on 
his way indeed, but, often without knowing it, passes by the very city to which he was hastening, his feet 
plying on at random and to no purpose: such like a thing is covetousness. "They have pierced themselves 
through with many sorrows." Dost thou see what he mean by that word "pierced"? What he means to 
express by the allusion(2) is this. Desires are thorns, and as when one touches thorns, he gores his hand, 
and gets him wounds, so he that falls into these lusts will be wounded by them, and pierce his soul with 
griefs. And what cares and troubles attend those who are thus pierced, it is not possible to express. 
Therefore he says, "Flee these things, and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, 
meekness." For meekness springs from love. 
Ver. 12. "Fight the good fight." 

Here he commends his boldness and manliness, that before all he confidently "made profession," and he 
reminds him of his early instruction. 
"Lay hold on eternal life." 

There is need not only of profession, but of patience also to persevere in that profession, and of vehement 
contention, and of numberless toils, that you be not overthrown. For many are the stumbling-blocks, and 
impediments, therefore the way is "strait and narrow." (Matt. vii. 14.) It is necessary therefore to be 
self-collected, (3) and well girt on every side. All around appear pleasures attracting the eyes of the soul. 
Those of beauty, of wealth, of luxury, of indolence, of glory, of revenge, of power, of dominion, and these are 
all fair and lovely in appearance, and able to captivate those who are unsteady, and who do not love the 
truth. For truth has but a severe and uninviting countenance. And why? Because the pleasures that she 
promises are all future, whereas the others hold out present honors and delights, and repose; though all are 
false and counterfeit. To these therefore adhere gross, effeminate, unmanly minds, indisposed to the toils of 
virtue. As in the games of the heathens, he who does not earnestly covet the crown, may from the first give 
himself up to revellings and drunkenness, and so do in fact the cowardly and unmanly combatants, whilst 
those who look steadfastly to the crown sustain blows without number. For they are supported and roused to 
action by the hope of future reward. 

MORAL. Let us then flee from this root of all evils, and we shall escape them all. "The love of money," he 
says, "is the root;" thus says Paul, or rather Christ by Paul, and let us see how this is. The actual experience 
of the world testifies it. For what evil is not caused by wealth, or rather not by wealth, but by the wicked will of 
those who know not how to use it? For it is possible to use wealth in well doing, and even through means of it 
to inherit the kingdom. But now what was given us for the relief of the poor, to make amends for our past sins, 
to win a good report, and to please God, this we employ against the poor and wretched, or rather against 
our own souls, and to the high displeasure of God. For as for the other, a man robs him of his wealth, and 
reduces him to poverty, but himself to death; and him he causes to pine in penury here, but himself in that 
eternal punishment. Are they equal sufferers, think you? 

What evils then does it not cause! what fraudulent practices, what robberies! what miseries, enmities, 
contentions, battles! Does it not stretch forth its hand even to the dead, nay, to fathers, and brethren? Do not 
they who are possessed by this passion violate the laws of nature, and the commandments of God? in short 
everything? Is it not this that renders our courts of justice necessary? Take away therefore the love of 
money, and you put an end to war, to battle, to enmity, to strife and contention. Such men ought therefore to 
be banished from the world, as wolves and pests. For as opposing and violent winds, Sweeping over a 
calm sea, stir it up from its foundations, and mingle the sands of the deep with the waves above, so the 
lovers of wealth confound and unsettle everything. The covetous man never knows a friend: a friend, did I 
say? he knows not God Himself, driven mad, as he is, by the passion of avarice. Do ye not see the Titans 
going forth sword in hand? This is a representation of madness. But the lovers of money do not counterfeit, 
they are really mad, and beside themselves; and if you could lay bare their souls, you would find them 
armed in this way not with one or two swords, but with thousands, acknowledging no one, but turning their 
rage against all; flying and snarling at all, slaughtering not dogs,(1) but the souls of men, and uttering 
blasphemies against heaven itself. By these men all things are subverted, and ruined by their madness 
after wealth. 
For whom indeed, whom I should accuse, I know not! It is a plague that so seizes all, some more, some less, 

but all in a degree. Like a fire catching a wood, that desolates and destroys all around, this passion has laid 
waste the world. Kings, magistrates, private persons, the poor, women, men, children, are all alike affected 
by it. As if a gross darkness had overspread the earth, no one is in his sober senses. Yet we hear, both in 
public and private, many declamations(2) against covetousness, but no one is mended by them. 
What then is to be done? How shall we extinguish this flame? For though it has risen up to heaven itself, it is 
to be extinguished. We have only to be willing, and we shall be able to master the conflagration. For as by 
our will it has got head, so it may be brought under by our will. Did not our own choice cause it, and will not 
the same choice avail to extinguish it? Only let us be willing. But how shall that willingness be engendered? If 
we consider the vanity and the unprofitableness of wealth, that it cannot depart hence with us, that even here 
it forsakes us, and that whilst it remains behind, it inflicts upon us wounds that depart along with us. If we see 
that there are riches There, compared to which the wealth of this world is more despicable than dung. If we 
consider that it is attended with numberless dangers, with pleasure that is temporary, pleasure mingled with 
sorrow. If we contemplate aright the true riches of eternal life, we shall be able to despise worldly wealth. If 
we remember that it profits nothing either to glory, or health, or any other thing; but on the contrary drowns 
men in destruction and perdition. If thou consider that here thou art rich, and hast many under thee, but that 
when thou departest hence, thou wilt go naked and solitary. If we often represent(3) these things to 
ourselves, and listen to them from others, there will perhaps be a return to a sound mind, and a deliverance 
from this dreadful punishment. 

Is a pearl beautiful? yet consider, it is but sea water, and was once cast away in the bosom of the deep. Are 
gold and silver beautiful? yet they were and are but dust and ashes. Are silken vestments beautiful? yet they 
are nothing but the spinning of worms. This beauty is but in opinion, in human prejudice, not in the nature of 
the things. For that which possesses beauty from nature, need not any to point it out. If you see a coin of 
brass that is but gilded over, yon admire it at first, fancying that it is gold; but when the cheat is shown to you 
by one who understands it, your wonder vanishes with the deceit. The beauty therefore was not in the nature 
of the thing. Neither is it in silver; you may admire tin for silver, as you admired brass for gold, and you need 
some one to inform you what you should admire. Thus our eyes are not sufficient to discern the difference. It 
is not so with flowers, which are much more beautiful. If you see a rose, you need no one to inform you, you 
can of yourself distinguish an anemone, and a violet, or a lily, and every other flower. It is nothing therefore 
but prejudice. And to show, that this destructive passion is but a prejudice; tell me, if the Emperor were 
pleased to ordain that silver should be of more value than gold, would you not transfer your love and 
admiration to the former? Thus we are everywhere under the influence of covetousness and opinion. (4) And 
that it is so, and that a thing is valued for its rarity, and not for its nature, appears hence. The fruits that are 
held cheap among us are in high esteem among the Cappadocians, and among the Serians(5) even more 
valuable than the most precious among us, from which country these garments are brought; and many such 
instances might be given in Arabia and India, where spices are produced, and where precious stones are 
found. Such preference therefore is nothing but prejudice, and human opinion. We act not from judgment, but 
at random, and as accident determines. But let us recover from this intoxication, let us fix our view upon that 
which is truly beautiful, beautiful in its own nature, upon godliness and righteousness; that we may obtain the 
promised blessings, through the grace and lovingkindness of Jesus Christ our Lord, with whom, &c. 

HOMILY XVIII. 

1 TIMOTHY vi. 13-16. 

"I give thee charge in the sight of God, Who quickeneth all things, and before Christ Jesus, Who before 

Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession; that thou keep this commandment without spot, unrebukable, 

until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ: which in his times He shall show, Who is the blessed and only 

Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords; Who only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man 

can approach unto; Whom no man hath seen, nor can see; to Whom be honor and power everlasting. 

Amen." 

AGAIN he calls God to witness, as he had done a little before, at once to increase his disciple's awe, and to 

secure his safety, and to show that these were not human commandments, that receiving the commandment 

as from the Lord Himself, and ever bearing in mind the Witness(1) before Whom he heard it, he may have it 

more fearfully impressed upon his mind. 

"I charge thee," he says, "before God, Who quickeneth all things." 

Here is at once consolation in the dangers which awaited him, and a remembrance of the resurrection 

awakened in him. 

"And before Jesus Christ, Who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession." 

The exhortation again is derived from the example of his Master, and what he means is this; as He had 

done, so ought ye to do, for for this cause He "witnessed" (1 Pet. ii. 21), that we might tread in His steps. 

"A good confession. "(2) What he does in his Epistle to the Hebrews, -"Looking unto Jesus, the Author and 

Finisher of our faith; Who for the joy that was set before Him endured the cross, despising the shame, and is 

set down at the right hand of the throne of God. For consider Him that endured such contradiction of sinners 

against Himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds" (Heb. xii. 2, 3),-that he now does to his disciple 

Timothy. As if he had said, Fear not death, since thou art the servant of God, Who can give life to all things. 

But to what "good confession" does he allude? To that which He made when Pilate asked, "Art thou a 

King?" "To this end," He said, "was I born." And again, "I came, that I might bear witness to the Truth. Behold, 

these have heard Me." (John xviii. 37.) He may mean this, or that when asked, "Art thou the Son of God?" He 

answered, "Thou sayest, that I am (the Son of God)." (Luke xxii. 70.) And many other testimonies and 

confessions did He make. 

Ver. 14. "That thou keep this commandment without spot, unrebukable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus 

Christ." 

That is, till thy end, thy departure hence, though he does not so express it, but that he may the more arouse 

him, says, "till His appearing." But what is "to keep the commandment without spot"? To contract no 

defilement, either of doctrine or of life. 

Ver. 15. "Which in His times He shall show, Who is the blessed and only Potentate, King of kings, and Lord 

of lords, Who only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto." 

Of whom are these things said? Of the Father, or of the Son? Of the Son, undoubtedly: and it is said for the 

consolation of Timothy, that he may not fear nor stand in awe of the kings of the earth. 

"In His times," that is, the due and fitting times, that he may not be impatient, because it has not yet come. 

And whence is it manifest, that He will show it? Because He is the Potentate, the "only Potentate." He then 

will show it, Who is "blessed," nay blessedness itself; and this is said, to show that in that appearing there is 

nothing painful or uneasy. 

But he says, "only," either in contradistinction to men, or because He was unoriginated,(3) or as we 

sometimes speak of a man whom we wish to extol. 

"Who only hath immortality." What then? hath not the Son immortality? Is He not immortality itself? How 

should not He, who is of the same substance with the Father, have immortality? 

"Dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto." Is He then Himself one Light, and is there another in 

which He dwells? is He then circumscribed by place? Think not of it. By this expression is represented the 

Incomprehensibleness of the Divine Nature. Thus he speaks of God, in the best way he is able. Observe, 

how when the tongue would utter something great, it fails in power. 

"Whom no man hath seen nor can see." As, indeed, no one hath seen the Son, nor can see Him. (4) 

"To whom be honor and power everlasting. Amen." Thus properly, and much to the purpose, has he 

spoken of God. For as he had called Him to witness, he speaks much of that Witness, that his disciple may 

be in the greater awe. In these terms he ascribes glory to Him, and this is all we can do, or say. We must not 

enquire too curiously, who He is. If power everlasting is His, fear not. Yea though now it take not place, (1) to 

Him is honor, to Him is power evermore. 

Ver. 17. "Charge them that are rich in this world that they be not high-minded." 

He has well said, "rich in this world." For there are others rich in the future world. And this advice he gives, 

knowing that nothing so generally produces pride and arrogance as wealth. To abate this, therefore, he 

immediately adds, "Nor trust in uncertain riches"; since that was the source of pride; inasmuch as he who 

hopes in God, is not elated. Why dost thou place thy hopes upon what is instantly transferable? For such is 

wealth! and why hopest thou on that of which thou canst not be confident? But you say, how can they avoid 

being high-minded? By considering the instability and uncertainty of riches, and that hope in God is infinitely 

more valuable; God being the Author of wealth itself. 

Ver. 17. "But in the living God," he says, "who giveth us richly all things to enjoy." 

This "all things richly" is justly spoken, in reference to the changes of the year, to air, light, water, and other 

gifts. For how richly and ungrudgingly are all these bestowed! If thou seekest riches, seek those that are 

stable and enduring, and which are the fruit of good works. He shows that this is his meaning by what 

follows. 

Ver. 1 8. "That they do good," he says, "that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute willing to 

communicate." 

The first phrase refers to wealth, the second to charity. For to be willing to communicate, implies that they are 

sociable and kind. 

Ver. 1 9. "Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come." 

There nothing is uncertain, for the foundation being firm, there is no instability, all is firm, fixed, immovable, 

fast, and enduring. 

Ver. 19. "That they may lay hold," he says, "on eternal life." 

For the doing of good works can secure the enjoyment of eternal life. 

Ver. 20. "O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust." 

Let it not suffer diminution. It is not thy own. Thou art intrusted with the property of another, do not lessen it. 
Ver. 20. "Avoiding profane and vain babblings, and oppositions of science falsely so called." 
Well did he thus call it. For where there is not faith, there is not knowledge; when anything springs from our 
reasonings, it is not knowledge. Or perhaps he says this, because some then assumed the name of 
Gnostics, as knowing more than others. 

Ver. 21 . "Which some professing have erred concerning the faith." 

You see how again he commands Timothy not even to meet them. "Avoiding opposition." There are 
therefore oppositions to which we ought not to vouchsafe an answer, because they turn men from faith, and 
do not suffer one to be firmly established or fixed in it. Let us not then pursue this science, but adhere to faith, 
that unshaken rock. For neither floods nor winds assailing will be able to harm us, since we stand on the 
rock immovable. Thus even in this life, if we choose Him, Who is truly the foundation, we stand, and no harm 
assails us. For what can hurt him who hath chosen the riches, the honor, the glory, the pleasure of the life to 
come? They are all firm, in them there is no variableness; all things here subject to reverse, and are for ever 
changing. For what wouldest thou have? glory? The Psalmist says, "His glory shall not descend after him." 
(Ps. xlix. 17.) And often it abides not with him whilst he lives. But it is not so with virtue, all things which pertain 
to her are permanent. Here, he who obtains glory from his office, upon another succeeding to his office, 
becomes a private man and inglorious. The rich man is reduced to poverty by the attack of robbers, or the 
snares of sycophants and knaves. It is not so with Christians. The temperate man, if he take heed to himself, 
will not be robbed of his virtue. He who rules himself, cannot become a common man and a subject. 
And that this rule is superior to any other, will appear upon examination. For of what advantage, tell me, is it 
to reign over nations of our fellow-men, and to be the slaves of our own passions? Or what are we the worse 
for having no one under our rule, if we are superior to the tyranny of the passions? That indeed is Freedom, 
that is Rule, that is Royalty and Sovereignty. The contrary is slavery, though a man be invested with 
countless diadems. For when a multitude of masters sway him from within, the love of money, the love of 
pleasure, and anger, and other passions, what avails his diadem? The tyranny of those passions is more 
severe, when not even his crown has power to deliver him from their subjection. As if one who had been a 
king should be reduced to slavery by barbarians, and they wishing to show their power the more absolutely, 
should not strip him of his purple robe and his diadem, but oblige him to work in them, and to perform all 
menial offices, to draw water, and to cook their food, that his disgrace and their honor might be the more 
apparent: so do our passions domineer over us more barbarously than any barbarians. For he that 
despises them can despise the barbarians too; but he that submits to them, will suffer more severely than 
from barbarians. The barbarian, when his power prevails, may afflict the body, but these passions torture 
the soul, and lacerate it all over. When the barbarian has prevailed, he delivers one to temporal death, but 
these to that which is to come. So that he alone is the free man, who has his freedom in himself; and he who 
submits to these unreasonable passions, is the slave. 

No master, however inhuman, imposes such severe and inhuman commands. They say to him, in effect, 
"Disgrace thy soul without end or object-offend thy God,-be deaf to the claims of nature; though it be thy 
father or thy mother, be not ashamed to set thyself against them." Such are the commands of avarice. 
"Sacrifice to me, she says, not calves, but men." The prophet indeed says, "Sacrifice men, for the calves 
have failed." (Hosea xiii. 2, Sept.) But avarice says, "Sacrifice men, though there are yet calves. Sacrifice 
those who have never injured thee, yea slay them, though they have been thy benefactors." Or again, "Be at 
war, and go about as the common enemy of all, of nature herself, and of God. Heap up gold, not that thou 
mayest enjoy it, but that thou mayest keep it, and work greater torture to thyself." For it is not possible that the 
lover of money should be able to enjoy it, since he fears lest his gold should be diminished, lest his hoards 
should fail. "Be watchful," it says, "be suspicious of every one, even domestics and friends. Have an eye to 
the goods of other men. Though you see the poor man perishing with hunger, give him nothing; but strip him, 
if it be possible, even of his skin. Break thine oaths, lie, swear. Be an accuser, a false informer. Refuse not, if 
it be necessary, to rush into fire, to submit to a thousand deaths, to perish with hunger, to struggle with 
disease." Does not avarice impose these laws? "Be offensive and impudent, shameless and bold, 
villainous and wicked, ungrateful, unfeeling, unfriendly, faithless, devoid of affection, a parricide, a beast 
rather than a man. Surpass the serpent in bitterness, the wolf in rapacity. Exceed in brutality even the beast, 
nay should it be necessary to proceed even to the malignity of the devil, refuse not. Be a stranger to thy 
benefactor." 

Does not avarice say all this, and is it not listened to? God on the contrary says, Be a friend to all, be gentle, 
beloved by all, give offense causelessly to no one. "Honor thy father and thy mother." Win an honorable 
reputation. Be not a man, but an angel. Utter nothing immodest, nothing false, nor even think of it. Relieve the 
poor. Bring not trouble on thyself, by ravaging others. Be not bold nor insolent. God says this, but no one 
hearkens. Is not hell then justly threatened, and the fire, and the worm that dieth not? How long are we thus to 
thrust ourselves down the precipice? How long are we to walk upon thorns, and pierce ourselves with nails, 
and be grateful for it? We subject ourselves to cruel tyrants, and refuse the gentle Master, who imposes 

nothing grievous, nor barbarous, nor burdensome, nor unprofitable, but all things such as are useful, and 
valuable, and beneficial. Let us then arouse ourselves, and be self-collected, and gather our forces. Let us 
love God as we ought, that we may obtain the blessings promised to those that love Him, through the grace 
and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom, to the Father, &c. 

HOMILIES OF ST. JOHN CHRYSOSTOM ON THE 
SECOND EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL THE APOSTLE TO 
TIMOTHY, HOMILIES I TO V (CHAPTERS 1 & 2) 

HOMILIES OF ST. JOHN CHRYSOSTOM, 

ARCHBISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE, 

ON THE SECOND EPISTLE OF ST. PAULTHE APOSTLE 

TO TIMOTHY. 

HOMILY I 

2 TIMOTHY i. 1,2. 

"Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, according to the promise of life which is in Jesus Christ, 
to Timothy, my dearly beloved son: Grace, mercy, and peace, from God the Father and Christ Jesus our 
Lord." 

WHAT is the reason of his writing this second Epistle to Timothy? He had said, "I hope to come unto thee 
shortly" (1 Tim. iii. 14), and as this had not taken place, instead of coming to him, he consoles him by a letter, 
when he was grieving perhaps for his absence, and oppressed by the cares of the government, which he 
had now taken in hand. For even great men, when they are placed at the helm, and are charged with the 
direction of the Church, feel the strangeness of their position, and are overwhelmed, as it were, by the waves 
of business. This was particularly the case when the Gospel was first preached, when the ground was 
everywhere unturned, and all was opposition and hostility. There were, besides, heresies commencing 
from the Jewish teachers, as he has shown in his former Epistle. Nor does he only comfort him by letters, he 
invites him to come to him: "Do thy diligence," he says, "to come shortly unto me," and, "when thou comest, 
bring with thee the books, but especially the parchments." (2 Tim. iv. 9 and 13.) And he seems to have 
written this Epistle when his end was approaching. For he says, "I am now ready to be offered up"; and 
again, "At my first answer no man stood with me." (2 Tim. iv. 6 and 16.) To set all this right, he both offers 
consolation from his own trials, and also says, 

"Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, according to the promise of life which is in Christ Jesus." 
Thus at the very commencement he raises up his mind. Tell me not, he says, of the dangers here. These 
obtain for us eternal life, where there is no peril, where grief and mourning flee away. For He hath not made 
us Apostles only that we might encounter dangers, but that we might even suffer and die.(1) And as it would 
not be a consolation to recount to him his own troubles, but rather an increase of his grief, he begins 
immediately with offering comfort, saying, "According to the promise of life which is in Jesus Christ." But if it is 
a "promise," seek it not here. For, "hope that is seen is not hope." (Rom. viii. 24.) 
Ver. 2. "To Timothy, my dearly beloved son." 

Not merely his "son," but, "dearly beloved"; since it is possible for sons not to be beloved. Not such, he 
means, art thou; I call thee not merely a son, but a "dearly beloved son." As he calls the Galatians his 
children, but at the same time complains of them; "My little children," he says, "of whom I travail in birth 
again." (Gal. iv. 19.) And he bears particular testimony to his virtue by calling him "beloved." For where love 
does not arise from nature, it must arise from the merit of the object. Those who are born of us, are loved not 
only on account of their virtue, but from the force of nature; but when those who are of the faith are beloved, it 
is on account of nothing but their merit, for what else can it be? And this especially in the case of Paul, who 
never acted from partiality. And further, he shows by calling him his "beloved son," that it was not because 
he was offended with him, or despised him, or condemned him; that he did not come to him. 
Ver. 2. "Grace, mercy, and peace, from God the Father, and Christ Jesus our Lord." 
These things which he before prayed for, he again invokes upon him. And observe how, at the very 
beginning, he excuses himself for not having come to him, nor seen him. For his words, "Till I come," and, 
"Hoping to come to thee shortly," had led Timothy to expect his coming soon. For this he excuses himself, 
but he does not immediately mention the cause of his not coming, lest he should grieve him mightily. For he 

was detained in prison by the emperor. But when at the end of the Epistle he invited him to come to him, then 
he informed him of it. He does not at the outset plunge him into sorrow, but encourages the hope that he 
shall see him. "Greatly desiring to see thee," and "Do thy diligence to come unto me shortly." (2 Tim. i. 4, 
and iv. 9.) Immediately therefore he raises him up, and proceeds to praise him. 

Ver. 3, 4. "I thank God, whom I serve from my forefathers with pure conscience, that without ceasing I have 
remembrance of thee in my prayers night and day; greatly desiring to see thee, being mindful of thy tears, 
that I might be filled with joy." 

'"I thank God,' he says, 'that I remember thee,' so much do I love thee." This is a mark of excessive love, 
when a man glories in his affection from loving so much. "I thank God," he says, "Whom I serve": and how? 
"With a pure conscience," for he had not violated his conscience. And here he speaks of his blameless life, 
for he everywhere calls his life his conscience. Or because I never gave up any good that I purposed, for 
any human cause, not even when I was a persecutor. Wherefore he says, "I obtained mercy, because I did 
it ignorantly in unbelief (1 Tim. i. 13); all but saying, "Do not suspect that it was done of wickedness." He 
properly commends his own disposition, that his love may appear sincere. For what he says is in fact, "I am 
not false, I do not think one thing and profess another." So in the book of Acts we read he was compelled to 
praise himself. For when they slandered him as a seditious man and an innovator, he said in his own 
defense, "Ananias said to me, The God of our fathers hath chosen thee that thou shouldest know His will, 
and see that Just One, and shouldest hear the voice of His mouth. For thou shalt be His witness unto all men 
of what thou hast seen and heard." (Acts xxii. 14, 15.) In the same manner here, that he may not, as if he bad 
been forgetful, have the character of one void of friendship and conscience, he justly praises himself, 
saying, that "without ceasing I have remembrance of thee," and not simply that, but "in my prayers." That is, it 
is the business of my prayers, that which I constantly continue to perform. For this he shows by saying, "For 
this I besought God day and night, desiring to see thee." Mark his fervent desire, the intensity(l) of his love. 
And again, his humility, how he apologizes to his disciples, and then he shows that it was not on light or vain 
grounds; and this he had shown us before, but again gives proof of it. "Being mindful of thy tears." It was 
natural for Timothy, when parting from him, (2) to mourn and weep, more than a child torn away from the milk 
and from the breast of its mother. "That I may be filled with joy; greatly desiring to see thee." I would not 
willingly have deprived myself of so great a pleasure, though I had been of an unfeeling and brutal nature, 
for those tears coming to my remembrance would have been enough to soften me. But such is not my 
character. I am one of those who serve God purely; so that many strong motives urged me to come to thee. 
So then he wept. And he mentions another cause, and that of a consolatory kind. 
Ver. 5. "When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee." 

This is another commendation, that Timothy came not of Gentiles, nor of unbelievers, but of a family that 
served Christ from the first. (Acts xvi. 1 , 3.) 

"Which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice." 

For Timothy, it says, "was the son of a certain woman which was a Jewess, and believed." How a Jewess? 
how believing? Because she was not of the Gentiles, "but on account of his father, who was a Greek, and of 
the Jews that were in those quarters, he took and circumcised him." Thus, as these mixtures of Jews and 
Gentiles took place, the Law began gradually to be dissolved. And mark in how many ways he shows that 
he did not despise him. "I serve God," he says, "I have a true conscience" for my part, and thou hast thy 
"tears," and not thy tears only, but for "thy faith," because thou art a laborer for the Truth, because there is no 
deceit in thee. As therefore thou showest thyself worthy of love, being so affectionate, so genuine a disciple 
of Christ; and as I am not one of those who are devoid of affection, but of those who earnestly pursue the 
Truth; what hindered me from coming to thee? 
"And I am persuaded that in thee also." 

From the beginning, he means, thou hast had this excellency. Thou receivedst from thy forefathers the faith 
unfeigned. For the praises of our ancestors, when we share in them, redound also to us. Otherwise they 
avail nothing, but rather condemn us; wherefore he has said, "I am persuaded that in thee also." It is not a 
conjecture, he means, it is my persuasion; I am fully assured of it. If therefore from no human motive thou 
hast embraced it, nothing will be able to shake thy faith. 

Ver. 6. "Wherefore I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God, which is in thee by the putting on 
of my hands." 

You see how greatly dispirited and dejected he considers him to be. He almost says, "Think not that I 
despise thee, but be assured that I do not condemn thee, nor have I forgotten thee. Consider, at any rate, thy 
mother and thy grandmother. It is because I know that thou hast unfeigned faith that I put thee in 
remembrance." For it requires much zeal to stir up the gift of God. As fire requires fuel, so grace requires our 
alacrity, that it may be ever fervent. "I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God, that is in thee 
by the putting on of my hands," that is, the grace of the Spirit, which thou hast received, for presiding over the 
Church, for the working of miracles, and for every service. For this grace it is in our power to kindle or to 
extinguish; wherefore he elsewhere says," Quench not the Spirit." (1 Thess. v. 19.) For by sloth and 

carelessness it is quenched, and by watchfulness and diligence it is kept alive. For it is in thee indeed, but 
do thou render it more vehement, that is, fill it with confidence, with joy and delight. Stand manfully. 
Ver. 7. "For God bath not given us the spirit of fear, but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind." 
That is, we did not receive the Spirit, that we should shrink from exertion, but that we may. speak with 
boldness. For to many He gives a spirit of fear, as we read in the wars of the Kings. "A spirit of fear fell upon 
them." (Ex. xv. 16?) That is, he infused terror into them. But to thee He has given, on the contrary, a spirit of 
power, and of love toward Himself. This, then, is of grace, and yet not merely of grace, but when we have 
first performed our own parts. For the Spirit that maketh us cry, "Abba, Father," inspires us with love both 
towards Him, and towards our neighbor, that we may love one another. For love arises from power, and 
from not fearing. For nothing is so apt to dissolve love as fear, and a suspicion of treachery. 
"For God hath not given us the spirit of fear, but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind":(1) he calls a 
healthy state of the soul a sound mind, or it may mean sobriety of mind, or else a sobering of the mind, that 
we may be sober-minded, and that if any evil befall us, it may sober us, and cut off superfluities. 
MORAL. Let us then not be distressed at the evils that happen to us. This is sobriety of mind. "In the season 
of temptation," he says, "make not haste." (Ecclus. ii. 2.) Many have their several griefs at home, and we 
share in each other's sorrows, though not in their sources. For one is unhappy on account of his wife, another 
on account of his child, or his domestic, another of his friend, another of his enemy, another of his neighbor, 
another from some loss. And various are the causes of sorrow, so that we can find no one free from trouble 
and unhappiness of some kind or other, but some have greater sorrows and some less. Let us not therefore 
be impatient, nor think ourselves only to be unhappy. 

For there is no such thing in this mortal life as being exempt from sorrow. If not to-day, yet to-morrow; if not 
to-morrow, yet some later day trouble comes. For as one cannot sail, I mean, over a long sea, and not feel 
disquietude, so it is not possible to pass through this life, without experience of sorrow, yea though you 
name a rich man; for in that he is rich, he hath many occasions of inordinate desires, (2) yea, though the king 
himself, since he too is ruled by many, and cannot do all that he would. Many favors he grants contrary to his 
wishes, and more than all men is obliged to do what he would not. How so? Because he has many about 
him who wish to receive his gifts. And just think how(3) great is his chagrin, when he is desirous to effect 
something, but is unable, either from fear or suspicion, or hindered by enemies or by friends. Often when he 
has succeeded in achieving some end, he loses all the pleasure of it, from many becoming at enmity with 
him. Again, do you think that they are free from grief, who live a life of ease? It is impossible. As a man 
cannot escape death, so neither can he escape sorrow. How many troubles must they endure, which we 
cannot express in words, and which they only can know by experience! How many have prayed a thousand 
times to die, in the midst of their wealth and luxury! For luxury by no means puts men out of the reach of grief: 
it is rather the very thing to produce sorrows, diseases, and uneasiness, often when there is no real ground 
for it. For when such is the habit of the soul, it is apt to grieve even without a cause. Physicians say that from 
a weak state of the stomach arise sorrows(1) without any occasion; and does not the like happen to 
ourselves, to feel uneasy, without knowing any cause for it? In short, we can find no one who is exempted 
from sorrow. And if he has less occasion for grief than ourselves, yet he thinks otherwise, for he feels his own 
sorrows, more than those of other men. As they who suffer pain in any part of their bodies, think that their 
sufferings exceed their neighbor's. He that has a disease of the eye, thinks there is nothing so painful, and 
he that has a disorder in the stomach, considers that the sorest of diseases, and each thinks that the 
heaviest of sufferings, with which he is himself afflicted. So it is with sorrow, each thinks his own present grief 
the most severe. For of this he judges by his own experience. He that is childless considers nothing so sad 
as to be without children; he that is poor, and has many children, complains of the extreme evils of a large 
family. He who has hut one, looks upon this as the greatest misery, because that one, being set too much 
store by, and never corrected, becomes willful, and brings grief upon his father. He who has a beautiful wife, 
thinks nothing so bad as having a beautiful wife, because it is the occasion of jealousy and intrigue. He who 
has an ugly one, thinks nothing worse than having a plain wife, because it is constantly disagreeable. The 
private man thinks nothing more mean, more useless, than his mode of life. The soldier declares that 
nothing is more toilsome, more perilous, than warfare; that it would he better to live on bread and water than 
endure such hardships. He that is in power thinks there can be no greater burden than to attend to the 
necessities of others. He that is subject to that power, thinks nothing more servile than living at the beck of 
others. The married man considers nothing worse than a wife, and the cares of marriage. The unmarried 
declares there is nothing so wretched as being unmarried, and wanting the repose of a home. The 
merchant thinks the husbandman happy in his security. The husbandman thinks the merchant so in his 
wealth. In short, all mankind are somehow hard to please, and discontented and impatient. When 
condemning the whole race, he saith, "Man is a thing of nought" (Ps. cxliv. 4), implying that the whole kind is 
a wretched unhappy creature. How many long for old age! How many think youth a happy time! Thus each 
different period has its unhappiness. When we find ourselves censured on account of our youth, we say, 
why are we not old? and when our heads are hoary, we ask whither has our youth flown? Numberless, in 

short, are the occasions of sorrow. There is one path only by which this unevenness can be escaped. It is 
the path of virtue. Yet that too has its sorrows, only they are sorrows not unprofitable, but productive of gain 
and advantage. For if any one has sinned, he washes away his sin by the compunction that comes of his 
sorrow. Or, if he has grieved in sympathizing with a fallen brother, this is not without its recompense. For 
sympathy with those that are in misery gives us great confidence towards God. 

Hear therefore what philosophy is taught by the example of Job in holy Scripture! Hear also what Paul saith: 
"Weep with them that weep"; and again, "Condescend to men of low estate." (Rom. xii. 15, 16.) For, by the 
communication of sorrow, the extreme burden of it is lightened. For as in the case of a heavy load, he that 
hears part of the weight relieves him who was bearing it alone, so it is in all other things. 
But now, when any one of our relatives dies, there are many who sit by and console us. Nay, we often raise 
up even an ass that has fallen; hut when the souls of our brethren are falling, we overlook them and pass by, 
as if they were of less value than an ass. And if we see any one entering into a tavern indecently; nay, if we 
see him drunk, or guilty of any other unseemly action, we do not restrain him, we rather join him in it. Whence 
Paul has said: "They not only do these things, but have pleasure in them that do them." (Rom. i. 32.) The 
greater part even form associations(2) for the purposes of drunkenness. But do thou, O man, form 
associations to restrain the madness of inebriety. Such friendly doings are beneficial to those who are in 
bonds or in affliction. Something of this kind Paul enjoined to the Corinthians, alluding to which he says, 
"That there be no gatherings when I come." (1 Cor. xvi. 2.) But now everything is done with a view to luxury, 
reveling, and pleasure. We have a common seat, a common table, we have wine in common, and common 
expenses, but we have no community of alms. Such were the friendly doings in the time of the Apostles; they 
brought all their goods into the common stock. Now I do not require you to bestow all, but some part. "Let 
each lay by him in store on the first day of the week, as God has prospered him," and lay it down as a tribute 
for the seven days. In this way give aims, whether more or less. "For thou shalt not appear before the Lord 
empty." (Ex. xxiii. 15.) This was said to the Jews, how much more then to us. For this cause the poor stand 
before the doors, that no one may enter empty, but each may do alms at his entrance. Thou enterest to 
implore mercy. First show mercy. He that comes later owes the more. For when we have been first, he that is 
second pays down more.(1) Make God thy debtor, and then offer thy prayers. Lend to Him, and then ask a 
return, and thou shalt receive it with usury. God wills this, and does not retract. If thou ask with alms, He holds 
himself obliged. If thou ask with alms, thou lendest and receivest interest. Yes, I beseech you! It is net for 
stretching out thy hands thou shalt be heard stretch forth thy hands, not to heaven, but to the poor. If thou 
stretch forth thy hand to the hands of the poor, thou hast reached the very summit of heaven. For He who sits 
there receives thine alms. But if thou liftestthem up without a gift, thou gainest nothing. If the king, arrayed in 
purple, should come to thee and ask an alms, wouldest thou not readily give all that thou hast? But now 
when thou art entreated through the poor, not by an earthly but a heavenly King, dost thou stand regardless, 
and defer thy gift? What punishment then dost thou not deserve? For the being heard depends not upon the 
lifting up of thy hands, nor on the multitude of thy words, but upon thy works. For hear the prophet, "When ye" 
spread "forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you: yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear." 
(Isa. i. 15.) For he ought to be silent, who needs mercy, and not even to look up to heaven; he that hath 
confidence may say(3) much. But what says the Scripture, "Judge for the fatherless, plead for the widow, 
learn to do good." (Isa. i. 1 7.) In this way we shall be heard, though we lift not up our hands, nor utter a word, 
nor make request. In these things then let us be zealous, that we may obtain the promised blessings, 
through the grace and lovingkindness, &c. 

HOMILY II. 

2 TIMOTHY i. 8-10. 

"Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me His prisoner: but be thou partaker of 
the afflictions of the Gospel according to the power of God; Who hath saved us, and called us with an holy 
calling, not according to our works, but according to His own purpose and grace, which was given us in 
Christ Jesus before the world began; but is now made manifest by the appearing of our Saviour Jesus 
Christ." 

THERE is nothing worse than that man should measure and judge of divine things by human reasonings. 
For thus he will fall from that rock(2) a vast distance, and be deprived of the light. For if he who wishes with 
human eyes to apprehend the rays of the sun will not only not apprehend them, but, besides this failure, will 
sustain great injury; so, but in a higher degree, is he in a way to suffer this, and abusing the gift of God, who 
would by human reasonings gaze intently on that Light. Observe accordingly how Marcion, and Manes, and 
Valentinus, and others who introduced their heresies and pernicious doctrines(4) into the Church of God, 
measuring divine things by human reasonings, became ashamed of the Divine economy. Yet it was not a 
subject for shame, but rather for glorying; I speak of the Cross of Christ. For there is not so great a sign of the 

love of God for mankind, not heaven, nor sea, nor earth, nor the creation of all things out of nothing, nor all 
else beside, as the Cross. Hence it is the boast of Paul, "God forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross of 
our Lord Jesus Christ." (Gal. vi. 14.) But natural men, and those who attribute to God no more than to human 
beings, stumble, and become ashamed. Wherefore Paul from the first exhorts his disciple, and through him 
all others, in these words: "Be not thou ashamed of the testimony of our Lord," that is, (5) Be not ashamed, 
that thou preachest One that was crucified, but rather glory in it." For in themselves death and imprisonment 
and chains are matters of shame and reproach. But when the cause is added before us, and the mystery 
viewed aright, they will appear full of dignity, and matter for boasting. For it was that death which saved the 
world, when it was perishing. That death connected earth with heaven, that death destroyed the power of the 
devil, and made men angels, and sons of God: that death raised our nature to the kingly throne. Those 
chains were the conversion of many. "Be not" therefore "ashamed," he says, "of the testimony of our Lord, 
nor of me His prisoner: but be thou partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel"; that is, though thou shouldest 
suffer the same things, be not thou ashamed. For that this is implied appears from what he said above; "God 
hath given us a spirit of power, and of love, and of a sound mind"; and by what follows, "Be thou partaker of 
the sufferings of the Gospel": not merely be not ashamed of them, but be not ashamed even to experience 
them. 

And he does not say, "Do not fear," but, the more to encourage him, "be not ashamed," as if there were no 
further danger, if he could overcome the shame. For shame is only then oppressive, when one is overcome 
by it. Be not therefore ashamed, if I, who raised the dead, who wrought miracles, who traversed the world, 
am now a prisoner. For I am imprisoned, not as a malefactor, but for the sake of Him who was crucified. If my 
Lord was not ashamed of the Cross, neither am I of chains. And with great propriety, when he exhorts him not 
to be ashamed, he reminds him of the Cross. If thou art not ashamed of the Cross, he means, neither be thou 
of chains; if our Lord and Master endured the Cross, much more should we chains. For he who is ashamed 
of what He endured, is ashamed of Him that was crucified. Now it is not on my own account that I bear these 
chains; therefore do not give way to human feelings, but bear thy part in these sufferings. "Be partaker of the 
afflictions of the Gospel." He says not this, as if the Gospel could suffer injury, but to excite his disciple to 
suffer for it. 

"According to the power of God; Who hath saved us, and called us with a holy calling, not according to our 
works, but according to His own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world 
began." 

More especially because it was a hard thing to say, "Be partakers of afflictions," he again consoles him.(1) 
Reckon that thou sustainest these things, not by thine own power, but by the power of God. For it is thy part to 
choose and to be zealous, but God's to alleviate sufferings and bid them cease. (2) He then shows him the 
proofs of His power. Consider how thou wast saved, how thou wast called. As he elsewhere says, 
"According to His power that worketh in us." (Eph. iii. 20.) So much was it a greater exercise of power to 
persuade the world to believe, than to make the Heavens. But how was he "called with a holy calling"?(3) 
This means, He made them saints, who were sinners and enemies. "And this not of ourselves, it was the gift 
of God." If then He is mighty in calling us, and good, in that He hath done it of grace and not of debt, we ought 
not to fear. For He Who, when we should have perished, (4) saved us, though enemies, by grace, will He not 
much more cooperate with us, when He sees us working? "Not according to our own works," he says, "but 
according to his own purpose and grace," that is, no one compelling, no one counseling Him, but of His own 
purpose, from the impulse of His own goodness, He saved us; for this is the meaning of "according to His 
own purpose." "Which was given us before the world began." That is, it was determined without beginning 
that these things should be done in Christ Jesus. This is no light consideration, that from the first He willed it. 
It was not an after-thought. How then is not the Son eternal? for He also willed it from the beginning. 
Ver. 1 0. "But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Saviour Jesus Christ, Who hath abolished death, 
and hath brought life and immortality to light by the Gospel." 

Thou seest the power, thou seest the gift bestowed not by works, but through the Gospel. These are objects 
of hope: for both were wrought in His Body. And how will they be wrought in ours? "By the Gospel." 
Ver. 1 1 . "Whereunto I am appointed a preacher and an Apostle, and a teacher of the Gentiles." 
Why does he so constantly repeat this, and call himself a teacher of the Gentiles? Because he wishes to 
persuade them that they also ought to draw close to the Gentiles. Be not therefore dismayed at my 
sufferings. The sinews of death are unstrung. It is not as a malefactor that I suffer, but because I am "a 
teacher of the Gentiles." At the same time he makes his discourse worthy of credit. 
Ver. 12. "For the which cause I also suffer these things, nevertheless I am not ashamed. For I know Whom I 
have believed, and am persuaded that He is able to keep that which I have committed unto Him against 
that day." 

"I am not ashamed," he says. For are chains, are sufferings, a matter for shame? Be not then ashamed! 
Thou seest how he illustrates his teaching by his works. "These things," he says, "I suffer": I am cast into 
prison, I am banished; "For I know Whom I have believed, and am persuaded that He is able to keep that 

which I have committed to Him(1) against That Day." What is(2) "that which is committed"?(3) The faith, the 
preaching of the Gospel. He, who committed this to him, he says, will preserve it unimpaired. I suffer 
everything, that I may not be despoiled of this treasure, and I am not ashamed at these things, so long as it 
is preserved uninjured. Or he calls the Faithful the charge which God committed to him, or which he 
committed to God. For he says, "Now I commit you to the Lord." (Acts xx. 32.) That is, these things will not be 
unprofitable to me. And in Timothy is seen the fruit of the charge thus "committed." You see that he is 
insensible to sufferings, from the hope that he entertains of his disciples. 

MORAL. Such ought a Teacher to be, so to regard his disciples, to think them everything. "Now we live," he 
says, "if ye stand fast in the Lord." And again, "What is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? are not even 
ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ?" (1 Thess. iii. 8, and ii. 19.) You see his anxiety in this matter, his 
regard for the good of his disciples, not less than for his own. (4) For teachers ought to surpass natural 
parents, to be more zealous than they. And it becomes their children to be kindly affectioned towards them. 
For he says, "Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves: for they watch for your souls as 
they that must give account." (Heb. xiii. 17.) For say, is he subject to so dangerous a responsibility, and art 
thou not willing to obey him, and that too, for thy own benefit? For though his own state should be good, yet 
as long as thou art in a bad condition his anxiety continues, he has a double account to render. And 
consider what it is to be responsible and anxious for each of those who are under his rule. What honor 
wouldest thou have reckoned equal, what service, in requital of such dangers? Thou canst not offer an 
equivalent. For thou hast not yet devoted thy soul for him, but he lays down his life for thee, and if he lays it 
not down here, when the occasion requires it, he loses it There. But thou art not willing to submit even in 
words. This is the prime cause of all these evils, that the authority of rulers is neglected, that there is no 
reverence, no fear. He says, "Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves." But now all is 
turned upside down and confounded. And this I say not for the sake of the rulers; (for what benefit will they 
have of the honor they receive from us, (5) except so far as we are rendered obedient;) but I say it for your 
advantage. For with respect to the future, they will not be benefited by the honor done them, but receive the 
greater condemnation, neither will they he injured as to the future by ill treatment, but will have the more 
excuse. But all this I desire to be done for your own sakes. For when rulers are honored by their people, this 
too is reckoned against them; as in the case of Eli it is said, "Did I not choose him out of his father's house?" 
(1 Sam. ii. 27.) But when they are insulted, as in the instance of Samuel, God said, "They have not rejected 
thee, but they have rejected Me." (1 Sam. viii. 7.) Therefore insult is their gain, honor their burden. What I say, 
therefore, is for your sakes, not for theirs. He that honors the Priest, will honor God also; and he who has 
learnt to despise the Priest, will in process of time insult God. "He that receiveth you," He saith, "receiveth 
Me." (Matt. x. 40.) "Hold my priests in honor" (Ecclus. vii. 31?), He says. The Jews learned to despise God, 
because they despised Moses, and would have stoned him. For when a man is piously disposed towards 
the Priest, he is much more so towards God. And even if the Priest be wicked, God seeing that thou 
respectest him, though unworthy of honor, through reverence to Him, will Himself reward thee. For if "he that 
receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive a prophet's reward" (Matt. x. 41); then he who 
honoreth and submitteth and giveth way to the Priest shall certainly be rewarded. For if in the case of 
hospitality, when thou knowest not the guest, thou receivest so high a recompense, much more wilt thou be 
requited, if thou obeyest him whom He requires thee to obey. "The Scribes and Pharisees," He says, "sit in 
Moses' seat; all therefore, whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do, but do not ye after their 
works." (Matt, xxiii. 2, 3.) Knowest thou not what the Priest is? He is an Angel(6) of the Lord. Are they his own 
words that he speaks? If thou despisest him, thou despisest not him, but God that ordained him. But how 
does it appear, thou askest, that he is ordained of God? Nay, if thou suppose it otherwise, thy hope is 
rendered vain. For if God worketh nothing through his means, thou neither hast any Laver, nor art partaker of 
the Mysteries, nor of the benefit of Blessings; thou art therefore not a Christian. What then, you say, does 
God ordain all, even the unworthy? God indeed doth not ordain all, but He worketh through all, though they 
be themselves unworthy, that the people may be saved. For if He spoke, for the sake of the people, by an 
ass, and by Balaam, a most wicked man, much more will He speak by the mouth of the Priest. What indeed 
will not God do or say for our salvation? By whom doth He not act? For if He wrought through Judas and 
those other that "prophesied," to whom He will say," I never knew you; depart from Me, ye workers of 
iniquity" (Matt. vii. 22, 23); and if others "cast out devils" (Ps. vi. 8); will He not much more work through the 
Priests? Since if we were to make inquisition into the lives of our rulers, we should then become the 
ordainers(l) of our own teachers, and all would be confusion; the feet would be uppermost, the head below. 
Hear Paul saying, "But with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you, or of man's judgment." 
(1 Cor. iv. 3.) And again, "Why dost thou judge thy brother?" (Rom. xiv. 10.) For if we may not judge our 
brother, much less our teacher. If God commands this indeed, thou doestwell, and sinnest if thou do it not; 
but if the contrary, dare not do it, nor attempt to go beyond the lines that are marked out. After Aaron had 
made the golden calf, Corah, Dathan, and Abiram raised an insurrection against him. And did they not 
perish? Let each attend to his own department. For if he teach perverted doctrine, though he be an Angel, 

obey him not; but if he teach the truth, take heed not to his life, but to his words. Thou hast Paul to instruct thee 
in what is right both by words and works. But thou sayest, "He gives not to the poor, he does not govern 
well." Whence knowest thou this? Blame not, before thou art informed. Be afraid of the great account. Many 
judgments are formed upon mere opinion. Imitate thy Lord, who said, "I will go down now, and see whether 
they have done altogether according to the cry of it, and if not, I will know." (Gen. xviii. 21 .) But if thou hast 
enquired, and informed thyself, and seen; yet await the Judge, and usurp not the office of Christ. To Him it 
belongs, and not to thee, to make this inquisition. Thou art an inferior servant, not a master. Thou art a 
sheep, be not curious concerning the shepherd, lest thou have to give account of thy accusations against 
him. But you say, How does he teach me that which he does not practice himself? It is not he that speaks to 
thee. If it be he whom thou obeyest, thou hast no reward. It is Christ that thus admonishes thee. And what do I 
say? Thou oughtest not to obey even Paul, if he speaks of himself, or anything human, but the Apostle, that 
has Christ speaking in him. Let not us judge one another's conduct, but each his own. Examine thine own 
life. 

But thou sayest, "He ought to be better than I." Wherefore? "Because he is a Priest." And is he not superior 
to thee in his labors, his dangers, his anxious conflicts and troubles? But if he is not better, oughtest thou 
therefore to destroy thyself? These are the words of arrogance. (2) For how is he not better than thyself? He 
steals, thou sayest, and commits sacrilege! How knowest thou this? Why dost thou cast thyself down a 
precipice? If thou shouldest hear it said that such an one hath a purple robe, (3) though thou knewest it to be 
true, and couldest convict him, thou declinestto do it, and pretendest ignorance, not being willing to run into 
unnecessary danger. But in this case thou art so far from being backward, that even without cause thou 
exposest thyself to the danger. Nor think thou art not responsible for these words. Hear what Christ says, 
"Every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment." (Matt. xii. 36.) 
And dost thou think thyself better than another, and dost thou not groan, and beat thy breast, and bow down 
thy head, and imitate the Publican? 

And then thou destroyest thyself, though thou be better. Be silent, that thou cease not to be better. If thou 
speak of it, thou hast done away the merit; if thou thinkest it, I do not say so; if thou dost not think it, thou hast 
added much. For if a notorious sinner, when he confessed, "went home justified," he who is a sinner in a less 
degree, and is conscious of it, how will he not be rewarded? Examine thy own life. Thou dost not steal; but 
thou art rapacious, and overbearing, and guilty of many other such things. I say not this to defend theft; God 
forbid! deeply lament if there is any one really guilty of it, but I do not believe it. How great an evil is 
sacrilege, it is impossible to say. But I spare you. For I would not that our virtue should be rendered vain by 
accusing others. What was worse than the Publican? For it is true that he was a publican, and guilty of many 
offenses, yet because the Pharisee only said, "I am not as this publican," he destroyed all his merit. I am 
not, thou sayest, like this sacrilegious Priest. And dost not thou make all in vain? 

This I am compelled to say, and to enlarge upon in my discourse, not so much because I am concerned for 
them, but because I fear for you, lest you should render your virtue vain by this boasting of yourselves, and 
condemnation of others. For hear the exhortation of Paul, "Let every one prove his own work, and then shall 
he have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another." (Gal. vi. 4.) 

If you had a wound, tell me, and should go to a physician, would you stay him from salving and dressing 
your own wound, and be curious to enquire whether the physician had a wound, or not? and if he had, would 
you mind it? Or because he had it, would you forbear dressing your own, and say, A physician ought to be in 
sound health, and since he is not so, I shall let my wound go uncured? For will it be any palliation(l) for him 
that is under rule, that his Priest is wicked? By no means. He will suffer the destined punishment, and you too 
will meet with that which is your due. For the Teacher now only fills a place. For "it is written, They shall all be 
taught of God." (John vi. 45; Isa. liv. 1 3.) "Neither shall they say, Know the Lord. For all shall know Me from the 
least to the greatest." (Jer. xxxi. 34.) Why then, you will say, does he preside? Why is he set over us? I 
beseech you, let us not speak ill of our teachers, nor call them to so strict an account, lest we bring evil upon 
ourselves. Let us examine ourselves, and we shall not speak ill of others. Let us reverence that day, on 
which he enlightened(2) us. He who has a father, whatever faults he has, conceals them all. For it is said, 
"Glory not in the dishonor of thy father; for thy father's dishonor is no glory unto thee. And if his understanding 
fail, have patience with him." (Ecclus. iii. 10-12.) And if this be said of our natural fathers, much more of our 
spiritual fathers. Reverence him, in that he every day ministers to thee, causes the Scriptures to be read, 
sets the house in order for thee, watches for thee, prays for thee, stands imploring God on thy behalf, offers 
supplications for thee, for thee is all his worship. Reverence all this, think of this, and approach him with 
pious respect. Say not, he is wicked. What of that? He that is not wicked, (3) doth he of himself bestow upon 
thee these great benefits? By no means. Everything worketh according to thy faith. Not even the righteous 
man can benefit thee, if thou art unfaithful, nor the unrighteous harm thee, if thou art faithful. God, when He 
would save His people, wrought for the ark by Oxen. (4) Is it the good life or the virtue of the Priest that 
confers so much on thee? The gifts which God bestows are not such as to be effects of the virtue of the 
Priest. All is of grace. His part is but to open his mouth, while God worketh all: the Priest only performs a 

symbol. (5) Consider how wide was the distance between John and Jesus. Hear John saying, "I have need 
to be baptized of Thee" (Matt. iii. 14), and, "Whose shoe's latchet I am not worthy to unloose." (John i. 27.) 
Yet notwithstanding this difference, the Spirit descended. Which John had not. For "of His fullness," it is said, 
"we all have received." (John i. 16.) Yet nevertheless, It descended not till He was baptized. But neither was 
it John who caused It to descend. Why then is this done? That thou mayest learn that the Priest performs a 
symbol. (6) No man differs so widely from another man, as John from Jesus, and yet with him(7) the Spirit 
descended, that we may learn, that it is God who worketh all, that all is God's doing. I am about to say what 
may appear strange, but be not astonished nor startled at it. The Offering is the same, whether a common 
man, or Paul or Peter offer it. It is the same which Christ gave to His disciples, and which the Priests now 
minister. This is nowise inferior to that, because it is not men that sanctify even this, but the Same who 
sanctified the one sanctifies the other also. For as the words which God spake are the same which the Priest 
now utters, so is the Offering the same, and the Baptism, that which He gave. Thus the whole is of faith. The 
Spirit immediately fell upon Cornelius, because he had previously fulfilled his part, and contributed his faith. 
And this is His Body, as well as that. And he who thinks the one inferior to the other, knows not that Christ 
even now is present, even now operates. Knowing therefore these things, which we have not said without 
reason, but that we may conform your minds in what is right, and render you more secure for the future, keep 
carefully in mind what has been spoken. For if we are always hearers, and never doers, we shall reap no 
advantage from what is said. Let us therefore attend diligently to the things spoken. Let us imprint them upon 
our minds. Let us have them ever engraved upon our consciences, and let us continually ascribe glory to 
the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost. 

HOMILY III. 

2 TIMOTHY i. 13-18. 

"Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou hast heard of me, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus. 
That good thing which was committed unto thee keep by the Holy Ghost Which dwelleth in us. This thou 
knowest, that all they which are in Asia be turned away from me; of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes. 
The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus; for he oft refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my 
chain: but, when he was in Rome, he sought me out very diligently, and found me. The Lord grant unto him 
that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day: and in how many things he ministered unto me at Ephesus, 
thou knowest very well." 

NOT by letters alone did Paul instruct his disciple in his duty, but before by words also which he shows, both 
in many other passages, as where he says, "whether by word or our Epistle" (2 Thess. ii. 15), and especially 
here. Let us not therefore suppose that anything relating to doctrine was spoken imperfectly. For many 
things he delivered to him without writing. Of these therefore he reminds him, when he says, "Hold fast the 
form of sound words, which thou hast heard of me." After the manner of artists, I have impressed on thee the 
image of virtue, fixing in thy soul a sort of rule, and model, and outline of all things pleasing to God. These 
things then hold fast, and whether thou art meditating any matter of faith or love, or of a sound mind, form from 
hence your ideas of them. It will not be necessary to have recourse to others for examples, when all has 
been deposited within thyself. 

"That good thing which was committed unto thee keep,"-how?-"by the Holy Ghost which dwelleth in us." For 
it is not in the power of a human soul, when instructed with things so great, to be sufficient for the keeping of 
them. And why? Because there are many robbers, and thick darkness, and the devil still at hand to plot 
against us; and we know not what is the hour, what the occasion for him to set upon us. How then, he means, 
shall we be sufficient for the keeping of them? "By the Holy Ghost"; that is if we have the Spirit: with us, if we 
do not expel grace, He will stand by us. For, "Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it. 
Except the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain." (Ps. cxxvii. 1 .) This is our wall, this our 
castle, this our refuge. If therefore It dwelleth in us, and is Itself our guard, what need of the commandment? 
That we may hold It fast, may keep It, and not banish It by our evil deeds. 

Then he describes his trials and temptations, not to depress his disciple, but to elevate him, that if he should 
ever fall into the same, he may not think it strange, when he looks back and remembers what things 
happened to his Teacher. What then says he? Since it was probable that Timothy might be apprehended, 
and be deserted, and be relieved by no friendly attention, or influence, or assistance, but be abandoned 
even by his friends and the faithful themselves, hear what he says, "This thou knowest, that all they which are 
in Asia be turned away from me." It seems that there were then in Rome many persons from the regions of 
Asia. "But no one stood by me," he says, no one acknowledged me, all were alienated. And observe the 
philosophy of his soul. He only mentions their conduct, he does not curse them, but he praises him that 
showed kindness to him, and invokes a thousand blessings upon him, without any curse on them. "Of whom 
is Phygellus and Hermogenes. The Lord give mercy to the house of Onesiphorus, for he oft refreshed me, 

and was not ashamed of my chain. But, when he was in Rome, he sought me out diligently and found me." 
Observe how he everywhere speaks of the shame, and not of the danger, lest Timothy should be alarmed. 
And yet it was a thing that was full of peril. For he gave offense to Nero by making friends with one of his 
prisoners. (2) But when he was in Rome, he says, he not only did not shun intercourse with me, but "sought 
me out very diligently, and found me." 

"The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day: and in how many things he 
ministered unto me at Ephesus, thou knowest very well." 

Such ought the faithful to be. Neither fear, nor threats, nor disgrace, should deter them from assisting one 
another, standing by them and succoring them as in war. For they do not so much benefit those who are in 
danger, as themselves, by the service they render to them, making themselves partakers of the crowns due 
to them. For example, is any one of those who are devoted to God visited with affliction and distress, and 
maintaining the conflict with great fortitude; whilst thou art not yet brought(3) to this conflict? It is in thy power if 
thou wilt, without entering into the course, to be a sharer of the crowns reserved for him, by standing by him, 
preparing his mind,(1) and animating and exciting him. Hence it is that Paul elsewhere says, "Ye have done 
well that ye did communicate with my affliction. For even in Thessalonica ye sent once and again unto my 
necessity." (Phil. iv. 14, 16.) And how could they that were far off share in the affliction of him that was not with 
them? How? He says, "ye sent once and again unto my necessities." Again he says, speaking of 
Epaphroditus, "Because he was nigh unto death, not regarding his life, that he might supply your lack of 
service toward me." (Phil. ii. 30.) For as in the service of kings, not only those who fight the battle, but those 
who guard the baggage, share in the honor; and not merely so, but frequently even have an equal portion of 
the spoils, though they have not imbrued their hands in blood, nor stood in array, nor even seen the ranks of 
the enemy; so it is in these conflicts. For he who relieves the combatant, when wasted with hunger, who 
stands by him, encouraging him by words, and rendering him every service, he is not inferior to the 
combatant. 

For do not suppose Paul the combatant, that irresistible and invincible one, but some one of the many, who, 
if he had not received much consolation and encouragement, would not perhaps have stood, would not 
have contended. So those who are out of the contest may perchance be the cause of victory to him, who is 
engaged in it, and may be partakers of the crowns reserved for the victor. And what wonder, if he who 
communicates to the living is thought worthy of the same rewards with those who contend, since it is 
possible to communicate after death even with the departed, with those who are asleep, who are already 
crowned, who want for nothing. For hear Paul saying, "Partaking in the memories of the Saints. "(2) And how 
may this be done? When thou admirest a man, (3) when thou doest any of those acts for which he was 
crowned, thou art evidently a sharer in his labors, and in his crowns. 

"The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day." He had compassion on me, he 
says, he shall therefore have the like return in that terrible Day, when we shall have need of much mercy. 
"The Lord grant him to find mercy from the Lord." Are there two Lords then? By no means. But "to us there is 
one Lord Christ Jesus, and one God." (1 Cor. viii. 6.) Here those who are infected with the heresy of Marcion 
assail this expression; but let them learn that this mode of speech is not uncommon in Scripture; as when it is 
said, "The Lord said unto my Lord" (Ps. ex. 1); and again, "I said unto the Lord, Thou art my Lord" (Ps. xvi. 2); 
and, "The Lord rained fire from the Lord." (Gen. xix. 24.) This indicates that the Persons are of the same 
substance, not that there is a distinction of nature. For we are not to understand that there are two 
substances differing from each other, but two Persons, each being of the same substance. 
Observe too, that he says, "The Lord grant him mercy." For as he himself had obtained mercy from 
Onesiphorus, so he wished him to obtain the same from God. MORAL. And if Onesiphorus, who exposed 
himself to danger, is saved by mercy, much more are we also saved by the same. For terrible indeed, 
terrible is that account, and such as needs great love for mankind, that we may not hear that awful sentence, 
"Depart from me ... I never knew you, ye that work iniquity" (Matt. vii. 23); or that fearful word, "Depart, ye 
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels" (Matt. xxv. 40): that we may not hear, 
"Between us and you there is a great gulf fixed" (Luke xvi. 16): that we may not hear that voice full of horror, 
"Take him away, and cast him into outer darkness": that we may not hear those words full of terror, "Thou 
wicked and slothful servant." (Matt. xxii. 13, and xxv. 26.) For awful truly and terrible is that tribunal. And yet 
God is gracious and merciful. He is called a God "of mercies and a God of comfort" (2 Cor. i. 3); good as 
none else is good, and kind, and gentle, and full of pity, Who "willeth not the death of a sinner, but that he 
should be converted and live." (Ez. xviii. 24; xxxiii. 1 1 .) Whence then, whence is that Day so full of agony and 
anguish? A stream of fire is rolling before His face. The books of our deeds are opened. The day itself is 
burning as an oven, the angels are flying around, and many furnaces are prepared. How then is He good 
and merciful, and full of lovingkindness to man? Even herein is He merciful, and He shows in these things 
the greatness of His lovingkindness. For He holds forth to us these terrors, that being constrained by them, 
we may be awakened to the desire of the kingdom. 
And observe how, besides commending Onesiphorus, he specifies his kindness, "he oft refreshed me"; like 

a wearied wrestler overcome by heat, he refreshed and strengthened him in his tribulations. And in how 
many things he ministered to me at Ephesus, thou knowest very well. Not only at Ephesus, but here also he 
refreshed me. For such ought to be the conduct of one on the watch and awakened to good actions, not to 
work once, or twice, or thrice, but through the whole of life. For as our body is not fed once for all, and so 
provided with sustenance for a whole life, but needs also daily food, so in this too, godliness requires to be 
supported every day by good works. For we ourselves have need of great mercy. It is on account of our 
sins that God, the Friend of man, does all these things, not that He needs them Himself, but He does all for 
us. For therefore it is that He has revealed them all, and made them known to us, and not merely told us of 
them, but given us assurance of them by what He has done. Though He was worthy of credit upon His word 
only, that no one may think it is said hyperbolically, or in the way of threatening merely, we have further 
assurance by His works. How? By the punishments which He has inflicted both publicly and privately. And 
that thou mayest learn by the very examples, at one time he punished Pharaoh, at another time He brought 
a flood of water upon the earth, and that utter destruction, and again at another time a flood of fire: and even 
now we see in many instances the wicked suffering vengeance, and punishments, which things are figures 
of Hell. 

For lest we should slumber and be slothful, and forget His word, He awakens our minds by deeds; showing 
us, even here, courts of justice, judgment seats, and trials. Is there then among men so great a regard for 
justice, and doth God, whose ordinance even these things are, make no account of it? Is this credible? In a 
house, in a market-place, there is a court of justice. The master daily sits in judgment upon his slaves, calls 
them to account for their offenses, punishes some and pardons others. In the country, the husbandman and 
his wife are daily at law. In a ship, the master is judge, and in a camp the general over his soldiers, and 
everywhere one may see judicial proceedings. In trades, the master judges the learner. In short all, publicly 
and privately, are judges to one another. In nothing is the consideration of justice overlooked, and all in 
every place give account of their actions. And is the inquisition for justice here thus spread through cities, 
through houses, and among individuals; and is there no regard for what is justice there, where "the right 
hand of God is full of righteousness" (Ps. xlviii. 10), and "His righteousness is as the mountains of God"? (Ps. 
xxxvi. 6.) 

How is it then that God, "the righteous Judge, strong and patient" (Ps. vii. 1 1 , Sept.), bears thus with men, and 
does not exact punishment? Here thou hast the cause, He is longsuffering, and thereby would lead thee to 
repentance. But if thou continuest in sin, thou "after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up unto 
thyself wrath." (Rom. ii. 5.) If then He is just, He repays according to desert, and does not overlook those 
who suffer wrongfully, but avenges them. For this is the part of one who is just. If He is powerful, He requites 
after death, and at the Resurrection: for this belongs to him who is powerful. And if because He is 
longsuffering He bears with men, let us not be disturbed, nor ask, why He does not prosecute vengeance 
here? For if this were done, the whole human race before this would have been swept away, if every day He 
should call us to account for our transgressions, since there is not, there is not indeed, a single day pure 
from sin, but in something greater or less we offend; so that we should not one of us have arrived at our 
twentieth year, but for His great long-suffering, and His goodness, that grants us a longer space for 
repentance, that we may put off our past transgressions. 

Let each therefore, with an upright conscience, entering into a review of what he has done, and bringing his 
whole life before him, consider, whether he is not deserving of chastisements and punishments without 
number? And when he is indignant that some one, who has been guilty of many bad actions, escapes with 
impunity; let him consider his own faults, and his indignation will cease. For those crimes appear great, 
because they are in great and notorious matters; but if he will enquire into his own, he will perhaps find them 
more numerous. For to rob and to defraud is the same thing, whether it be done for gold or silver; since both 
proceed from the same mind. He that will steal a little would not refuse to steal much, if it fell in his way; and 
that it does not, is not his own choice, but an accidental circumstance. A poor man, who robs a poorer, would 
not hesitate to rob the rich if he could. His forbearance arises from weakness, and not from choice. Such an 
one, you say, is a ruler; and takes away the property of those who are under his rule. And say, dost not thou 
steal? For tell me not that he steals talents, and you as many(1) pence. In giving alms, some cast in gold, 
while the widow threw in two mites, yet she contributed not less than they. Wherefore? Because the intention 
is considered, and not the amount of the gift. And then, in the case of alms, thou wilt have God judge thus, 
and wouldest, because of thy poverty, receive no less a reward for giving two mites than he who lays down 
many talents of gold? and is not the same rule applicable to wrongful dealings? How is this consistent? As 
she who contributed two mites was considered equal to the greatest givers, because of her good intention, 
so thou, who stealest two mites, art as culpable as those mightier robbers. Nay, if I may give utterance to 
something strange, thou art a worse robber than they. For a man would be equally an adulterer, whether he 
committed the sin with the wife of a king, or of a poor man, or of a slave: since the offense is not judged by 
the quality of the persons, but by the wickedness of his will who commits it; so is it likewise in this case. Nay, I 
should call him who committed the sin with an inferior perhaps more guilty, than him who intrigued with the 

queen herself. For in this case, wealth, and beauty, and other attractions might be pleaded, none of which 
exist in the other. Therefore the other is the worse adulterer. Again, he seems to me a more determined 
drunkard, who commits that excess with bad wine; so he is a worse defrauder, who does not despise small 
thefts; for he who commits great robberies, would perhaps not stoop to petty thefts, whereas he who steals 
little things would never forbear greater, therefore he is the greater thief of the two. For how should he 
despise gold, who does not despise silver? So that when we accuse our rulers, let us recount our own faults, 
and we shall find ourselves more given to wrong and robbery than they; unless we judge of right and wrong 
rather by the act, than by the intention of the mind, as we ought to judge. If one should be convicted of having 
stolen the goods of a poor man, another those of a rich man, will they not both be punished alike? Is not a 
man equally a murderer, whether he murder a poor and deformed, or a rich and handsome, man? When 
therefore we say that such an one has seized upon another person's land, let us reflect upon our own faults, 
and then we shall not condemn other men, but we shall admire the longsuffering of God. We shall not be 
indignant that judgment does not fall upon them, but we shall be more slow to commit wickedness 
ourselves. For when we perceive ourselves liable to the same punishment, We shall no longer feel such 
discontent, and shall desist from offenses, and shall obtain the good things to come, through the grace and 
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father, &c. 

HOMILY IV. 

2 TIMOTHY ii. 1-7. 

"Thou therefore, my son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And the things that thou hast heard of 
me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. 
Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ, no man that warreth entangleth himself 
with the affairs of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier. And if a man also 
strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully. The husbandman that laboreth must be 
first partaker of the fruits. Consider what I say; and the Lord give thee understanding in all things." 
THE young sailor at sea is inspired with great confidence, if the Master of the ship has been preserved in a 
shipwreck. For he will not consider that it is from his inexperience that he is exposed to the storm, but from 
the nature of things; and this has no little effect upon his mind. In war also the Captain, who sees his General 
wounded and recovered again, is much encouraged. And thus it produces some consolation to the faithful, 
that the Apostle should have been exposed to great sufferings, and not rendered weak by the utmost of 
them. And had it not been so, he would not have related his sufferings. For when Timothy heard, that he who 
possessed so great powers, who had conquered the whole world, is a prisoner, and afflicted, yet is not 
impatient, nor discontented upon the desertion of his friends; he, if ever exposed to the same sufferings 
himself, would not consider that it proceeded from human weakness, nor from the circumstance of his being 
a disciple, and inferior to Paul, since his teacher too suffered the like, but that all this happened from the 
natural course of things. For Paul himself did this,(1) and related what had befallen him, that he might 
strengthen Timothy, and renew his courage. And he shows that it was for this reason he mentioned his trials 
and afflictions, in that he has added, "Thou, therefore, my son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus." 
What sayest thou? Thou hast shaken us with terrors, thou hast told us that thou art in chains, in afflictions, that 
all have forsaken thee, and, as if thou hadst said thou hadst not suffered anything, nor been abandoned by 
any, thou addest, "Thou therefore, my son, be strong"?-And justly too. For these things were to thy 
strengthening more than to his.(1) For if I, Paul, endure these things, much more oughtestthou to bear them. If 
the master, much more the disciple. And this exhortation he introduces with much affection, calling him "son," 
and not only so, but "my son." If thou art a son, he means, imitate thy father. If thou art a son, be strong in 
consideration of the things which I have said, or rather be strong, not merely from what I have told you, but "of 
God." "Be strong," he says, "in the grace that is in Christ Jesus"; that is, "through the grace of Christ." That is, 
stand firmly. Thou knowest the battle. For elsewhere he says, "We wrestle not against flesh and blood." 
(Eph. vi. 12.) And this he says not to depress but to excite them. Be sober therefore, he means, and watch 
have the grace of the Lord cooperating with thee, and aiding thee in thy contest, contribute thy own part with 
much alacrity and resolution. "And the things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same 
commit thou to faithful men"; to "faithful" men, not to questioners nor to reasoners, to "faithful." How faithful? 
Such as betray not the Gospel they should preach. "The things which thou hast heard," not which thou hast 
searched out. For "faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God." (Rom. x. 17.) But wherefore, 
"among many witnesses"? As if he had said: Thou hast not heard in secret, nor apart, but in the presence of 
many, with all openness of speech. Nor does he say, Tell, but "commit," as a treasure committed is 
deposited in safety. Again he alarms his disciple, both from things above and things below. But he says not 
only "commit to faithful men"; for of what advantage is it that one is faithful, if he is not able to convey his 
doctrine to others? when he does not indeed betray the faith; but does not render others faithful? The 

teacher therefore ought to have two qualities, to be both faithful, and apt to teach; wherefore he says, "who 
shall be able to teach others also." 

"Thou therefore endure hardness as a good soldier of Jesus Christ." Oh, how great a dignity is this, to be a 
soldier of Jesus Christ! Observe the kings on earth, how great an honor it is esteemed to serve under them. 
If therefore the soldier of the king ought to endure hardness, not to endure hardness is not the part of any 
soldier. So that it behooves thee not to complain, if thou endurest hardness, for that is the part of a soldier; 
but to complain, if thou dost not endure hardness. 

"No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life, that he may please him who hath chosen 
him to be a soldier. And if a man also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned except he strive lawfully." 
These things are said indeed to Timothy, but through him they are addressed to every teacher and 
disciple. Let no one therefore of those who hold the office of a Bishop disdain to hear these things, but let 
him be ashamed not to do them. "If any one strive for masteries," he says, "he is not crowned, except he 
strive lawfully." What is meant by "lawfully"? It is not enough that he enters into the lists, that he is anointed, 
and even engages, unless he comply with all the laws of the exercise, with respect to diet, to temperance 
and sobriety, and all the rules of the wrestling school, unless, in short, he go through all that is befitting for a 
wrestler,(2) he is not crowned. And observe the wisdom of Paul. He mentions wrestlers and soldiers, the one 
to prepare him for slaughter and blood, the other with reference to endurance, that he might bear everything 
with fortitude, and be ever in exercise. 

"The husbandman that laboreth must be first partaker of the fruits." 

He had first spoken from his own example as a teacher. He now speaks from those that are more common, 
as wrestlers and soldiers, and in their case he sets before him the rewards. First, that he may please him 
who hath chosen him to be a soldier; secondly, that he may be crowned; now he proposes a third example 
that more particularly suits himself. For the instance of the soldier and the wrestler corresponds to those who 
are under rule, but that of the husbandman to the Teacher. (Strive) not as a soldier or a wrestler only, but as 
a husbandman too. The husbandman takes care not of himself alone, but of the fruits of the earth. That is, no 
little reward of his labors is enjoyed by the husbandman. 

Here he both shows, that to God nothing is wanting, and that there is a reward for Teaching, which he shows 
by a common instance. As the husbandman, he says, does not labor without profit, but enjoys before others 
the fruits of his own toils, so is it fit that the teacher should do: either he means this, or he is speaking of the 
honor to be paid to teachers, but this is less consistent. For why does he not say the husbandman simply, 
but him "that laboreth"? not only that worketh, but that is worn with toil? And here with reference to the delay of 
reward, that no one may be impatient, he says, thou reapest the fruit already, or there is a reward in the labor 
itself. When therefore he has set before him the examples of soldiers, of wrestlers, and husbandmen, and all 
figuratively, "No one," he says, "is crowned except he strive lawfully." And having observed that "the 
husbandman who laboreth must first be partaker of the fruits," he adds, 
"Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding in all things." 

It is on this account that he has spoken these things in proverb and parable. Then again to show his 
affectionate disposition, he ceases not to pray for him, as fearing for his own son, and he says, 
Ver. 8, 9. "Remember that Jesus Christ, of the seed of David, was raised from the dead, according to my 
Gospel. Wherein I suffer trouble as an evil-doer, even unto bonds." 

On what account is this mentioned? It is directed chiefly against the heretics, at the same time to encourage 
Timothy, by showing the advantage of sufferings, since Christ, our Master, Himself overcame death by 
suffering. Remember this, he says, and thou wilt have sufficient comfort. "Remember that Jesus Christ, of the 
seed of David, was raised from the dead." For upon that point many had already begun to subvert the 
dispensation, being ashamed at the immensity of God's love to mankind. For of such a nature are the 
benefits which God has conferred upon us, that men were ashamed to ascribe them to God, and could not 
believe He had so far condescended. "According to my Gospel." Thus he everywhere speaks in his 
Epistles, saying "according to my Gospel, "(1) either because they were bound to believe him, or because 
there were some who preached "another Gospel." (Gal. i. 6.) 

"Wherein I suffer trouble," he says, "as an evil-doer, even unto bonds." Again he introduces consolation and 
encouragement from himself, and he prepares(2) his hearer's mind with these two things; first, that he should 
know him to endure hardness; and, secondly, that he did not so but for a useful purpose, for in this case he 
will gain, in the other will even suffer harm. For what advantage is it, that you can show that a Teacher has 
exposed himself to hardship, but not for any useful purpose? But if it is for any benefit, if for the profit of those 
who are taught, then it is worthy of admiration? 

"But the word of God is not bound." That is, if we were soldiers of this world, and waged an earthly warfare, 
the chains that confine our hands would avail. But now God has made us such that nothing can subdue us. 
For our hands are bound, but not our tongue, since nothing can bind the tongue but cowardice and unbelief 
alone; and where these are not, though you fasten chains upon us, the preaching of the Gospel is not bound. 
If indeed you bind a husbandman, you prevent his sowing, for he sows with his hand: but if you bind a 

Teacher, you hinder not the word, for it is sown with his tongue, not with his hand. Our word therefore is not 
subjected to bonds. For though we are bound, that is free, and runs its course. How? Because though 
bound, behold, we preach. This is for the encouragement of those that are free. For if we that are bound 
preach, much more does it behoove you that are loose to do so. You have heard that I suffer these things, 
as an evil-doer. Be not dejected. For it is a great wonder, that being bound I do the work of those that are 
free, that being bound I overcome all, that being bound I prevail over those that bound me. For it is the word 
of God, not ours. Human chains cannot bind the word of God. "These things I suffer on account of the elect." 
Ver. 10. "Therefore I endure all things," he says, "for the elect's sake, that they may also obtain the salvation 
which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory." 

Behold another incentive. I endure these things, he says, not for myself, but for the salvation of others. It was 
in my power to have lived free from danger; to have suffered none of these things, if I had consulted my own 
interest. On what account then do I suffer these things? For the good of others, that others may obtain eternal 
life. What then dost thou promise thyself? He has not said, simply on account of these particular persons; 
but "for the elect's sake." If God has chosen them, it becomes us to suffer everything for their sakes. "That 
they also may obtain salvation." By saying, "they also," he means, as well as we. For God hath chosen us 
also; and as God suffered for our sakes, so should we suffer for their sakes. Thus it is a matter of retribution, 
not of favor. On the part of God it was grace, for He having received no previous benefit, hath done us good: 
but on our parts it is retribution, we having previously received benefits from God, suffer for these, for whom 
we suffer, in order "that they may obtain salvation." What sayest thou? What salvation? Art thou who wast not 
the author of salvation to thyself, but wast destroying thyself, art thou the author of salvation to others? Surely 
not, and therefore he adds, "salvation that is in Christ Jesus"; that which is truly salvation, "with eternal glory." 
Present things are afflictive, but they are but on earth. Present things are ignominious, but they are 
temporary. They are full of bitterness and pain; but they last only to-day and to-morrow. 
Such is not the nature of the good things, they are eternal, they are in heaven. That is true glory, this is 
dishonor. 

MORAL. For observe, I pray, beloved, that is not glory which is on earth, the true glory is in heaven. But if any 
one would be glorified, let him be dishonored. If he would obtain rest, let him suffer affliction. If any one would 
be forever illustrious, would enjoy pleasure, let him despise temporal things. And that dishonor is glory, and 
glory dishonor, let us now set before us to the best of our power, that we may see what is real glory. It is not 
possible to be glorified upon earth; if thou wouldest be glorified, it must be through dishonor. And let us 
prove this in the examples of two persons, Nero and Paul. The one had the glory of this world, the other the 
dishonor. How? The first was a tyrant, had obtained great success had raised many trophies, had wealth 
ever flowing in, numerous armies everywhere; he had the greater part of the world and the imperial city 
subject to his sway, the whole senate crouching to him, and his palace too(1) was advancing with splendid 
show. When he must be armed, he went forth arrayed in gold and precious stones. When he was to sit still in 
peace, he sat clothed in robes of purple. He was surrounded by numerous guards and attendants. He was 
called Lord of land and sea, Emperor,(2) Augustus, Caesar, King, and other such high-sounding names as 
implied(3) flattery and courtship; and nothing was wanting that might tend to glory. Even wise men and 
potentates and sovereigns trembled at him. For beside all this, he was said to be a cruel and violent man. 
He even wished to be thought a god, and he despised both all the idols, and the very God Who is over all. 
He was worshiped as a god. What greater glory than this? Or rather what greater dishonor? For-I know not 
how-my tongue is carried away by the force of truth, and passes sentence before judgment. Meanwhile let 
us examine the matter according to the opinion of the multitude, and of unbelievers, and the estimation of 
flattery. 

What is greater in the common estimation of glory than to be reputed a god? It is indeed a great disgrace 
that any human being should be so mad, but for the present let us consider the matter according to the 
opinion of the multitude. Nothing then was wanting to him, that contributes to human glory, but he was 
worshiped by all as a god. Now in opposition to him, let us consider Paul. He was a Cilician, and the 
difference between Rome and Cilicia, all know. He was a tent-maker, a poor man, unskilled in the wisdom of 
those without, knowing only the Hebrew tongue, a language despised by all, especially by the Italians. For 
they do not so much despise the barbarian, the Greek, or any other tongue as the Syriac, and this has 
affinity with the Hebrew. Nor wonder at this, for if they despised the Greek, which is so admirable and 
beautiful, much more the Hebrew. He was a man that often lived in hunger, often went to bed without food, a 
man that was naked, and had not clothes to put on; "in cold, and nakedness," as he says of himself. (1 Cor. 
xi. 27.) Nor was this all; but he was cast into prison at the command of Nero himself, and confined with 
robbers, with impostors, with gave-breakers, with murderers, and he was, as he himself says, scourged as a 
malefactor. Who then is the more illustrious? The name of the one the greater part have never heard of. The 
other is daily celebrated by Greeks, and Barbarians, and Scythians, and those who inhabit the extremities 
of the earth. 
But let us not yet consider what is the case now, but even at that time who was the more illustrious, who the 

more glorious, he that was in chains, and dragged bound from prison, or he that was clothed in a purple 
robe, and walked forth from a palace? The prisoner certainly. For the other, who had armies at his 
command, and sat arrayed in purple, was not able to do what he would. But the prisoner, that was like a 
malefactor, and in mean attire, could do everything with more authority. How? The one said, "Do not 
disseminate the word of God." The other said, "I cannot forbear; 'the word of God is not bound.'" Thus the 
Cilician, the prisoner, the poor tent-maker, who lived in hunger, despised the Roman, rich as he was, and 
emperor, and ruling over all, who enriched so many thousands; and with all his armies he availed nothing. 
Who then was illustrious? who venerable? He that in chains was a conqueror, or he that in a purple robe was 
conquered? He that standing below, smote, or he that sitting above, was smitten? He that commanded and 
was despised, or he who was commanded and made no account of the commands? He who being alone 
was victorious, or he who with numerous armies was defeated? The king therefore so came off, that his 
prisoner triumphed over him. Tell me then on whose side you would be? For do not look to what comes 
afterwards, but to what was then their state. Would you be on the side of Nero, or of Paul? I speak not 
according to the estimate of faith, for that is manifest; but according to the estimate of glory, and reverence, 
and preeminence. Any man of right understanding would say, on the side of Paul. For if to conquer is more 
illustrious than to be conquered, he is more glorious. And this is not yet much, that he conquered, but that 
being in so mean a state he conquered one in so exalted a condition. For I say, and will not cease to repeat 
it, though bound with a chain, yet he smote him that was invested with a diadem. 
Such is the power of Christ. The chain surpassed the kingly crown, and this apparel was shown more 
brilliant than that. Clothed in filthy rags, as the inhabitant of a prison, he turned all eyes upon the chains that 
hung on him, rather than on the purple robe. He stood on earth bound down and stooping low, and all left the 
tyrant mounted on a golden chariot to gaze on him. And well they might. For it was customary to see a king 
with white horses, but it was a strange and unwonted sight to behold a prisoner conversing with a king with 
as much confidence as a king would converse with a pitiful and wretched slave. The surrounding multitude 
were all slaves of the king, yet they admired not their lord, but him who was superior to their lord. And he 
before whom all feared and trembled, was trampled upon by one solitary man. See then how great was the 
brightness of these very chains! 

And what need to mention what followed after these things? The tomb of the one is nowhere to be seen; but 
the other lies in the royal city itself, in greater splendor than any king, even there where he conquered, where 
he raised his trophy. If mention is made of the one, it is with reproach, even among his kindred, for he is said 
to have been profligate. But the memory of the other is everywhere accompanied with a good report, not 
among(1) us only, but among his enemies. For when truth shines forth, it puts to shame even one's enemies, 
and if they admire him not for his faith, yet they admire him for his boldness and his manly freedom. The one 
is proclaimed by all mouths, as one that is crowned, the other is loaded with reproaches and accusations. 
Which then is the real splendor? 

And yet I am but praising the lion for his talons, when I ought to be speaking of his real honors. And what are 
these? Those in the heavens. How will he come in a shining vesture with the King of Heaven! How will Nero 
stand then, mournful and dejected! And if what I say seems to thee incredible and ridiculous, thou art 
ridiculous for deriding that which is no subject for laughter. For if thou disbelievest the future, be convinced 
from what is past. The season for being crowned is not yet come, and yet how great honor has the 
combatant gained! What honor then will he not obtain, when the Distributor of the prizes shall come! He was 
among foreigners, "a stranger and a sojourner" (Heb. xi. 1 3), and thus is he admired: what good will he not 
enjoy, when he is amongst his own? Now "our life is hid with Christ in God" (Col. iii. 3); yet he who is dead 
worketh more and is more honored than the living. When that our life shall come, what will he not participate? 
What will he not attain? 

On this account God made him enjoy these honors, not because he wanted them. For if when in the body he 
despised popular glory, much more will he despise it now that he is delivered from the body. Nor only on 
this account has He caused him to enjoy honor, but that those who disbelieve the future may be convinced 
from the present. I say that when the Resurrection shall be, Paul will come with the King of Heaven, and will 
enjoy infinite blessings. But the unbeliever will not be convinced. Let him believe then from the present. The 
tent-maker is more illustrious, more honored than the king. No emperor of Rome ever enjoyed so great 
honor. The emperor is cast out, and lies, no one knows where. The tent-maker occupies the midst of the city, 
as if he were a king, and living. From these things believe, even with respect to the future. If he enjoys so 
great honor here, where he was persecuted and banished, what will he not be when he shall come 
hereafter? If when he was a tent-maker, he was so illustrious, what will he be when he shall come rivaling the 
beams of the sun? If in so much meanness he overcame such magnificence, to whom, at his coming, will he 
not be superior? Can we avoid the conclusion? Who is not moved by the fact, that a tent-maker became 
more honorable than the most honored of kings? If here things happen so beyond the course of nature, 
much more will it be so hereafter. If thou wilt not believe the future, O man, believe the present. If thou wilt not 
believe invisible things, believe things that are seen: or rather believe things which are seen, for so thou wilt 

believe things which are invisible. But if thou wilt not, we may fitly say with the Apostle, "We are pure from 
your blood" (Acts xx. 26): for we have testified to you of all things, and have left out nothing that we should 
have said. Blame yourselves therefore, and to yourselves(2) will ye impute the punishment of Hell. But let 
us, my beloved children, be imitators of Paul, not in his faith only, but in his life, that we may attain to 
heavenly glory, and trample upon that glory that is here. Let not any things present attract us. Let us despise 
visible things, that we may obtain heavenly things, or rather may(3) through these obtain the others, but let it 
be our aim preeminently to obtain those, of which God grant that we may be all accounted worthy, through 
the grace and lovingkindness, &c. 

HOMILY V. 

2 TIMOTHY ii. 11-14. 

"It is a faithful saying: for if we be dead with Him, we shall also live with Him: if we suffer, we shall also reign 
with Him: if we deny Him, He also will deny us: if we believe not, yet He abideth faithful: He cannot deny 
Himself. Of these things put them in remembrance, charging them before the Lord, that they strive not about 
words to no profit, but to the subverting of the hearers." 

MANY of the weaker sort of men give up the effort of faith, and do not endure the deferring of their hope. 
They seek things present, and form from these their judgment of the future. When therefore their lot here was 
death, torments, and chains, and yet he says, they shall come to eternal life, they would not have believed, 
but would have said, "What sayest thou? When I live, I die; and when I die, I live? Thou promisest nothing on 
earth, and dost thou give it in heaven? Little things thou dost not bestow; and dost thou offer great things?" 
That none therefore may argue thus, he places beyond doubt the proof of these things, laying it down 
beforehand already, and giving certain signs. For, "remember," he says, "that Jesus Christ was raised from 
the dead"; that is, rose again after death. And now showing the same thing he says, "It is a faithful saying," 
that he who has attained a heavenly life, will attain eternal life also. Whence is it "faithful"? Because, he says, 
"If we be dead with Him, we shall also live with Him." For say, shall we partake with Him in things laborious 
and painful; and shall we not in things beneficial? But not even a man would act thus, nor, if one had chosen 
to suffer affliction and death with him, would he refuse to him a share in his rest, if he had attained it. But how 
are we "dead with Him"? This death he means both of that in the Layer, and that in sufferings. For he says, 
"Bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus" (2 Cor. iv. 10); and, "We are buried with Him by 
baptism into death" (Rom. vi. 4); and, "Our old man is crucified with Him"; and, "We have been planted 
together in the likeness of His death." (Rom. vi. 5, 6.) But he also speaks here of death by trials: and that 
more especially, for he was also suffering trials when he wrote it. And this is what he says, "If we have 
suffered death on His account, shall we not live on His account? This is not to be doubted. 'If we suffer, we 
shall also reign with Him,'" not absolutely, we shall reign, but "if we suffer," showing that it is not enough to die 
once, (the blessed man himself died daily,) but there was need of much patient endurance; and especially 
Timothy had need of it. For tell me not, he says, of your first sufferings, but that you continue to suffer. 
Then on the other side he exhorts him, not from the good, but from the evil. For if wicked men were to partake 
of the same things, this would be no consolation. And if having endured they were to reign with Him, but not 
having endured were not indeed to reign with Him, but were to suffer no worse evil, though this were terrible, 
yet it would not be enough to affect most men with concern. Wherefore he speaks of something more 
dreadful still. If we deny Him, He will also deny us. So then there is a retribution not of good things only, but of 
the contrary. And consider What it is probable that he will suffer, who is denied in that kingdom. "Whosoever 
shall deny Me, him will I also deny." (Matt. x. 33.) And the retribution is not equal, though it seems so 
expressed. For we who deny Him are men, but He who denies us is God; and how great is the distance 
between God and man, it is needless to say. 

Besides, we injure ourselves; Him we cannot injure. And to show this, he has added, "If we believe not, He 
abideth faithful: He cannot deny Himself: that is, if we believe not that He rose again, He is not injured by it. 
He is faithful and unshaken, whether we say so or not. If then He is not at all injured by our denying Him, it is 
for nothing else than for our benefit that He desires our confession. For He abideth the same, whether we 
deny Him or not. He cannot deny Himself, that is, His own Being. We may say that He is not; though such is 
not the fact. It is not in His nature, it is not possible for Him not to be, that is, to go into nonentity. (1) His 
subsistence always abides, always is. Let us not therefore be so affected, as if we could gratify or could 
injure Him. But lest any one should think that Timothy needed this advice, he has added, 
"Of these things put them in remembrance, charging them before the Lord, that they strive not about words to 
no profit, but to the subverting of the hearers." It is an overawing thing to call God to witness what we say, for 
if no one would dare to set at nought the testimony of man when appealed to, much less when the appeal is 
to God. If any one, for instance, entering into a contract, or making his will, chooses to call witnesses worthy 
of credit, would any transfer the things to those who are not included? Surely not. And even if he wishes it, yet 

fearing the credibility of the witnesses, he avoids it. What is "charging them before the Lord"? he calls God 

to witness both what was said, and what was done. 

"That they strive not about words to no profit;" and not merely so, but "to the subverting of the hearers." Not 

only is there no gain from it, but much harm. "Of these things then put them in remembrance," and if they 

despise thee, God will judge them. But why does he admonish them not to strive about words? He knows 

that it is a dainty(1) thing, and that the human soul is ever prone to contend and to dispute about words. To 

guard against this, he has not only charged them "not to strive about words," but to render his discourse 

more alarming, he adds, "to the subverting of the hearers." 

Ver. 1 5. "Study to show thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly 

dividing the word of truth." 

Everywhere this "not being ashamed"! And why is he ever so careful to guard him against shame? Because 

it was natural for many to be ashamed both of Paul himself, as being a tent-maker, and of the preaching, 

since its teachers perished. For Christ had been crucified, himself was about to be beheaded, Peter was 

crucified with his head downwards, and these things they suffered from audacious and despicable men. 

Because such men were in power, he says, "Be not ashamed"; that is, fear not to do anything tending to 

godliness, though it be necessary to submit to slavery or any other suffering. For how does any one 

become approved? By being "a workman that needeth not to be ashamed." As the workman is not 

ashamed of any work, so neither should he be ashamed who labors in the Gospel. He should submit to 

anything. 

"Rightly dividing the word of truth." 

This he hath well said. For many distort it, and pervert it in every way, and many additions are made to it. He 

has not said directing it, but "rightly dividing," that is, cut away what is spurious, with much vehemence assail 

it, and extirpate it. With the sword of the Spirit cut off from your preaching, as from a thong, whatever is 

superfluous and foreign to it. 

Ver. 16. "And shun profane novelties of speech. "(2) 

For they will not stop there. For when anything new has been introduced, it is ever producing innovations, 

and the error of him who has once left the safe harbor is infinite, and never stops. 

"For they will increase unto more ungodliness," he says, 

Ver. 1 7. "And their word will eat as doth a canker." 

It is an evil not to be restrained, not curable by any medicine, it destroys the whole frame. He shows that 

novelty of doctrine is a disease, and worse than a disease. And here he implies that they are incorrigible, 

and that they erred not weakly but willfully. 

"Of whom is Hymeneus and Philetus," 

Ver. 18. "Who concerning the truth have erred, saying that the resurrection is past already, and overthrow the 

faith of some." 

He has well said, "They will increase unto more ungodliness." For it appears indeed to be a solitary evil, but 

see what evils spring out of it. For if the Resurrection is already past, not only do we suffer loss in being 

deprived of that great glory, but because judgment is taken away, and retribution also. For if the 

Resurrection is past, retribution also is past. The good therefore have reaped persecutions and afflictions, 

and the wicked have not been punished, nay verily, they live in great pleasure. (3) It were better to say that 

there is no resurrection, than that it is already past. 

"And overthrow," he says, "the faith of some." 

"Of some," not of all. For if there is no resurrection, faith is subverted. Our preaching is vain, nor is Christ 

risen; and if He is not risen, neither was He born, nor has He ascended into heaven. Observe how this error, 

while it seems to oppose the doctrine of the Resurrection, draws after it many other evils. What then, says 

one, ought we to do nothing for those who are subverted?(4) 

Ver. 19. "Nevertheless," he says, "the foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal, The Lord knoweth 

them that are His. And, Let every one that nameth the name of the Lord(5) depart from iniquity." 

He shows that even before they were subverted, they were not firm. For otherwise, they would not have 

been overthrown at the first attack, as Adam(1) was firm before the commandment. For those who are fixed 

not only are not harmed through deceivers, but are even admired. 

And he calls it "sure," and a "foundation"; so ought we to adhere to the faith; "having this seal, The Lord 

knoweth them that are His." What is this? He has taken it from Deuteronomy;" that is, Firm souls stand fixed 

and immovable. But whence are they manifest? From having these characters inscribed upon their actions, 

from their being known by God, and not perishing with the world, and from their departing from iniquity. 

"Let every one," he says, "that nameth the name of the Lord depart from iniquity." 

These are the distinguishing marks of the foundation. As a(3) foundation is shown to be firm, and as letters 

are inscribed upon a stone that the letters may be significant. But these letters are shown by works, 

"Having," he says, "this seal" fixed thereon, "Let every one that nameth the name of the Lord depart from 

iniquity." Thus if any one is unrighteous, he is not of the foundation. So that this too is of the seal, not to do 

iniquity. 

MORAL. Let us not therefore put off from us the royal seal and token, that we may not be of those who are not 
sealed, that we may not be unsound, that we may be firmly grounded, that we may be of the foundation, and 
not carried to and fro. This marks them that are of God, that they depart from iniquity. For how can any one 
be of God Who is just, if he does iniquity, if by his works he opposes Him, if he insults Him by his misdeeds? 
Again we are speaking against injustice, and again we have many that are hostile to us. For this affection, 
like a tyrant, has seized upon the souls of all, and, what is worse, not by necessity nor violence, but by 
persuasion and gentle insinuation, and they are grateful for their slavery. And this is indeed the misery; for if 
they were held by constraint and not by love, they would soon depart. And whence is it, that a thing which is 
most bitter, appears to be sweet? whence is it that righteousness, which is a most sweet thing, becomes 
bitter? It is the fault of our senses. Thus some have thought honey bitter, and have taken with pleasure other 
things that were noxious. And the cause is not in the nature of things, but in the perverseness of the sufferers. 
The judging faculty of the soul(4) is disordered? Just as a balance, if its beam be unsteady, (6) moves 
round, and does not show accurately the weight of things placed in it; so the soul, if it has not the beam of its 
own thoughts fixed, and firmly riveted to the law of God, being carried round and drawn down, will not be 
able to judge a right of actions. 

For if any one will examine carefully, he will perceive the great bitterness of injustice, not to those who suffer 
it, but to those who practice it, and to these more than to the others. And let us riot speak of things future, but 
for the present of things here. Hath it not battles, judgments, condemnation, ill will, abuse? what is more bitter 
than these? Hath it not enmities, and wars, and accusations? what is more bitter than these? Hath it not 
conscience continually scourging and gnawing us? If it were possible, I could wish to draw out from the body 
the soul of the unrighteous man, and you would see it pale and trembling, ashamed, hiding its head, 
anxiously fearful, and self-condemned. For should we sink down into the very depths of wickedness, the 
judging faculty of the mind(7) is not destroyed, but remains unbribed. And no one pursues injustice thinking it 
to be good, but he invents excuses, and has recourse to every artifice of words to shift off the accusation. 
But he cannot get it off his conscience. Here indeed the speciousness of words, the corruption of rulers, and 
multitudes of flatterers, is often able to throw justice into the shade, but within, the conscience(8) has nothing 
of this sort, there are no flatterers there, no wealth to corrupt the judge. For the faculty of judging is naturally 
implanted in us by God, and what comes from God cannot be so corrupted. But uneasy slumbers, 
thick-coming fancies, and the frequent recollections of guilt, destroy our repose. Has any one, for instance, 
unjustly deprived another of his house? not only is he that is robbed rendered unhappy, but the man who 
robbed him. If he is persuaded of a future judgment, (if indeed any one is so persuaded,) he groans 
exceedingly, and is in misery. But if he believes not in futurity, yet he blushes for shame; or rather there is no 
man, whether Greek, Jew, or heretic, who is not afraid of a judgment to come. 

And although he is not a philosopher with respect to futurity; yet he fears and trembles at what may befall him 
here, lest he may have some retribution in his property, his children, his family, or his life. For many such 
visitations God inflicts. For since the doctrine of the Resurrection is not sufficient to bring all men to reason, 
He affords even here many proofs of His righteous judgment, and exhibits them to the world. One who has 
gained wrongfully is without children, another falls in war, another is maimed in his body, another loses his 
son. He considers these things, on these his imagination dwells, and he lives in continual fear. 
Know you not what the unrighteous suffer? Is there no bitterness in these things? And were there nothing of 
this sort, do not all condemn him, and hate and abhor him, and think him less rational than a beast, even 
those who are themselves unrighteous? For if they condemn themselves, much more do they condemn 
another, calling him rapacious, fraudulent, a pestilent fellow. What pleasure then can he enjoy? He has only 
the heavier care and anxiety to preserve his gains, and the being more anxious and troubled. For the more 
wealth any one gets about him, the more painful watchfulness does he store up for himself. Then what are 
the curses of those whom he has wronged, their pleadings against him?(1) And what, if sickness should 
befall him? For it is impossible for one, who has fallen into sickness, however atheistically. he may be 
inclined, not to be anxious about these things, not to be thoughtful, when he is unable to do anything. For as 
long as we are here, the soul enjoying itself, does not tolerate painful thoughts: but when it is about to take its 
flight from the body, then a greater fear constrains it, as entering into the very portals of judgment. Even 
robbers, whilst they are in prison, live without fear, but when they are brought to the very curtain of the 
court,(2) they sink with terror. For when the fear of death is urgent, like a fire consuming all things besides, it 
obliges the soul to philosophize, and to take thought for futurity. The desire of wealth, the love of gain, and of 
bodily pleasures, no longer possesses it. These things passing away like clouds, leave the judging faculty 
clear, and grief entering in softens the hard heart. For nothing is so opposite to philosophy, as a life of 
pleasure; nor, on the other hand, is anything so favorable to philosophy as affliction. Consider what the 
covetous man will then be. For, "an hour of affliction," it is said, "maketh a man forget much pleasure." 
(Ecclus. ii. 27.) What will then be his state, when he considers those whom he has robbed, and injured, and 
defrauded, when he sees others reaping the fruits of his grasping, and himself going to pay the penalty? For 

it cannot, indeed it cannot be, that when fallen into sickness he should not reflect upon these things. For often 
the soul of itself is distracted with agony and terror. What a bitterness is this, tell me! And with every sickness 
these things must be endured. And what will he not suffer when he sees others punished or put to death? 
These things await him here. And as to what he must undergo hereafter, it is not possible to say what 
punishment, what vengeance, what torments, what racks are reserved for him There. These things we 
declare. "He that hath ears to hear, let him hear." (Luke viii. 8.) We are for ever discoursing of these things, 
not willingly, but of necessity. For we could wish there were no obligation to mention such things at all. But 
since it must be, we would at least, by a little medicine, deliver you from your disease, and restore you to 
health. But whilst you remain in this sickness, it would show a mean and weak spirit, not to say cruelty and 
inhumanity, to desist from the healing treatment. For if when physicians despair of our bodies, we beseech 
them not to neglect us, not to cease to our last breath applying whatever is in their power, shall we not much 
more exhort ourselves? For perhaps when we have come to the very gates of Hell, the vestibule of 
wickedness itself, it may be possible to recover, to renew our strength, to lay hold on eternal life! How many, 
who have heard ten times and remained insensible, have afterwards at one hearing been converted! Or 
rather, not at one hearing; for though they seemed insensible at the ten discourses, yet they gained 
something, and afterwards showed all at once abundant fruit. For as a tree may receive ten strokes, and not 
fall; then afterwards be brought down all at once by a single blow: yet it is not done by that one blow, but by 
the ten which made that last successful. And this is known to him who sees the root, though he who takes his 
view of the trunk above knows it not. So it is in this case. And thus often, when physicians have applied many 
remedies, no benefit is perceived; but afterwards some one comes in and effects an entire cure. Yet it is not 
the work of him alone, but of these who have already reduced the disorder. So that, if now we do not bring 
forth the fruits of hearing the word, yet hereafter we shall. For that we shall bring them forth, I am fully 
persuaded. For it is not, indeed it is not possible that such eager desire, such a love of hearing, should fail 
of its effect. God forbid! But may we all. having become worthy of the admonitions of Christ, obtain the 
everlasting blessings, &c. 

HOMILIES OF ST. JOHN CHRYSOSTOM ON THE 
SECOND EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL THE APOSTLE TO 
TIMOTHY, HOMILIES VI TO X (CHAPTERS 2, 3 & 4) 

HOMILY VI. 

2 TIMOTHY ii. 20, 21. 

"But in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and of silver, but also of wood and of earth; and 
some to honor, and some to dishonor. If a man therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto 
honor, sanctified, and meet for the master's use, and prepared unto every good work." 
MANY men are still even now perplexed to account for the fact, that the wicked are suffered to remain, and 
are not yet destroyed. Now doubtless various reasons may be assigned for this, as, that they may be 
converted, or that by their punishment they may be made an example to the multitude. But Paul here 
mentions a similar case. For he says, 

"In a great house there are not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of wood and earth." Showing by this, 
that as in a great house it is likely there should be a great difference of vessels, so here also, in the whole 
world, for he speaks not of the Church only, but of the world at large. For think not, I pray, that he means it of 
the Church; for there he would not have any vessels of wood or of earth, but all of gold or silver where is the 
body of Christ, where is that "pure virgin, without spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing." (Eph. v. 27.) And this is 
what he means to say Let it not disturb thee that there are corrupt and wicked men. For in a great house 
there are such vessels. But what then? they do not receive the same honor. But some are to honor and 
some to dishonor. "Nay," says one, "in a house they may be of some use, but not at all in the world." Though 
God employs them not for such honorable service, he makes use of them for other purposes. For instance, 
the vainglorious man builds much, so does the covetous man, the merchant, the tradesman, the magistrate; 
there are certain works in the world suited to these. But the golden vessel is not of such a nature. It is 
employed about the royal table. He does not say however that wickedness is a necessary thing, (for how 
should it be?) but that the wicked also have their work. For if all were of gold or of silver, there would be no 
need of the viler sort. For instance, if all were hardy, there would be no need of houses; if all were free from 
luxury, there would be no need of dainties. If all were careful only for necessaries, there would be no need of 
splendid building. 

"If therefore a man purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified." Seestthou that it is 
not of nature, nor of the necessity of matter, to be a vessel of gold or of earth, but of our own choice? For 
otherwise the earthen could not become gold, nor could the golden descend to the vileness of the other. But 
in this case there is much change, and alteration of state. Paul was an earthen vessel, and became a 
golden one. Judas was a golden vessel, and became an earthen one. The earthen vessels, therefore, are 
such from uncleanness. The fornicator and the covetous man become earthen vessels. "But how then does 
he say elsewhere, 'We have this treasure in earthen vessels,' so that he does not despise but honor the 
earthen vessel, speaking of it as the recipient of the treasure?" There he shows the nature itself, and not the 
form of the material. For he means to say that our body is an earthen vessel. For as earthenware is nothing 
else but baked clay, so is our body nothing but clay consolidated by the heat of the soul; for that it is 
earthen, is evident. For as such a vessel is often by falling broken and dashed to pieces, so our body falls 
and is dissolved by death. For how do our bones differs from a potsherd, hard and dry as they are? or our 
flesh from clay, being, like it, composed of water? But, as I said, how is it that he does not speak 
contemptuously of it? Because there he is discoursing of its nature, here of our choice. "If a man," he says, 
"purge himself from these," not merely "cleanse," but "cleanse out,"(1) that is, cleanse himself perfectly, "he 
shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified, and meet for the Master's use." The others therefore are useless for 
any good purpose, though some use is made of them. "And prepared(2) unto every good work." Even 
though he do it not, he is fit for it, and has a capacity for it. We ought therefore to be prepared for everything, 
even for death, for martyrdom, for a life of virginity, or for all these. 
Ver. 22. "Flee also youthful lusts." 

Not only the lust of fornication, but every inordinate desire is a youthful lust. Let the aged learn that they ought 
not to do the deeds of the youthful. If one be given to insolence, or a lover of power, of riches, of bodily 
pleasures, it is a youthful lust, and foolish. These things must proceed from a heart not yet established, from 

a mind not deeply grounded, but in a wavering state. What then does he advise in order that none may be 

captivated by these things? "Flee youthful" imaginations, "but 

"Follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart." 

He calls virtue in general, "righteousness" godliness of life, "faith, meekness, charity." 

What is meant by "those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart"? It is as if he said, Rejoice not in those 

who only call upon the Lord; but those who call upon Him sincerely and unfeignedly, who have nothing of 

deceit about them, who approach Him in peace, who are not contentious. With these associate thyself. But 

with others be not easy, but only as far as lies in you, be peaceable. 

Ver. 23. "But foolish and unlearned questions avoid, knowing that they do gender strifes." 

Do you see how he everywhere draws him off from questions; not that he was not able to overthrow them; for 

he was well able. For had he not been able he would have said, Be diligent, that thou mayest be able to 

refute them; as when he says, "Give attendance to reading, for by so doing thou shalt both save thyself and 

them that hear thee." (1 Tim. iv. 1 3, 1 6.) But he knew that it was useless to enter at all into these disputes, that 

there will be no end of it, save contentions, enmities, insults, and reproaches. These "questions" therefore 

"avoid"; so that there are other questions, some relating to the Scriptures, some to other things. 

Ver. 24. "And the servant of the Lord must not strive." 

Not even in questions ought he to strive, for the servant of the Lord must keep far from strife, since God is the 

God of peace, and what should the servant of the God of peace have to do with strife? 

"But be gentle unto all men." 

How is it then he says, "Rebuke with all authority" (Tit. ii. 15); and again, "Let no man despise thy youth" (1 

Tim. iv. 12): and again, '"Rebuke them Sharply"? (Tit. i. 13.) Because this is consistent with meekness. For a 

strong rebuke, if it be given with gentleness, is most likely to wound deeply: for it is possible, indeed it is, to 

touch more effectually by gentleness, than one overawes by boldness. 

"Apt to teach"; that is, those who are willing to be taught. For "a man that is an heretic," he says, "after the first 

and second admonition reject." (Tit. iii. 10.) "Patient." He has well added this, for it is a quality which a 

teacher above all things ought to possess. All things are vain without it. And if fishermen do not despair, 

though often they cast their nets for a whole day without catching anything, much more should not we. For 

see what is the result. From constant teaching, it often happens that the plow of the word, descending to the 

depth of the soul, roots out the evil passion that troubled it. For he that hears often will at length be affected. A 

man cannot go on hearing continually without some effect being produced. Sometimes therefore, when he 

was on the point of being persuaded, he is lost by our becoming weary. For the same thing occurs, as if an 

unskillful husbandman should in the first year dig about the vine he had planted, and seeking to reap some 

fruit in the second year, and again in the third, and gathering nothing, should after three years despair, and in 

the fourth year, when he was about to receive the recompense of his labors, abandon his vine. And having 

said, "Patient," he is not satisfied, but goes on to say, 

Ver. 25. "In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves." 

For he that teaches must be especially careful to do it with meekness. For a soul that wishes to learn cannot 

gain any useful instruction from harshness and contention. For when it would apply, being thus thrown into 

perplexity, it will learn nothing. He who would gain any useful knowledge ought above all things to be well 

disposed towards his teacher, and if this be not previously attained, nothing that is requisite or useful can be 

accomplished. And no one can be well disposed towards him who is violent and overbearing. How is it then 

that he says, "A man that is an heretic, after the first and second admonition, reject"? He speaks there of one 

incorrigible, of one whom he knows to be diseased beyond the possibility of cure. 

"If God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth." 

Ver. 26. "And that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the devil." 

What he says amounts to this. Perhaps there will be a reformation. Perhaps! for it is uncertain. So that we 

ought to withdraw only from those, of whom we can show plainly, and concerning whom we are fully 

persuaded, that whatever be done, they will not be reformed. "In meekness," he says. In this temper, you 

see, we ought to address ourselves to those who are willing to learn, and never cease from conversing with 

them till we have come to the demonstration. (1) 

"Who are taken captive by him at his will." It is truly said, "Who are taken captive, "(2) for meanwhile they float 

in error. Observe here how he teaches to be humble-minded. He has not said, if peradventure you should 

be able, but, "if peradventure God should grant them a recovery"; if anything be done, therefore, all is of the 

Lord. Thou plantest, thou waterest but He soweth and maketh it produce fruit. Let us not therefore be so 

affected, as if we ourselves wrought the persuasion, even if we should persuade any one. "Taken captive 

by him," he says, "to His will."(1) This no one will say relates to doctrine, but to life. For "His will" is that we 

live rightly. But some are in the snare of the devil by reason of their life, we ought not therefore to be weary 

even with respect to these. 

"If peradventure," he says, "they may recover, that are taken captive, unto His will." Now "If peradventure," 

implies much longsuffering. For not to do the will of God is a snare I of the devil. 

For as a sparrow, though it be not wholly enclosed, but only caught by the foot, is still under the power of him 
who set the snare; so though we be not wholly subverted, both in faith and life, but in life only, we are under 
the power of the devil. For "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of 
heaven"; and again, "I know you not; depart from me, ye that work iniquity." (Matt. vii. 21-23.) You set there is 
no advantage from our faith, when our Lord knows us not: and to the virgins he says the same, "I know you 
not." (Matt. xxv. 12.) What then is the benefit of virginity, or of many labors, when the Lord knows us not? And 
in many places we find men not blamed for their faith, but punished for their evil life only; as elsewhere, not 
reproved for evil lives, but perishing for their pravity of doctrine. For these things hold together.(2) You see 
that when we do not the will of God, we are under the snare of the devil. And often not only from a bad life, but 
from one defect, we enter into Hell, where there are not good qualities to counterbalance it, since the virgins 
were not accused of fornication or adultery, nor of envy or ill-will, nor of drunkenness, nor of unsound faith, 
but of a failure of oil, that is, they failed in almsgiving, for that is the oil meant.(3) And those who were 
pronounced accursed in the words, "Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire," were not accused of 
any such crimes, but because they had not fed Christ. 

MORAL. Seest thou that a failure in alms-giving is enough to cast a man into hell, fire? For where will he avail 
who does not give alms? Dost thou fast every day? So also did those virgins, but it availed them nothing. 
Dost thou pray? What of that? prayer without alms-giving is unfruitful, without that all things are unclean and 
unprofitable. The better part of virtue is destroyed. "He that loveth not his brother," it is said, "knoweth not 
God." (1 John iv. 8.) And how dost thou love him, when thou dost not even impart to him of these poor 
worthless things? Tell me, therefore, dost thou observe chastity? On what account? From fear of 
punishment? By no means. It is of a natural endowment that thou observest it, since if thou wast chaste from 
fear of punishment, and didst violence to nature in submitting to so severe a rule, much more oughtest thou 
to do alms. For to govern the desire of wealth, and of bodily pleasures, is not the same thing. The latter is 
much more difficult to restrain. And wherefore? Because the pleasure is natural, and the desire of it is innate 
and of natural growth in the body. It is not so with riches. Herein we are able to resemble God, in showing 
mercy and pity. When therefore we have not this quality, we are devoid of all good. He has not said, "ye 
shall be like unto your Father, if ye fist," nor "if ye be virgins," nor "if ye pray," hath He said, "ye shall be like 
unto your Father," for none of these things can be applied to God, nor are they His acts. But what? "Be ye 
merciful, as your Father in Heaven is merciful." (Luke vi. 36.) This is the work of God. If therefore thou hast not 
this, what hast thou? He says: "I will have mercy, and not sacrifice." (Hosea vi. 6.) God made Heaven, and 
earth, and sea. Great works these, and worthy of His wisdom! But by none of these has He so powerfully 
attracted human nature to Himself, as by mercy and the love of mankind. For that indeed is the work of 
power and wisdom and goodness. But it is far more so that He became a servant. Do we not for this more 
especially admire Him? are we not for this still more amazed at Him? Nothing attracts God to us so much as 
mercy. And the prophets from beginning to end discourse upon this subject. But I speak not of mercy that is 
accompanied with covetousness. That is not mercy. For it is not the root of the thorn but of the olive that 
produces the oil(4); so it is not the root of covetousness, of iniquity, or of rapine, that produces mercy. Do not 
put a slander on almsgiving. Do not cause it to be evil spoken of by all. If thou committest robbery for this, 
that thou mayest give alms, nothing is more wicked than thy almsgiving. For when it is produced by rapine, it 
is not almsgiving, it is inhumanity, it is cruelty, it is an insult to God. If Cain so offended, by offering inferior gifts 
of his own, shall he not offend, who offers the goods of another? An offering is nothing else but a sacrifice, a 
purification, not a pollution. And thou who darest not to pray with unclean hands, dost thou offer the dirt and 
filth of robbery, and think thou doest nothing wrong? Thou sufferest not thy hands to be full of dirt and filth, but 
having first cleansed these, thou offerest. Yet that filth is no charge against thee, while the other deserves 
reproach and blame. Let it not therefore be our consideration, how we may offer prayers and oblations with 
clean hands, but how the things offered may be pure. If one, after having washed a vessel clean, should fill it 
with unclean gifts, would it not be ridiculous mockery? Let the hands be clean; and they will be so, if we wash 
them not with water only, but first with righteousness. This is the purifier of the hands. But if they be full of 
unrighteousness, though they be washed a thousand times, it avails nothing. "Wash you, make you clean" 
(Isa. i. 16), He says, but does He add, "Go to the baths, the lakes, the rivers"? No; but what? "Put away the 
evil of your doings from your souls." This is to be clean. (1) This it is to be cleansed from defilement. This is 
real purity. The other is of little use; but this bestows upon us confidence towards God. The one may be 
obtained by adulterers, thieves, murderers, by worthless, and dissolute, and effeminate persons, and 
especially the latter. For they are ever careful of the cleanliness of their bodies, and scented with perfumes, 
cleansing their sepulcher.(2) For their body(3) is but a sepulcher, since the soul is dead within it. This 
cleanness therefore may be theirs, (4) but not that which is inward. 

To wash the body is no great matter. That is a Jewish purification, senseless(5) and unprofitable, where 
purity within is wanting. Suppose one to labor under a putrefying sore, or consuming ulcer; let him wash his 
body ever so much, it is of no advantage. And if the putrefaction of the body receives no benefit from 
cleansing and disguising the outward appearance; when the soul is infected with rottenness, what is gained 

by the purity of the body? Nothing! Our prayers ought to be pure, and pure they cannot be, if they are sent 
forth from a corrupt soul, and nothing so corrupts the soul as avarice and rapine. But there are some who 
after committing numberless sins during the day, wash themselves in the evening and enter the churches, 
holding up their hands with much confidence, as if by the washing of the bath they had put off all their guilt. 
And if this were the case, it would be a vast advantage to use the bath daily! I would not myself cease to 
frequent the baths, (6) if it made us pure, and cleansed us from our sins! But these things are trifling and 
ridiculous, the toys of children. It is not the filth of the body, but the impurity of the soul, to which God is averse. 
For He says, "Blessed are the pure "-does He say in body? No-"in heart: for they shall see God." (Matt. v. 
8.) And what says the Prophet: "Create in me a clean heart, O God." (Ps. li. 10.) And again, "Wash my heart 
from wickedness." (Jer. iv. 14.) 

It is of great use to be in the habit of doing good actions. See how trifling and unprofitable these washings 
are. But when the soul is prepossessed by a habit, it does not depart from it, nor does it venture to draw nigh 
in prayer, till it has fulfilled these ceremonies. For instance, we have brought ourselves to a habit of washing 
and praying, and without washing we do not think it right to pray. And we do not willingly pray with unwashed 
hands, as if we should offend God, and violate our conscience. Now if this trifling custom has so great power 
over us, and is observed every day; if we had brought ourselves to a habit of almsgiving, and had 
determined so constantly to observe it, as never to enter a house of prayer with empty hands, the point 
would be gained. For great is the power of habit both in good things and in evil, and when this carries us on, 
there will be little trouble. Many are in the habit of crossing(7) themselves continually, and they need no one 
to remind them of it, but often when the mind is wandering after other things, the hand is involuntarily drawn by 
custom, as by some living teacher, to make the sign. Some have brought themselves into a habit of not 
swearing at all, and therefore neither willingly nor unwillingly do they ever do it. Let us then bring ourselves 
into such a habit of almsgiving. 

What labors were it worth to us to discover such a remedy. For say, were there not the relief of almsgiving, 
while we still by our numberless sins rendered ourselves liable to Divine vengeance, should we not have 
lamented sadly? Should we not have said, O that it were possible by our wealth to wash away our sins, and 
we would have parted with it all! O that by our riches we could put away the wrath of God, then we would not 
spare our substance? For if we do this in sickness, and at the point of death we say, "If it were possible to 
buy off death, such an one would give all his possessions"; much more in this matter. For see how great is 
the love of God for man. He has granted us power to buy off not temporal but eternal death. Do not 
purchase, He says, this short life, but that life that is everlasting. It is that I sell thee, not the other: I do not 
mock thee. Didst thou gain the present life, thou hadst gained nothing. I know the worth of that which I offer 
thee. The bargainers and traffickers in worldly goods do not act thus. They, when they can(1) impose on 
whom they will, give a little to receive a great deal. It is not so with God. He gives the greater by far for the 
less. 

Tell me, if you were to go to a merchant, and he were to set before you two stones, one of little worth, (2) and 
the other very precious, and sure to fetch a large amount of wealth; if he allowed you for the price of the 
cheap one to carry off the more costly, should you complain of him? No! You would rather admire his 
liberality. So now, two lives are set before us, the one temporal, the other eternal. These God offers us for 
sale, but He would sell us the latter rather than the former. Why do we complain, like silly children, that we 
receive the more precious?(3) Is it possible then to purchase life for money? Yes, when what we bestow is 
our own, and not the property of another; when we do not practice an imposture. But, you say, henceforth the 
goods are mine. They are not thine after rapine. They are still thy neighbor's, though thou wert a thousand 
times the master of them. For if thou shouldest receive a deposit, it would not be thine own even for the short 
season that the depositor was traveling, though it might be laid up with thee. If therefore that is not ours, which 
we received with the consent and thanks of those who deposited it, even for the short period that we retain it, 
much less is that ours, which we plundered against the will of its owner. He is the master of it, however long 
thou mayest withhold it. But Virtue is(4) really our own; as for money, even our own is not strictly ours, much 
less that of others. Today it is ours, to-morrow it belongs to another. What is of virtue is our own possession. 
This does not suffer loss, like other things, but is entirely possessed by all who have it. This therefore let us 
acquire, and let us despise riches, that we may be able to attain those real goods, of which God grant that 
we may be thought worthy to partake, through the grace and lovingkindness, &c. 

HOMILY VII. 

2 TIMOTHY iii. 1-7. 

"This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, 
covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, Without natural 
affection, truce-breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, Traitors, 

heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God; Having a form of godliness, but denying 
the power thereof; from such turn away. For of this sort are they, which creep into houses, and lead captive 
silly women laden with sins, led away with divers lusts and pleasures, Ever learning, and never able to 
come to the knowledge of the truth." 

HE had said in the former Epistle, that "the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some shall 
depart from the faith" (1 Tim. iv. 1,2); and elsewhere in this Epistle he foretells that something of this kind will 
afterwards happen; and here again he does the same thing: "This know, that in the last days perilous times 
shall come." And this he pronounces not only from the future, but from the past; "As Jannes and Jambres 
withstood Moses." And again from reasoning; "In a great house there are not only vessels of gold and of 
silver." But why does he do this? In order that Timothy may not be troubled, nor any one of us, when there 
are evil men. If there were such in the time of Moses, and will be hereafter, it is no wonder that there are such 
in our times. 

"In the last days perilous times shall come," he says, that is, exceeding bad times. How shall times be 
perilous?(5) He says it not blaming the days, nor the times, but the men of those times. For thus it is 
customary with us to speak of good times or evil times, from the events that happen in them, caused by 
men. Immediately he sets down the root and fountain, whence these and all other evils spring, that is, 
overweeningness. He that is seized with this passion is careless even of his own interests. For when a man 
overlooks the concerns of his neighbor, and is careless of them, how should he regard his own? For as he 
that looks to his neighbor's affairs will in them order his own to advantage, so he that looks down upon his 
neighbor's concerns will neglect his own. For if we are members one of another, the welfare of our neighbor 
is not his concern only, but that of the whole body, and the injury of our neighbor is not confined to him, but 
distracts with pains all else as well.(1) If we are a building, whatever part is weakened, it affects the whole 
whilst that which is solid gives strength and support to the rest. So also in the Church, if thou hast slighted thy 
neighbor, thou has injured thyself. How? In that one of thy own members hath suffered no small hurt. And if 
he, who does not impart of hid possessions, goes into Hell, much more will he be condemned, who sees a 
neighbor suffering severer evils, and does not stretch out his hand, since in this case the loss is more 
grievous. 

"For men shall be lovers of their own selves." He that loves himself may be said not to love himself, but he 
that loves his brother, loves himself in the truest sense. From self-love springs covetousness. For the 
wretched niggardly temper of self-love contracts that love which should be widely extended, and diffused on 
every side. "Covetous." From covetousness springs boastfulness, from boastfulness pride, from pride 
blasphemy, from blasphemy defiance and disobedience. For he who exalts himself against men, will easily 
do it against God. Thus sins are produced. Often they ascend from below. He that is pious towards men, is 
still more pious towards God. He who is meek to his fellow-servants, is more meek to his Master. He that 
despises his fellow-servants, will end with despising God Himself. 

MORAL. Let us not then despise one another for that is an evil training which teaches us to despise God. 
And indeed to despise one another is in effect to despise God, Who commanded us to show all regard to 
one another. And this may be otherwise manifested by an example. Cain despised his brother, and so, 
immediately after, he despised God. How despised Him? Mark his insolent answer to God; "Am I my 
brother's keeper?" (Gen. iv. 9.) Again, Esau despised his brother, and he too despised God. Wherefore 
God said, "Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated." (Rom. ix. 13; Mai. i. 2, 3.) Hence Paul says, "Lest 
there be any fornicator or profane person as Esau." (Heb. xii. 16.) The brethren of Joseph despised him, 
and they also despised God. The Israelites despised Moses, and they also despised God. So too the 
sons of Eli despised the people, and they too despised God. Would you see it also from the contrary? 
Abraham, who was tender of his brother's son, was obedient to God, as is manifest in his conduct with 
respect to his son Isaac, and in all his other virtues. Again, Abel was meek to his brother, and he also was 
pious towards God. Let us not therefore despise one another, lest we learn also to despise God. Let us 
honor one another, that we may learn also to honor God. He that is insolent with respect to men, will also be 
insolent with respect to God. But when covetousness and selfishness and insolence meet together, what is 
wanting to complete destruction? Everything is corrupted, and a foul flood of sins bursts in. "Unthankful," he 
says. For how can the covetous man be thankful? To whom will he feel gratitude? To no one. He considers 
all men his enemies, and desires the goods of all. Though you spend your whole substance upon him, he 
will feel no gratitude. He is angry that you have not more, that you might bestow it upon him. And if you made 
him master of the whole world, he would still be unthankful, and think that he had received nothing. This 
desire is insatiable. It is the craving of disease; and such is the nature of the cravings of disease. 
He who has a fever can never be satisfied, but with constant desire of drinking, is never filled, but suffers a 
continual thirst; so he who is mad after wealth never knows the fulfillment of his desire; whatever is bestowed 
upon him, he is still unsatisfied, and will therefore never be thankful. For he will feel no gratitude to him, who 
does not give him as much as he wishes, and this no one can ever do. And as there is no limit to his wishes, 
he will feel no gratitude. Thus no one is so unthankful as the covetous, so insensible as the lover of money. 

He is the enemy of all the world. He is indignant that there are men. He would have all one vast desert, that 
he might have the property of all. And many wild imaginations does he form. "O that there were an 
earthquake," he says, "in the city, that all the rest being swallowed up, I might be left alone, to have, if 
possible, the possessions of all! O that a pestilence would come and destroy everything but gold! O that 
there might be a submersion, or an eruption of the sea!" Such are his imaginations. He prays for nothing 
good, but for earthquakes, and thunderbolts, for wars, and plagues, and the like. Well, tell me now, thou 
wretched man, more servile than any slave, if all things were gold, wouldest thou not be destroyed by thy 
gold, (2) and perish with hunger? If the world were swallowed up by an earthquake, thou also wouldest perish 
by thy fatal desire. For if there were no other men than thyself, the necessaries of life would fail thee. For 
suppose that the other inhabitants of the earth were destroyed at once, and that their gold and silver came 
of its own accord to thee. (For such men fancy to themselves absurdities, and impossibilities.) But if their 
gold and silver, their vests of silk and cloth of gold, came into thy hands, what would it profit thee? Death 
would only the more certainly overtake thee, when there were none to prepare bread or till the earth for thee; 
wild beasts would prowl around, and the devil agitate thy soul with fear. Many devils indeed now possess it, 
but then they would lead thee to desperation, and plunge thee at once into destruction. But you say, "I would 
wish there should be tilling of the land and men to prepare food." Then they would consume somewhat. "But 
I would not have them consume anything." So insatiable is this desire! For what can be more ridiculous than 
this? Seestthou the impossibility of the thing? He wishes to have many to minister to him, yet he grudges 
them their share of food, because it diminishes his substance! What then? Wouldest thou then have men of 
stone? This is all a mockery; and waves, and tempest, and huge billows, and violent agitation, and storm, 
overwhelm the soul. It is ever hungry, ever thirsty. Shall we not pity and mourn for him? Of bodily diseases 
this is thought a most painful one, and it is called by physicians bulimy, (1) when a man being filled, is yet 
always hungry. And is not the same disorder in the soul more lamentable? For avarice is the morbid hunger 
of the soul, which is always filling, never satisfied, but still craving. If it were necessary to drink hellebore, or 
submit to anything a thousand times worse, would it not be worth our while to undertake it readily, that we 
might be delivered from this passion? There is no abundance of riches that can fill the belly of greediness. 
And shall we not be ashamed, that men can be thus transported with the love of money, whilst we show not 
any proportion of such earnestness in love to God, and honor Him not as bullion is honored? For money 
men will undergo watchings, and journeyings and continual perils, and hatred, and hostility, and, in short, 
everything. But we do not venture to utter a mere word for God, nor incur an enmity, but if we are required to 
assist any of those who are persecuted, we abandon the injured person, withdrawing ourselves from the 
hatred of the powerful, and the danger it involves. And though God has given us power that we might succor 
him, yet we suffer him to perish, from our unwillingness to incur men's hatred and displeasure. And this many 
profess to justify, saying, "Be loved for nothing, but be not hated for nothing." But is this to be hated for 
nothing? Or what is better than such hatred? For to be hated on account of God is better than to be loved on 
His account: for when we are loved for God's sake, we are debtors for the honor, but when we are hated for 
His sake, He is our debtor to reward us. The lovers of wealth know no limit to their love, be it never so great; 
but we, if we have done ever so little, think that we have fulfilled everything. We love not God as much, no, 
not by many times over so much, as they love gold. Their inordinate rage for gold is a heavy accusation 
against them. It is our condemnation that we are not so beside ourselves for God; that we do not bestow 
upon the Lord of all as much love as they bestow upon mere earth, for gold from the mine is no better. 
Let us then behold their madness, and be ashamed of ourselves. For what though we are not inflamed with 
the love of gold, while we are not earnest in our prayers to God? For in their case men despise wife, 
children, substance, and their own safety, and that when they are not certain that they shall increase their 
substance. For often, in the very midst of their hopes, they lose at once their life and their labor. But we, 
though we know that, if we love Him as we ought to love Him, we shall obtain our desire, yet love Him not, 
but are altogether cold in our love both to our neighbor and to God; cold in our love to God, because cold in 
our love to our neighbor. For it is not, indeed it is not possible that a man, who is a stranger to the feeling of 
love, should have any generosity or manly spirit, since the foundation of all that is good is no other than 
love. "On this," it is said, "hang all the law and the prophets." (Matt. xxii. 40.) For as fire set to a forest is wont 
to clear away everything, so the fire of love, wherever it is received, consumes and makes way through 
everything that is hurtful to the divine harvest, and renders the soil pure and fit for the reception of the seed. 
Where there is love, all evils are removed. There is no love of money, the root of evil, there is no 
self-love(2): there is no boasting; for why should one boast over his friend? Nothing makes a man so 
humble as love. We perform the offices of servants to our friends, and are not ashamed; we are even 
thankful for the opportunity of serving them. We spare not our property, and often not out persons; for 
dangers too are encountered at times for him that is loved. No envy, no calumny is there, where there is 
genuine love. We not only do not slander our friends, but we stop the mouth of slanderers. All is gentleness 
and mildness. Not a trace of strife and contention appears. Everything breathes peace. For "Love," it is 
said, "is this fulfilling of the law." (Rom. xiii. 10.) There is nothing offensive with it. How so? Because where 

love exists, all the sins of covetousness, rapine, envy, slander, arrogance, perjury, and falsehood are done 
away. For men perjure themselves, in order to rob, but no one would rob him whom he loved, but would 
rather give him his own possessions. For we are more obliged than if we received from him. Ye know this, 
all you that have friends, friends, I mean, in reality, not in name only, but whoever loves as men ought to love, 
whoever is really linked to another. And let those who are ignorant of it learn from those who know. 
I will now cite you from the Scriptures a wonderful instance of friendship. Jonathan, the son of Saul, loved 
David, and his soul was so knit to him, that David in mourning over him says, "Thy love to me was wonderful, 
passing the love of women. Thou wast wounded unto death." (2 Sam. i. 25, 26.) What then? did he envy 
David? Not at all, though he had great reason. How? Because, by the events he perceived that the kingdom 
would pass from himself to him, yet he felt nothing of the kind. He did not say, "This is he that is depriving me 
of my paternal kingdom," but he favored his obtaining the sovereignty; and he spared not his father for the 
sake of his friend. Yet let not any one think him a parricide, for he did not injure his father, but restrained his 
unjust attempts. He rather spared than injured him. He did not permit him to proceed to an unjust murder. He 
was many times willing even to die for his friend, and far from accusing him, he restrained even his father's 
accusation. Instead of envying, he joined in obtaining the kingdom for him. Why do I speak of wealth? He 
even sacrificed his own life for him. For the sake of his friend, he did not even stand in awe of his father, 
since his father entertained unjust designs, but his conscience was free from all such. Thus justice was 
conjoined with friendship. 

Such then was Jonathan. Let us now consider David. He had no opportunity of returning the recompense, for 
his benefactor was taken away before the reign of David, and slain before he whom he had served came to 
his kingdom. What then? As far as it was allowed him and left in his power, let us see how that righteous man 
manifested his friendship. "Very pleasant," he says, "hast thou been to me, Jonathan; thou wast wounded 
unto death." (2 Sam. i. 25, Gr.) Is this all? This indeed was no slight tribute, but he also frequently rescued 
from danger his son and his grandson, remembrance of the kindness of the father, and he continued to 
support and protect his children, as he would have done those of his own son. Such friendship I would wish 
all to entertain both towards the living and the dead. 

Let women listen to this (for it is on their account especially that I refer to the departed) who enter into a 
second marriage, and defile the bed of their deceased husband, though they have loved him.(1) Not that I 
forbid a second marriage, or pronounce it a proof of wantonness, for Paul does not allow me, stopping my 
mouth by saying to women, "If she marry she hath not sinned." (1 Cor. vii. 28 and 40.) Yet let us attend to what 
follows, "But she is happier if she so abide." This state is much better than the other. Wherefore? for many 
reasons. For if it is better not to marry at all than to marry, much more in this case. "But some, you say, could 
not endure widowhood, and have fallen into many misfortunes." Yes; because they know not what 
widowhood is. For it is not widowhood to be exempt from a second marriage, as neither is it virginity to be 
altogether unmarried. For as "that which is comely," and "that ye may attend upon the Lord without 
distraction," is the mark of the one state, so it is the mark of the other to be desolate, to "continue in 
supplications and prayers," to renounce luxury and pleasure. For "she that liveth in pleasure is dead whilst 
she liveth." (1 Tim. v. 6.) If remaining a widow, thou wouldest have the same pomp, the same show, the same 
attire, as thou hadst while thy husband was living, it were better for thee to marry. For it is not the union that is 
objectionable, but the multitude of cares that attend it. But that which is not wrong, thou dost not: but that which 
is not indifferent, which is liable to blame, in that thou involvest thyself. On this account "some have turned 
aside after Satan," because they have not been able to live properly as widows. 
Wouldest thou know what a widow is, and what a widow's dignity, hear Paul's account of it. "If she have 
brought up children, if she have lodged strangers, if she have washed the Saints' feet, if she have relieved 
the afflicted, if she have diligently followed every good work." (1 Tim. v. 10.) But when after the death of thy 
husband, thou art arrayed in the same pomp of wealth, no wonder if thou canst not support widowhood. 
Transfer this wealth, therefore, to heaven, and thou wilt find the burden of widowhood tolerable. But, thou 
sayest, what if I have children to succeed to their father's inheritance? Instruct them also to despise riches. 
Transfer thy own possessions, reserving for them just a sufficiency. Teach them too to be superior to riches. 
But what if besides my silver and gold, I am surrounded by a crowd of slaves, oppressed by a multitude of 
affairs, how shall I be equal to the care of all these things, when deprived of the support of my husband? 
This is but an excuse, a pretense, as appears from many causes. For if thou dost hot deserve wealth, nor 
seek to increase thy present possessions, thy burden will be light. To get riches is much more laborious 
than to take care of them. If therefore thou cuttest off this one thing, accumulating, and suppliestthe needy 
out of thy substance, God will hold over thee His protecting hand. And if thou sayest this from a real desire to 
preserve the inheritance of thy fatherless children, and art not, under this pretense, possessed with 
covetousness; He who searches the heart knows how to secure their riches, even He who commanded 
thee to bring up children. 

For it is not possible, indeed it is not, that a house established by almsgiving should suffer any calamity. If it 
should be unfortunate for a time, in the end it will prosper. This will be more than spear and shield to all the 

household. Hear what the devil says concerning Job. "Hast not thou made an hedge about him and about 
his house, and about all that he hath on every side?" (Job i. 10.) Wherefore? Hear Job himself saying, "I was 
eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame. I was a father to the orphans." (Job xxix. 1 5.) As he who does not 
turn aside from the calamities of others, will not suffer even in his own misfortunes, because he has learnt to 
sympathize; so he who will not bear the griefs of sympathy, will learn all sorrow in his own person. (1) And, as 
in the case of a bodily disease, if, when the foot is mortified, the hand does not sympathize by cleansing the 
wound, washing away the discharge, and applying a plaster, it will suffer the like disease of its own; so she 
who will not minister to another when she is not herself afflicted, will have to bear sufferings of her own. For 
the evil spreading from the other part will reach to this also, and the question will not be of ministering to the 
other, but of its own cure and relief. So it is here also. He that will not relieve others, will be a sufferer himself. 
"Thou hast hedged him in," saith Satan, "within and without," and I dare not attack him! But he suffered 
afflictions, you say. True. But those afflictions were the occasion of great good. His substance was doubled, 
his reward increased, his righteousness enlarged, his crown was splendid, his prize glorious. Both his 
spiritual and temporal blessings were augmented. He lost his children, but he received, not these restored, 
but others in their room, and those too he had safe for the Resurrection. Had they been restored, the number 
would have been diminished, but now having given others in their stead, He will present them also at the 
Resurrection. All these things happened to him, because of his openhandedness in almsgiving. Let us then 
do likewise, that we may obtain the same rewards by the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. Amen. 

HOMILY VIM. 

2 TIMOTHY iii. 1-4. 

"This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, 
covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural 
affection, truce-breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, Traitors, 
heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God." 

IF any now takes offense at the existence of heretics, let him remember that it was so from the beginning, the 
devil always setting up error by the side of truth. God from the beginning promised good, the devil came too 
with a promise. God planted Paradise, the devil deceived, saying, "Ye shall be as gods." (Gen. iii. 5.) For as 
he could show nothing in actions, he made the more promises in words. Such is the character of deceivers. 
After this were Cain and Abel, then the sons of Seth and the daughters of men; afterwards Ham and Japhet, 
Abraham and Pharaoh, Jacob and Esau; and so it is even to the end, Moses and the magicians, the 
Prophets and the false prophets, the Apostles and the false apostles, Christ and Antichrist. Thus it was then, 
both before and at that time. Then there was Theudas, then Simon, then were the Apostles, then too this 
party of Hermogenes and Philetus. In short, there was no time when falsehood was not set up in opposition 
to truth. Let us not therefore be distressed. That it would be so, was foretold from the beginning. Therefore he 
says, "Know that in the last days perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, 
covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural 
affection." The unthankful then is unholy, and this is natural, for what will he be to others, who is not grateful to 
his benefactor? The unthankful man is a truce-breaker, he is without natural affection, in themselves, whilst 
they commit many sins and offenses, find consolation in defaming the characters of others. 
"Incontinent," with respect both to their tongue and their appetite, and everything else. 
"Fierce," hence their inhumanity and cruelty, when any one is covetous selfish, ungrateful, licentious. 
"Despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady." "Traitors," betrayers of friendship; "heady" having no 
steadiness; "high-minded," filled with arrogance. "Lover of pleasures more than lovers of God." 
Ver. 5. "Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof." 

In the Epistle to the Romans, he says somewhat on this wise, "Having the form of knowledge and of the truth 
in the law" (Rom. ii. 20), where he speaks in commendation of it: but here he speaks of this sin as an evil 
beyond all other defects. And why is this? Because he does not use the words in the same signification. For 
an image is often taken to signify a likeness; but sometimes a thing without life, and worthless. Thus he says 
himself in his Epistle to the Corinthians, "A man ought not to cover his head, forasmuch as he is the image 
and glory of God." (1 Cor. xi. 7.) But the Prophet says, "Man walketh in an image." (Ps. xxxix. 9, Gr.) And the 
Scripture sometimes takes a lion to represent royalty, as, "He couched as a lion, and as a lion's whelp, who 
shall raise him up?" (Gen. xlix. 9, Gr.) And sometimes to signify rapacity, as, "a ravening and a roaring lion." 
(Ps. xxii. 13.) And we ourselves do the same. For as things are compounded and varied in themselves, they 
are fitly adduced for various images and examples. As when we would express our admiration of a beautiful 
woman, we say, she is like a picture; and when we admire a painting, we say that it speaks, that it breathes 
But we do not mean to express the same thing, but in one case to mark likeness, in the other beauty. So 

here with respect to form, in the one passage, it means a model, or representation, a doctrine, or pattern of 

godliness; in the other, something that is lifeless, a mere appear out the power. For as a fair and florid body, 

when it has no strength, is like a painted figure, so is a right faith apart from works. For let us suppose any 

one to be "covetous, a traitor, heady," and yet to believe aright; of what advantage is it, if he wants all the 

qualities becoming a Christian, if he does not the works that characterize godliness, but outdoes the Greeks 

in impiety, when he is a mischief to those with whom he associates, causes God to be blasphemed, and the 

doctrine to be slandered by his evil deeds? 

"From such turn away" he says. But how is this, if men are to be so "in the latter times"? There were probably 

then such, in some degree at least, though not to the same excess. But, in truth, through him he warns all to 

turn away from such characters. 

Ver. 6. "For of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led 

away with divers lust." 

Ver. 7. "Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth." 

Do you see them employing the artifice of that old deceiver, the weapons which the devil used against 

Adam? "Entering into houses," he says. Observe how he shows their impudence by this expression, (1) their 

dishonorable ways, their deceitfulness. "Leading captive silly women," so that he who is easy to be 

deceived is a "silly woman," and nothing like a man: for to be deceived is the part of silly women. "Laden 

with sins." See whence arises their persuasion, from their sins, from their being conscious to themselves of 

nothing good! And with great propriety has he said "laden. "(2) For this expression marks the multitude of 

their sins, and their state of disorder and confusion; "led away with divers lusts." He does not accuse nature, 

for it is not women simply, but such women as these, that he blames. And why "divers lusts"? by that are 

implied their various faults, their luxury, their disorderly conduct, their wantonness. "Divers lust" he says, that 

is, of glory, of wealth, of pleasure, of self-will, of honor: and perchance other vile desires are implied. 

"Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth." He does not say thus to excuse, but to 

threaten them severely; for their understanding was callous because they had weighed themselves down 

with lusts and sins. 

Ver. 8. "Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth." 

Who are these?(3) The magicians in the time of Moses. But how is it their names are nowhere else 

introduced? Either they were handed down by tradition, or it is probable that Paul knew them by inspiration. 

"Men of corrupt minds," he says, "reprobate concerning the faith." 

Ver. 9. "But they shall proceed no further; for their folly shall be manifested unto all men, as theirs also was." 

"They shall proceed no further"; how then does he say elsewhere, "They will increase unto more 

ungodliness"? (2 Tim. ii. 16.) He there means, that beginning to innovate and to deceive, they will not pause 

in their error, but will always invent new deceits and corrupt doctrines, for error is never stationary. But here 

he says, that they shall not be able to deceive, nor carry men away with them, for however at first they may 

seem to impose upon them, they will soon and easily be detected. For that he is speaking to this effect 

appears from what follows. "For their folly shall be manifest unto all." Whence? Every way-" as theirs also 

was." For if errors flourish at first, they do not continue to the end for so it is with things that are not fair by 

nature, but fair in appearance; they flourish for a time, and then are detected, and come to nought. But not 

such are our doctrines, and of these thou art a witness, for in our doctrines there is no deceit, for who would 

choose to die for a deceit? 

Ver. 10. "But thou hast fully known(1) my doctrine." Wherefore be strong; for thou wert not merely present, but 

didst follow closely. Here he seems to imply that the period had been long, in that he says, "Thou hast 

followed up my doctrine"; this refers to his discourse. "Manner of life"; this to his conduct. "Purpose"; this to 

his zeal, and the firmness of his soul. I did not say these things, he says, and not do them; nor was I a 

philosopher in words only. "Faith, longsuffering." He means how none of these things troubled me. "Charity," 

which those men had not; "patience," nor yet this. Towards the heretics, he means, I show much 

longsuffering; "patience," that under persecution. 

Ver. 1 1 . "Persecutions, afflictions" 

There are two things that disquiet a teacher, the number of heretics, and men's wanting fortitude to endure 

sufferings. And yet he has[2] said much about these, that such always have been, and always will be, and 

no age will be free from them, and that they will not be able to injure us, and that in the world there are 

vessels of gold and of silver. You see how he proceeds to discourse about his afflictions, "which came 

upon me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra." 

Why has he selected these instances out of many? Because the rest was known to Timothy, and these 

perhaps were new events, and he does not mention the former ones, for he is not enumerating them 

particularly, for he is not actuated by ambition or vainglory, but he recounts them for the consolation of his 

disciple, not from ostentation. And here he speaks of Antioch in Pisidia, and Lystra, whence Timothy himself 

was. "What persecutions I endured." There was twofold matter of consolation, that I displayed a generous 

zeal, and that I was not forsaken. It cannot be said, that God abandoned me, but He rendered my crown 

more radiant. 

"What persecutions I endured: but out of But why, he says, should I speak only of myself? Each one that will 
live godly will be persecuted. Here he calls afflictions and sorrows, "persecutions," for it is not possible that 
a man pursuing the course of virtue should not be exposed to grief, tribulation, and temptations. For how can 
he escape it who is treading in the strait and narrow way, and who has heard, that "in the world ye shall have 
tribulation"? (John xvi. 33.) If Job in his time said, "The life of man upon earth h a state of trial" (Jobvii. 1, Gr.); 
how much more was it so in those days? 

Ver. 13. "But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived?." 
Let none of these things, he says, disturb thee, if they are in prosperity, and thou in trials. Such is the nature of 
the case. From my own instance thou mayest learn that it is impossible for man, in his warfare with the 
wicked, not to be exposed to tribulation. One cannot be in combat and live luxuriously, one cannot be 
wrestling and feasting. Let none therefore of those who are contending seek for ease or joyous living. Again, 
the present state is contest, warfare, tribulation, straits, and trials, and the very scene of conflicts. The 
season for rest is not now, this is the time for toil and labor. No one who has just stripped and anointed 
himself thinks of ease. If thou thinkest of ease, why didst thou strip, or prepare to fight? "But do I not maintain 
the fight?" you say. What, when thou dost not conquer thy desires, nor reset the evil bias of nature? 
Ver. 1 4. "But continue thou in the things that thou hast learned and hast been assured of, knowing of whom 
thou hast learned them; And that from a child thou hast known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make 
thee wise unto salvation through the faith which in Christ Jesus." 

What is this? As the prophet David exhorted, saying, "Be not thou envious against the workers of iniquity" 
(Ps. xxxvii. 1) so Paul exhorts, "Continue thou in the things which thou hast learned" and not simply learned, 
but "hast been assured of," that is, hast believed. And what have I believed? That this is the Life. And if thou 
seest things happening contrary to thy belief, be not troubled. The same hap-called" (Gen. xxi. 12); and he 
was commanded to sacrifice Isaac yet he was not troubled nor dismayed. Let no one be offended because 
of the wicked. This the Scripture taught from the beginning. 

What then, if the good be in prosperity, and the wicked be punished? The one is likely to happen, the other 
not so. For the wicked will possibly be punished, but the good cannot always be rejoicing. No one was 
equal to Paul yet he passed all his life in afflictions, in tears and groanings night and day. "For the space of 
three years," he says, "I ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears." (Acts xx. 31 .) And again: 
"That which cometh upon me daily." (1 Cor. xi. 28.) He did not rejoice to-day, and grieve to-morrow, but he 
ceased not daily to grieve. How then does he say, "Evil men shall wax worse and worse"? He has not said, 
they shall find rest, but" they shall wax worse and worse." Their progress is for the worse. He has not said, 
they shall be in prosperity. But if they are punished, they are punished that thou mayest not suppose their 
sins are unavenged. For since we are not deterred from wickedness by the fear of hell, in very tenderness 
He rouses us from our insensibility, and awakens us. If no wicked man was ever punished, no one would 
believe that God presides over human affairs. If all were punished, no one would expect a future 
resurrection, since all had receded their due here. On this account He both punishes, and forbears to 
punish. On this account the righteous suffer tribulation here, because they are sojourners, and strangers, 
and are in a foreign country. The just therefore endure these things for the purpose of trial. For hear what 
God said to Job: "Thinkest thou that I have warned thee other- any affliction suffer but the punishment of their 
sins. Under all circumstances, therefore, whether afflictive or otherwise, let us give thanks to God. For both 
are beneficial. He does nothing in hatred or enmity to us, but all things from care and consideration for us. 
"Knowing that from a child thou hast known the sacred writings. The holy Scriptures he calls "sacred 
writings." In these thou wast nurtured, so that through them thy faith ought to be firm and unshaken. For the 
root was laid deep, and nourished by length of time, (2) nor will anything subvert it. that is, they will not suffer 
thee to have any foolish feeling, such as most men have. For he who knows the Scriptures as he ought, is 
not offended at anything that happens; he endures all things manfully, referring them partly to faith, and to the 
incomprehensible nature of the divine dispensation, and partly knowing reasons for them, and finding 
examples in the Scriptures. Since it is a great sign of knowledge not to be curious about everything, nor to 
wish to know all things. And if you will allow me, I will explain myself by an example. Let us suppose a river, 
or rather rivers (I ask no allowance, I only speak of what rivers really are,) all are not of the same depth. 
Some have a shallow bed, others one deep enough to drown one unacquainted with it. In one part there are 
whirlpools, and not in another. It is good therefore to forbear to make trial of all, (3) and it is no small proof of 
knowledge not to wish to sound all the depths: whereas he that would venture on every part of the river, is 
really most ignorant of the peculiar nature of rivers and will often be in danger of perishing from venturing into 
the deeper parts with the same boldness with which he crossed the shallows. So it is in the things of God. He 
that will know all things, and ventures to intrude into everything, he it is that h most ignorant what God is. And 
of rivers indeed, the greater part is safe, and the depths and whirlpools few, but with respect to the things of 
God, the greater part is hidden, and it is not possible to trace out His works. Why then art thou bent on 
drowning thyself in those depths? 

Know this, however, that God dispenses all things, that He provides for all, that we are free agents, that 
some things He works, and some things He permits; that He wills noting evil to be done; that all things are 
not done by His will, but some by ours also; all evil things by ours alone, all good things by our will conjointly 
with His influence; and that nothing is without His knowledge. Therefore He worketh all things. (4) Thou then 
knowing this canst reckon what things are good, what are evil, and what are indifferent. Thus virtue is good, 
vice is evil; but riches and poverty life and death, are things indifferent. If thou knowestthis, thou wilt know 
thereby, that the righteous are afflicted that they may be crowned, the wicked, that they may receive the 
punishment of their sins. But all sinners are not punished here, lest the generality should disbelieve the 
Resurrection; nor all the righteous afflicted, lest men should think that vice, and not virtue, is approved. 
These are the rules and limits. Bring what you will to the test of these, and you will not be perplexed with 
doubt. For as there is among calculators the number of six thousand, to which all things can be reduced, and 
everything can be divided and multiplied in the scale of six thousand, and this is known to all who are 
acquainted with arithmetic(l); so he who knows those rules, which I will briefly recapitulate, will never be 
offended. And what are these? That virtue is a good, vice an evil; that diseases, poverty, ill-treatment, false 
accusations, and the like, are things indifferent; that the righteous are afflicted here or if ever they are in 
prosperity, it is that virtue may not appear odious; that the wicked enjoy pleasure now that hereafter they 
may be punished, or if they are sometimes visited, it is that vice may not seem to be approved, nor their 
actions to go unpunished; that all are not punished, lest there should be a disbelief of the time of 
resurrection; that even of the good, some who have done bad actions are quit of them here; and of the 
wicked, some have good ones, and are rewarded for them here, that their wickedness may be punished 
hereafter (Matt. vi. 5); that the works of God are for the most part incomprehensible, and that the difference 
between us and Him is greater than can be expressed. If we reason on these grounds, nothing will be able 
to trouble or perplex us. If we listen to the Scriptures continually, we shall find many such examples. 
"Which are able," he says, "to make thee wise unto salvation." 

For the Scriptures suggest to us what is to be done, and what is not to be done. For hear this blessed one 
elsewhere saying, "Thou art confident that thou thyself art a guide of the blind, a light of them which are in 
darkness, an instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes?" (Rom. ii. 19, 20.) Thou seest that the Law is the 
light of them which are in darkness; and if that which showeth the letter, the letter which killeth, is light, what 
then is the Spirit which quickeneth? If the Old Covenant is light, what is the New, which contains so many, and 
so great revelations? where the difference is as great, as if any one should open heaven to those who only 
know the earth, and make all things there visible. There we learn concerning hell, heaven, and judgment. Let 
us not believe in things irrational. They are nothing but imposture. "What," you say, "when what they foretell 
comes to pass?" It is because you believe it, if it does come to pass. The impostor has taken thee captive. 
Thy life is in his power, he manages thee as he win. If a captain of robbers should have under his power and 
disposal the son of a king, who had fled to him, preferring the desert, and his lawless company, would he be 
able to pronounce whether he would live or die? Assuredly he would, not because he knows the future, but 
because he is the disposer of his life or death, the youth having put himself in his power. For according to his 
own pleasure, he may either kill him, or spare his life, as he is become subject to him, and it is equally at 
his(2) disposal to sat whether thou shalt be rich or poor. The greater part of the world have delivered 
themselves up into the hands of the devil. 

And furthermore, it contributes much to favor the pretenses of these deceivers, that a man has accustomed 
himself to believe in them. For no one takes notice of their failures, but their lucky conjectures are observed. 
But if these men have any power of prognosticating, bring them to me, a believer. I say not this, as 
magnifying myself, (for it is no great honor to be superior to these things,) and indeed I am deep-laden with 
sins; but with respect to these matters, I will not be humble-minded; by the grace of God I despise them all. 
Bring me this pretender to magic; let him, if he has any power of prognosticating, tell me what will happen to 
me to-morrow. But he will not tell me. For I am under the power of the King, and he has no claim to my 
allegiance or submission. I am far from his holes and caverns. I war under the king. "But some one 
committed theft," you say, "and this man discovered it." This is not always true, certainly, but for the most part 
absurdities and falsehoods. For they know nothing. If indeed they know anything, they ought rather to speak 
of their own concerns, how the numerous offerings to their idols have been stolen, how so much of their gold 
has been melted. Why have they not informed their Priests? Even for the sake of money, they have not 
been able to give information when their idol-temples have been burnt, and many have perished with 
them. (3) Why do they not provide for their own salty? But it is altogether a matter of chance, if they have 
predicted anything. With us there are prophets, and they do not fail. They do not speak truth in one instance 
and falsehood in another, but always declare the truth; for this is the privilege of foreknowledge. 
Cease, then, from this madness, I beseech you, if at bast you believe in Christ; and if you believe not, why 
do you expose yourselves? Why do you deceive? "How long win ye halt on both your hips?" (1 Kings xviii. 
21 , Sept.) Why do you go to them? Why enquire of them? The infant you go to them, the infant you enquire, 
you put yourself in slavery to them. For you enquire, as if you believed. "No," you say, "I do not enquire, as 

believing, but making trial of them." But to make trial, whether they speak the truth, is the part not of one who 
believes that they are false, but of one who still doubts. Wherefore then dost thou enquire what will happen? 
For if they answered, "This will happen, but do so and so, and thou wilt escape it"; even in that case thou 
oughtest by no means to be an idolater; yet thy madness were not so great. But if they foretell future 
events, (1) he that listens to them will gain nothing more than unavailing sorrow. The event does not happen, 
but he suffers the uneasiness, and torments(2) himself. 

If it were for our good, God would not have grudged us this foreknowledge. He who has revealed to us 
things in heaven, would not have envied us. For, "All things," He says, "that I have heard of the Father I have 
made known unto you "; and, "I call you not servants, but friends. Ye are my friends" (John xv. 15.) Why then 
did He not make these things known unto us? Because He would not have us concerned about them. And 
as a proof that He does not envy us this knowledge, such things were revealed to the ancients, because 
they were babes, even about an ass, (4) and the like. But to us, because He would not have us concerned 
about such things, He has not cared to reveal them. But what do we learn? Things which they never knew, 
for little indeed were all those things of old. But what we are taught is this, that we shall rise again, that we 
shall be immortal, and incorruptible, that our life shall have no end, that all things will pass away, that we 
shall be caught up in the clouds, that the wicked shall suffer punishment, and numberless other things, and in 
all these there is no falsehood. Is it not better to know these than to hear that the ass that was lost is found? 
Lo, thou hast gotten thine ass! Lo, thou hast found him! What is thy gain? Will he not soon be lost again some 
other way? For if he leave thee not, at bast thou wilt lose him in thy death. But the things which I have 
mentioned, if we will but hold them fast, we shall retain perpetually. These therefore let us pursue. To these 
stable and enduring goods let us attach ourselves. Let us not give heed to soothsayers, fortune-tellers, and 
jugglers, but to God who knoweth all things certainly, whose knowledge is universal. Thus we shall know all 
that it befits us to know, and shall obtain all good things, through the grace and lovingkindness, &c. 

HOMILY IX. 

2 TIMOTHY iii. 16, 17. 

"All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for 
instruction in righteousness: That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works." 
[R. V.: Every Scripture inspired of God is also profitable &c] 

HAVING offered much exhortation and consolation from other sources, he adds that which is more perfect, 
derived from the Scriptures; and he is reasonably full in offering consolation, be- breath, when he saw him 
departing as it were in death, (3) rent his garments for grief, what think to die, and that he could not enjoy his 
company when he was near his death which is above all things apt to be distressing? For we are less 
grateful for the past time, when we have been deprived of the more recent intercourse of those who are 
departed. For this reason when he had previously offered much consolation, he then discourses concerning 
his own death: and this m no ordinary way, but is words adapted to comfort him and fill him with joy; so as to 
have it considered as a sacrifice rather than a death; a migration, as in fact it was, and a removal to a better 
state. "For I am now ready to be offered up" (2 Tim. iv. 6), he says. For this reason he writes: "All Scripture is 
given by inspiration of God, (5) and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in 
righteousness" All what Scripture? all that sacred writing, he means, of which I was speaking. This is said of 
what he was discoursing of; about which he said, "From a child thou hast known the holy Scriptures." All 
such, then, "is given by inspiration of God"; therefore, he means, do not doubt; and it is "profitable for 
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness: that the man of God may be perfect, 
thoroughly furnished unto all good works" 

"For doctrine." For thence we shall know, whether we ought to learn or to be ignorant of anything. And thence 
we may disprove what is false, thence we may be corrected and brought to a right mind, may be comforted 
and consoled, and if anything is deficient, we may have it added to us. 

"That the man of God may be perfect." For this is the exhortation of the Scripture given, that the man of God 
may be rendered perfect by it; without this therefore he cannot be perfect. Thou hast the Scriptures, he says, 
in place of me. If thou wouldest learn anything, thou mayest learn it from them. And if he thus wrote to 
Timothy, who was filled with the Spirit, how much more to us! 
"Thoroughly furnished unto all good works"; 

Chap. iv. 1. "I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, Who shall judge the quick and 
the dead." 

He either means the wicked and the just, or the departed and those that are still living; for many will be left 
alive. In the former Epistle he raised his fears, saying. "I give thee charge in the sight of God, Who 
quickeneth all things" (1 Tim. vi. 13): but here he sets before him what is more dreadful "Who shall judge the 
quick and the dead," that is, Who shall call them to account "at His appearing and His kingdom. "When shah 

He judge? at His appearing with glory, and in His kingdom. Either he says this to show that He will not come 

in the way that He now has come, or, "I call to witness His coming, and His kingdom. He calls Him to 

witness, showing that he had reminded Him of that appearing. Then teaching him how he ought to preach 

the word, he adds, 

Ver. 2. "Preach the word: be infant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering 

and doctrine." 

What means "in season, out of season"? That is, have not any limited season: let it always be thy season, 

not only in peace and security, and when sitting in the Church. Whether thou be in danger, in prison, in 

chains, or going to thy death, at that very time reprove. Withhold not rebuke, for reproof is then most 

seasonable, when thy rebuke will be most successful, when the reality is proved. "Exhort," he says. After the 

manner of physicians, having shown the wound, he gives the incision, he applies the plaster. For if you omit 

either of these, the other becomes useless. If you rebuke without convicting you will seem to be rash, and no 

one will tolerate it, but after the matter is proved, he will submit to rebuke: before, he will be headstrong. And 

if you convict and rebuke, but vehemently, and do not apply exhortation, (1) all your labor will be lost. For 

conviction(2) is intolerable in itself if consolation be not mingled with it. As if incision, though salutary in itself, 

have not plenty of lenitives to assuage the pain, the patient cannot endure cutting and hacking, so it is in this 

matter. 

"With all longsuffering and doctrine." For he that reproves is required to be longsuffering, that he may not 

believe hastily, and rebuke needs consolation, that it may be received as it ought. And why to 

"longsuffering" does he add "doctrine"? "Not as in anger, not as in hatred, not as insulting over him, not as 

having caught an enemy. Far be these things from thee." But how? As loving as sympathizing with him, as 

more distressed than himself at his grief, as melted at his sufferings? "With all longsuffering and doctrine." 

No ordinary teaching is implied. 

Ver. 3. "For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine." 

Before they grow stiffnecked,(3) preoccupy them all. For this reason he says, "in season, out of season"; do 

everything so as to have willing disciples. 

"But after their own lusts," he says, "shall they heap to themselves teachers." 

Nothing can be more expressive than these words For by saying "they shall heap to themselves," he shows 

the indiscriminate multitude of the teachers, as also by their being elected by their disciples. "They shall 

heap to themselves teachers" he says, "having itching ears." Seeking for such as speak to gratify and 

delight their hearers. 

Ver. 4. "And they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and be turned unto fables." 

This he foretells, not as willing to throw him into despair, but to prepare him to bear it firmly, when it shall 

happen. As Christ also did m saying "They will deliver you up, and they will scourge you, and bring you 

before the synagogues, for My name's sake." (Matt. x. 17.) And this blessed man elsewhere says, "For I 

know this, that after my departures shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock." (Acts xx. 

29.) But this he said that they might watch, and duly use the present opportunity. 

Ver. 5. "But watch thou in all things, endure affliction." 

It was for this therefore, that he foretold these things; as Christ also toward the end predicted that there 

should be "false Christs and false prophets ; so he too, when he was about to depart, spoke of these things. 

"But watch thou in all things, endure affliction"; that is, labor, preoccupy their minds before this pestilence 

assails them; secure the safety of the sheep before the wolves enter in, everywhere endure hardship. 

"Do the work of an evangelist, make full proof of thy ministry." Thus it was the work of an evangelist that he 

should endure hardship, both in himself, and from those without; "make full proof of that is, fulfill" thy 

ministry." And behold another necessity for his enduring affliction, 

Ver. 6. "For I am now ready to be poured out,(1) and the time of my departure is at hand." 

He has not said of my sacrifice; but, what is 

Often, when I have taken the Apostle into my hands, and have considered this passage, I have been at a 

loss to understand why Paul here speaks so loftily: "I have fought the good fight." But now by the grace of 

God I seem to have found it out. For what purpose then does he speak thus? He is desirous to console the 

despondency of his disciple, and therefore bids him be of good cheer, since he was going to his crown, 

having finished all his work, and obtained a glorious end. Thou oughtest to rejoice, he says, not to grieve. 

And why? Because, "I have fought the good fight." As a father whose son was sitting by him, bewailing his 

orphan state, might console him, saying, Weep not, my son; we have lived a good life, we have arrived at 

old age, and now we leave thee. Our life has been irreproachable, we depart with glory, and thou mayest be 

held in admiration for our actions, Our king is much indebted to us. As if he had said, We have raised 

trophies, we have conquered enemies, and this not boastfully. God forbid; but to raise up his dejected son, 

and to encourage him by his praises in heart." (1 Thess. ii. 17.) If he then felt so much at being separated 

from his disciples, what thinkest thou were the feelings of Timothy? If on parting from him whilst living he 

wept, so that Paul says, "Being mindful of thy tears, that I may be filled with joy." (2 Tim. i. 4), how much more 

at his death? These things then he wrote to console him. Indeed the whole Epistle is full of consolation, and 
is a sort of Testament. "I have fought the good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith." "A good 
fight," he says, therefore do thou engage in it. But is that a good fight, where there are imprisonment, chains, 
and death? Yea, he says for it is fought in the cause of Christ, and great crowns are won in it. "The good 
fight"! There is no worthier than this contest. This crown is without end. This is not of olive leaves. It has not a 
human umpire. It has not men for spectator. The theater is crowded with Angels. There men labor many 
days, and suffer hardships, and for one hour they receive the crown, and immediately all the pleasure 
passes away. But here far otherwise, it continues for ever in brightness, us both to contend and to run; to 
contend, by enduring afflictions firmly, and to run, not vainly, but to some good end. It is truly a good fight, not 
only delighting, but benefiting the spectator: and the race does not end in nothing It is not a mere display of 
strength and of rivalry. It draws all up to heaven. This race is, brighter than the sun's yea, this which Paul ran 
upon earth, than that which he runs in heaven. And how had he "finished his course"? He traversed the 
whole world, beginning from Galilee and Arabia, and advancing to the extremities of the each, so that, as he 
says, "From Jerusalem and round about unto lllyricum I have fully preached the Gospel of Christ." (Rom. xv. 
19.) He passed over the earth like a bird, or rather more swiftly than a bird: for a bird only flies over it, but he, 
having the wing of the Spirit, made his way through numberless impediments, dangers, deaths, and 
calamities, so that he was even teeter than a bird. Had he been a mere bird, he might have alighted and 
been taken, but bring upborne by the Spirit he soared above all snares as a bird with a wing of fire, solation 
of his disciples, but he further adds the rewards. And what are these? 
Ver. 8. "Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness." 

Here again he calls virtue in general righteousness. Thou shouldest not grieve that I shall depart, to be 
invested with that crown which will by Christ be placed upon my head. But if I continued here, truly thy 
mightest rather grieve, and fear lest I should fail and perish. 

Ver. 8. "Which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day, and not to me Christ? By rejoicing at 
His coming; and he who rejoices at His coming, will perform works worthy of His joy; he will throw away his 
substance if need be, and even his life, so that he may obtain future blessings, that he may be thought 
worthy to behold that second coming in a fitting state, in confidence, in brightness and glory. This is to "love 
His appearing." He who loves His appearing will do everything to ensure, before His general coming, a 
particular coming to himself. And how, you will say, is this possible? Hear from Christ, who and make Our 
abode with him." (John xiv. promise to come to us in particular: for He says, "We will come and make Our 
abode with him." If any man "love His appearing," he will do everything to invite Him to himself, and to hold 
Him, that the light may shine upon him. Let there be nothing unworthy of His coming, and He will soon take 
up His abode with us. 

And it is called His "Epiphany, "(1) because He will appear above, (2) and shine forth from on high. Let us 
therefore "seek those things that are above," and we shall soon draw down those beams upon us. None of 
those who grovel below, and bury themselves in this lower earth, will be able to view the light of that Sun. 
None of those who defile themselves with worldly things will be able to behold that Sun of right- thyself from 
that depth, from the waves of a worldly life, if thou wouldest see the Sun, and enjoy His appearing. Then thou 
wilt see Him with great confidence. Be even now a philosopher. Let not a spirit of perverseness possess 
thee, lest He smite thee severely, and bring thee low. Let not thy heart be hardened; nor darkened, lest thou 
be shipwrecked there. Let there be no self-deceit. For the rocks beneath the sea cause the most fatal 
shipwrecks. Nourish no wild beasts, I mean evil passions, worse than wild beasts. Confide not in things ever 
flowing, that thou mayest be able to stand firmly. None can stand upon water, but upon a rock all find a 
secure footing. Worldly things are as water, as a torrent, that passes away. "The waters," he saith, "are 
come in unto my soul." (Ps. Ixix. that we suffer for Christ. This divine incantation let us repeat, and it will charm 
away the pain of every wound. 

And how can we suffer for Christ, you ask? If one accuse thee falsely in any case, not on account of Christ, 
yet if thou bearest it patiently, if thou givest thanks, if thou prayest for him, all this thou doest for Christ. But if 
thou curse him, if thou utter discontent, if thou attempt to revenge it, though thou shouldest not be able, it is not 
for Christ's sake; thou sufferest loss, and art deprived of thy reward on account of thy intention. For it rests 
with us either to the disposition of our own minds. As, for instance, great were the sufferings of Job, yet he 
suffered with thankfulness; and he was justified, not because he suffered, but because in suffering he 
endured it thankfully. Another under the same sufferings, yet not the same, for none ever suffered like 
Job-but under lighter sufferings, exclaims is impatient, curses the whole world, and complains against God. 
He is condemned and sentenced, not because he suffered, but because he blasphemed; and he 
blasphemed, not from any necessity arising from his afflictions, since if necessity arising from events were 
the cause, Job too must have blasphemed; but since he, who suffered more severely, did no such thing, it 
did not come to pass from this cause, but from the man's weakness of purpose. We want therefore strength 
of soul, and nothing will then appear grievous, but if our soul is weak, we find a grievance in everything. 
According to our dispositions, all things become tolerable or intolerable. Let us strengthen our resolution, 

and we shall bear all things easily. The tree whose roots are fixed deep in the earth is not shaken by the 
utmost violence of the storm, but if it beset lightly in the surface of the ground, a slight gust of wind will tear it 
up from the roots. So it is with us; if our flesh be nailed down by the fear of God, nothing will be able to shake 
us; but if we merely intend well, a little shock will subvert and destroy us. Where- soul cleaveth to Thee "; 
observe, he says not, draweth nigh, but "cleaveth to Thee"; and again, "My soul thirsteth for Thee." (Ps. Ixii. 
3.) He said not merry "longeth," that he might by such words express the vehemence of so to cleave and be 
united to Him, that we may never be separated from Him. If thus we hold by God, if thus we rivet our thoughts 
upon Him, if we thirst with the love of Him, all that we desire will be ours, and we shall obtain the good things 
to come, in Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, power, and honor, 
now and for ever. Amen. 

HOMILY X. 

2 TIMOTHY iv. 9-13. 

"Do thy diligence to come shortly unto me: For Demas hath forsaken me, having loved this present world, 

and is departed unto Thessalonica; Crescens to Galatia, Titus unto Dalmatia. Only Luke is with me. Take 

Mark, and bring him with thee: for he is profitable to me for the ministry. And Tychicus have I sent to Ephesus. 

The cloak that I left at Troas with Carpus, when thou comest, bring with thee, and the books, but especially 

the parchments." 

IT is worth while to enquire why he calls Timothy to him, inasmuch as he was intrusted with a Church, and a 

whole nation. It was not from arrogance. For Paul was ready to come to him; for we find him saying, "But if I 

tarry long, that thou mayest know how thou oughtestto behave thyself in the house of God." (1 Tim. iii.15.) But 

he was withholden by a strong necessity. He was no longer matter of his own movements. He was in prison, 

and had been confined by Nero, and was all but on the point of death. That this might not happen before he 

saw his disciple, he therefore sends for him, desiring to see him before he dies, and perhaps to deliver 

much in charge to him. Wherefore he says "Hasten to come to me before the winter." 

"For Demas hath forsaken me, having loved this present world." He does not say, "That I may see thee 

before I depart this life," which would have grieved him, but "because I am alone," he says, "and have no 

one to help or support me." 

"For Demas hath forsaken me, having loved this present world, and is deputed to Thessalonica"; that is, 

having loved his own ease and security from danger, he has chosen rather to live luxuriously at home, than 

to suffer hardships with me, and share my present danger. He has blamed him alone, not for the sake of 

blaming him, but to confirm us, that we may not be effeminate in declining toils and dangers, for this is, 

"having loved this present world." At the same time he wishes to draw his disciple to him. 

"Crescens to Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia." 

These he does not censure. For Titus was one of the most admirable men, so that to him he intrusted the 

affairs of the island, no small island, I mean, but that great one of Crete. 

"Only Luke is with me." For he adhered to him inseparably. It was he who wrote the Gospel, and the 

General(2) Acts; he was devoted to labors, and to learning, and a man of fortitude; of him Paul writes, 

"whose praise is in the Gospel throughout all the Churches." (2 COR. viii. 18.) 

"Take Mark, and bring him with thee, for he is profitable to me for the ministry." 

It is not for his own relief, but for the ministry imprisoned, he did not cease to preach. So it was on the same 

account he sent for Timothy, not for his own, but for the Gospel's sake, that his death might occasion no 

disturbance to the faithful, when many of his own disciples were present to prevent tumults, and to console 

those who would scarce have endurance to bear up at his death. For it is probable that the believers at 

Rome were men of consequence. 

"And Tychicus have I sent to Ephesus. The cloak that I left at Troas with Carpus, when thou comest bring 

with thee, and the books, but especially the parchments." 

The word here translated "cloak"(4) may mean a garment, or, as some say, a bag, in which the books were 

contained. But what had he to do with books, who was about to depart and go to God? He needed them 

much, that he might deposit them in the hands of the faithful, who would retain them in place of his own 

teaching. All the faithful, then, would suffer a great blow, but particularly those who were present at his death, 

and then enjoyed his society. But the cloak he requires, that he might not be obliged to receive one from 

another. For we see him making a great point of avoiding this; and elsewhere, when he was addressing 

those from Ephesus, he says, "Ye know that 35); and again, "It is more blessed to give than to receive." 

Ver. 14. "Alexander the coppersmith did me much evil; the Lord reward him according to his works." 

Here he again makes mention of his trial, not he might bear them firmly. Though they be mean and 

contemptible persons, and without honor, who cause these trials, they ought all, he says, to be borne with 

fortitude. For he who suffers wrong from any great personage, receives no little distinction from the 

superiority of him who does the wrong. But he who is injured by a vile and abject person, suffers the greater 

annoyance. "He did me much evil," he says, that is, he persecuted me in various ways. But these things will 

not go unpunished! For the Lord will reward him according to his works. As he said above: "What 

persecutions I endured, but out of them all the Lord delivered me." (2 Tim iii. 1 1 .) So also here he consoles 

his disciples by a double consideration, that he himself had suffered wrong, and that the other would be 

rewarded for his evil deeds. Not that the Saints rejoice in the punishment of their persecutors, but that the 

cause of the Gospel required it, and the weaker would derive consolation from it. 

Ver. 15. "Of whom be thou ware also; for he hath greatly withstood our words." 

That is, he is hostile to us, and opposes us. He has not said, Revenge, punish, expel him, although by the 

grace given him he might have so done, but he does no such thing; nor does he arm Timothy against him, 

but only commands him to avoid him, leaving vengeance to God, and for the consolation of the weaker he 

has says these things to prepare the mind of his disciple, is manifest also from what follows. But see how he 

mentions other of his trials. 

Ver. 16. "At my first answer," he says, "no man stood with me, but all men forsook me: I pray God that it may 

not be laid to their charge." 

Do you see how he spares his friends, notwithstanding it was a grievous thing they had done? For it is not 

the same thing to be despised by aliens, as by our own friends. Do you see his intense dejection? It cannot 

be friends; for these also betrayed me. "All men," he says "forsook me." And this was no light offense. For if 

he that in war abandons one who is exposed to danger, and shrinks from meeting the hands of his enemies, 

is justly smitten by his friends, as having utterly betrayed their cause, much more in the case of the Gospel. 

But what "first answer" does he speak of? He had stood before Nero, and had escaped. But afterwards, 

because he had converted his cup-bearer, he was beheaded. And here again is encouragement for his 

disciple in what follows. 

Ver. 17. "Notwithstanding the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me." 

Though deserted by man, God doth not permit him to suffer any harm. He strengthened me, he says, that is, 

He gave me boldness in speaking. He suffered me not to sink. 

"That by me the preaching might be fully known." 

That is, might be fulfilled. Observe his great humility. He does not say He strengthened me as deserving of 

His gift, but that "the preaching," with which I was intrusted, "might be fully known." As if any one should wear 

a purple robe and a diadem, and to that circumstance should owe his safety. "And that all the Gentiles might 

hear." What is this? That the luster of the Gospel, and the care of His Providence for me, might be known to 

all. 

"And I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion." 

Ver. 18. "And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work." 

See how near he had been to death. He had fallen into the very jaws of the lion. For he calls Nero a lion from 

his ferocity, and the violent and dating character of his government. "The Lord delivered me," he says, "and 

will deliver." But if he says, "He will deliver me," why does he say, "I am ready to be offered"? Attend to the 

expression, "He delivered me," he says, "from the lion's mouth"; and again, "He will deliver me," not from 

the lion's mouth, but "from every evil work." For then He delivered me from the danger; but now that enough 

has been done for the Gospel, He will yet again deliver me from every sin that is, He will not suffer me to 

depart with condemnation. For striving against sin" (Heb. xii. 4), and not yield, is a deliverance from another 

lion, even the devil, so that this preservation is greater than the former when he seems to be given up. 

"And will preserve me unto His heavenly kingdom; to Whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen," 

This then is salvation, when we shine forth there. But what means, "He will preserve me unto His kingdom"? 

He will deliver me from all blame, and preserve me there. For this is to be preserved unto His kingdom, to 

die here on account of it. For "He that hateth his life in this world shall keep it unto life eternal." (John xii. 25.) 

"To whom be glory." Lo, here is a doxology to the Son. 

Ver. 19. "Salute Priscilla and Aquila, and the household of Onesiphorus." 

For he was then in Rome, of whom he said "The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in 

that day." (2 Tim. i. 1 8.) By this naming of him, he makes those of his household also more zealous in such 

good actions. 

"Salute Priscilla and Aquila." These are they of whom he makes continual mention, with whom too he had 

lodged, and who had taken Apollos to them. He names the woman first, as being I suppose more zealous, 

and more faithful, for she had then received Apollos; or it might be done indifferently. And it was to them no 

slight consolation to be thus saluted. (1) It conveyed a demonstration of esteem and love, and a 

participation in much grace. For the bare salutation of that holy and blessed man was sufficient to fill with 

grace him who received it. 

Ver. 20. "Erastus abode at Corinth: but Trophimus have I left at Miletum sick." 

This Trophimus and Tychicus, we know from the book of the Acts, sailed away with him from Judea, and 

were everywhere his companions, perhaps as being more zealous than the rest. 

""Trophimus I have let at Miletum sick." Why then didst thou not hem him, instead of leaving him? The 
Apostles could not do everything or they did not dispense miraculous gifts upon all occasions, lest more 
should be ascribed whose voice was weak. Why was not this defect removed? Nay, he was often afflicted 
with grief and dejection, and he was not admitted into the Land of Promise. 

For many things were permitted by God, that the weakness of human nature might be manifested. And if with 
these defects the insensible Jews could ask, Where is Moses who brought us would they not have been 
affected towards him if he had brought them also into the Land of Promise? If he had not been suffered to be 
overpowered by the fear of Pharaoh, would they not have thought him a God? We see that the people of 
Lystra were thus affected in the case when they rent their clothes, and ran in among when he had healed the 
man lame from his birth, when all were amazed at the miracle, answered and said, "Ye men of Israel, why 
marvel ye at this, or why look ye so earnestly on us, as though by our own power or holiness we had made 
this man to walk"? (Acts iii. 12.) Hear also the blessed Paul, saying, "There was given to me a thorn in the 
flesh, lest I should be exalted above measure." (2 Cor. xii. 7.) But this, you say, was an expression of humility. 
Far from it. The thorn was not sent him that he might be humble, nor does he say this only out of humility. 
There are other causes besides to be assigned for it. Observe therefore how God, accounting for it, says, 
"My grace is sufficient for thee"; not "that thou mayest not be exited above measure," but what? "For my 
strength is made perfect in weakness." Two ends therefore were answered at once: what was doing was 
made dearly manifest, and the whole was ascribed to God. For this cause he has said elsewhere, "We 
carry this treasure in earthen vessels" (2 COR. iv. 7); that is, in bodies weak and liable to suffering. Why? 
"That the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us." If our bodies were not subject to infirmity, all 
would be ascribed to them. And elsewhere we see him grieving at the infirmity of Epaphroditus, concerning 
whom he writes, "He was sick nigh unto death, but God had mercy on him." (Phil. ii. 27.) And many other 
instances there are of his ignorance of events, which was profitable both for him and his disciples. 
"Trophimus I have left at Miletum sick." Miletus was near Ephesus, Did this happen then when he sailed to 
Judea, or upon some other occasion? For after he had been in Rome, he returned to Spain, but whether he 
came thence again into these parts, we know not. (2) We see him however deserted by all. "For Demas," he 
says, "hath forsaken me. Crescens is departed into Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia. Erastus abode at Corinth. 
Trophimus have I left at Miletum sick." 

Ver. 21 . "Do thy diligence to come before winter. Eubulus greeteth thee, and Pudens and Linus, and 
Claudia?' 

This Linus, some say, was second(1) Bishop of the Church of Rome after Peter. "And Claudia." You see 
how zealous for the faith the women were, how ardent! Such was Priscilla and this Claudia already crucified, 
already prepared for the battle! But why, when there were so many faithful, does he mention only these 
women? Manifestly because they in purpose had already withdrawn from worldly affairs, and were illustrious 
above other. For a woman as such, meets not with any impediments. It is the work of divine grace, that this 
sex should be impeded only in the affairs of this life, or rather not even in them. For a woman undertakes no 
small share of the whole administration, being the keeper of the house. And without her not even political 
affairs could be properly conducted. For if their domestic concerns were in a state of confusion and 
disorder, those who are engaged in public affairs would be kept at home, and political business would be ill 
managed. So that neither in those matters, as neither in spiritual, is she inferior. For she is able, if so inclined, 
to endure a thousand deaths. Accordingly many women have suffered martyrdom. She is able to practice 
chastity even more than men, no such strong flame disturbing her; "holiness, without which no one shall see 
the Lord" (Heb. xii, 14); and contempt of wealth, if she will, and in short all other virtues. 
"Do thy diligence to come before winter." See how he urges him, yet he does not say anything to grieve him. 
He does not say, "Before I die," lest he should afflict him; but, "Before winter," that thou be not detained. 
"Eubulus," he says, "greeteth thee, and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the brethren." He does not 
mention the rest by name. Seest thou that those were the most zealous? 
Ver. 22. "The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit." 

There can be no better prayer than this. Grieve not for my departure. The Lord will be with thee. And he 
says, not "with thee," but "with thy spirit." Thus there is a twofold assistance, the grace of the Spirit,(2) and 
God helping it. And otherwise God will not be with us, if we have not spiritual grace. For if we be deserted by 
grace, how shall He be with us? 
"Grace be with us. Amen." 

Thus he prays for himself too, that they may always be well-pleasing to Him, that they may have grace 
together with the spiritual gift, for where this is, nothing will be grievous. For as he who beholds the king, and 
is in favor with him, is sensible of no uneasiness; so though our friends forsake us, though we be overtaken 
by calamity we shall feel no distress, if that grace be with us and fortify us. 

MORAL. But how shall we draw down grace upon us? By doing what is pleasing to God, and obeying Him in 
all things. In great houses do we not see those domestics in favor, who do not regard their own interest, but 
with all zeal and alacrity promote their masters' and who not from the compulsion of the master, but from their 

own affection and good disposition, order all things well. When they are always before their eyes, when they 
are engaged in the house, when they are not occupied in any private concerns, nor caring for their own, but 
rather consider their masters' concerns as their own. For he who makes what is his own his master's, does 
not really give up his own to his master, but makes his interest his own; he commands even as himself in his 
affairs, (3) and rules equally with him. He is often as much feared by the domestics, and whatever he says 
his master says too, and he is henceforth dreaded by all his enemies. 

And if he who in worldly concerns prefers his masters interests to his own, does not really neglect his own 
interest, but rather advance it the more; much more is this the case in spiritual matters. Despise thine own 
concerns, and thou wilt receive those of God. This He Himself wills. Despise each, and seize upon the 
kingdom of heaven. Dwell there, not here. Be formidable there, not here. If thou art formidable there thou wilt 
be formidable not to men, but to demons, and even to the devil himself. But if thy dependence is on worldly 
wealth, thou wilt be contemptible to them, and often to men too. Whatever be thy riches thou wilt be rich in 
servile things. But if thou despisest these, thou wilt be radiant in the house of the King. 
Such were the Apostles, despising a servile house and worldly wealth! And see how they commanded in 
the affairs of their Master. "Let one," they said, "be delivered from disease, another from the possession of 
devils: bind this man, and loose that." This was done by them on earth, but it was fulfilled as in Heaven. For, 
"whatever ye shall bind on earth," said He, "shall be bound in Heaven." (Matt, xviii. 18.) And greater power 
than His own did He give them. And that I lie not, appears from His own words. "He that believeth in Me, 
greater works shall he do than these which I do." (John xiv. 12.) Why so? Because this honor is reflected 
upon the Master.(1) As in our own affairs, if the servant has great power, the master is the more admired, for if 
the servant is so powerful, much more is he who commands him. But if any man, neglecting his master's 
service thinks only of his wife, his son, or his servant, and seeks to be rich, and to lay up treasure there, by 
stealing and robbing his master of his possessions, he is presently ruined, and his wealth perishes with 
him. 

Wherefore having these examples, I beseech you, let us not regard our possessions, that we may regard 
ourselves: nay, let us despise them, that we may obtain them. If we despise them, He will take care of them; 
if we take care of them, God will despise them. Let us labor in the concerns of God, not in our own, or rather 
really in our own, for His are our own. I speak not of heaven, (2) nor of earth, nor of the things of this world: 
these are unworthy of Him. And they belong alike to the faithful and the unbelievers. What then do I speak of 
as His? His glory and His kingdom. These are His, and ours for His sake. How? "If we be dead with Him," 
He says, "we shall also live with Him. If we suffer, we shall also reign with Him." (2 Tim. ii. 1 1 .) We are 
become "joint heirs," and are called His "brethren." Why do we sink below, when He is drawing us upward 
towards Himself? How long shall we be poor, and beggarly? Heaven is set before us; and do we linger on 
earth? Is His kingdom opened to us, and do we choose such poverty as is here? Is life immortal offered us, 
and do we spend ourselves for lands, for wood and stones? Be truly rich. I would wish thee to be so. Be 
covetous and rapacious, I blame thee not for it. Here it is a fault not to be covetous, here it is blameworthy 
not to be grasping. What then is this? "The kingdom of Heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take it by 
force." (Matt. xi. 12.) There be thou violent! be grasping! It is not diminished by being seized upon. For 
neither is virtue divided, nor piety lessened, nor the kingdom of Heaven. Virtue is increased when thou 
seizest upon it, whilst temporal goods are lessened when they are seized upon. And this appears from 
hence: Let there be ten thousand men in a city; if all seize on virtue, it is multiplied, for they become righteous 
in ten thousand things. (3) If no one seizes upon it, it is diminished, for it is nowhere to be found. 
Thou seest then that good things are multiplied on being possessed by many, but earthly goods are rather 
diminished by seizing. Let us not therefore sit down content with poverty, but let us choose riches. God is 
then rich, when those who enjoy His kingdom are many. "For He is rich," it is said, "unto all that call upon 
Him." (Rom. x. 12.) Increase then His substance; and thou wilt increase it by taking possession of it, by being 
covetous of it, by violently seizing it. And truly there is need of violence. Wherefore? Because there are so 
many impediments, as wives and children, cares and worldly business; besides those demons, and him 
who is the ruler of them, the devil. There is need then of violence, there is need of fortitude. He who takes by 
violence is exposed to toils. How? He endures all things, he contends against necessities. How? He almost 
attempts impossibilities. If such are those who take by violence, and we shrink from attempting even what is 
possible, how shall we ever win? or when shall we enjoy the things for which we strive? "The violent," it is 
said, "take" the kingdom of heaven "by force." Violence and rapacity are needed. For it is not simply set 
before us, and ready to our hands. He who seizes by violence, is ever sober and watchful, he is anxious 
and thoughtful, that he may make his seizure at a seasonable time. Dost thou not see that in war he who is 
about to make a seizure keeps watch and is under arms the whole night? If then they who aim at seizing 
upon worldly goods, watch and are armed all the night long, should we, who wish to seize upon spiritual 
things, sleep and snore in the day, and continue always naked and unarmed? For he who is engaged in sin 
is unarmed; as he who practices righteousness is armed. We do not fortify ourselves with almsgiving. We 
do not prepare for ourselves lamps that are burning, we do not fence ourselves in spiritual armor. We do not 

learn the way that leads thither. We are not sober and watchful, and therefore we can seize no spoil. 
If a man wishes to make an attempt on a kingdom, does he not set death before him in a thousand shapes? 
Is he not armed at all points, does he not practice the art of war, does he not do everything with this view, 
and so rush on to the attack? But we do not act thus. We wish to take the spoil while we are sleeping, and 
therefore we come off with empty hands. Dost thou not see plunderers, how they flee, how rapidly they 
move? how they force their way through everything? And there is need of expedition here. The devil is in 
pursuit of thee. He orders those before to detain thee. But if thou art strong, if thou art watchful, thou wilt spurn 
one, and thrust aside another, and escape from all, as a bird. Yea, if thou depart hence, if thou escape from 
the market and the tumult, I mean this life, and arrive at those higher regions beyond these, in the world to 
come. For there, as in a solitude, there is no tumult, no one to disturb, or to stay thy course. 
Hast thou seized? Yet a little exertion is needed after the seizure, that what thou hast seized may not be 
taken from thee. If we run on, if we look to none of those things that are set before our eyes, if we consider 
nothing but how we may escape from those who would hinder us, we shall be able to retain with all security 
what we have seized. Hast thou seized on chastity? Tarry not; flee beyond the reach of the devil. If he sees 
that he cannot overtake thee, he will cease to pursue; as we, when we can no longer see those who have 
robbed us, despair of the pursuit, and do not pursue, nor call on others to stop thief, but suffer them to 
escape. So do thou run vigorously at the beginning, and when thou art beyond the reach of the devil, he will 
not afterwards attack thee, but thou wilt be in safety, securely enjoying those unspeakable blessings, which 
God grant that we may all obtain through Jesus Christ our Lord. To whom with the Father, and the Holy 
Ghost, be glory, power, honor, and worship, now and for ever, and world without end. Amen.
