Clement of Alexandria, The Stromata (Miscellanies)
Translation: Roberts-Donaldson 1885 (Ante-Nicene Fathers), Public Domain
Source: https://archive.org/details/EarlyChurchFathers38Volumes

THE STROMATA, OR MISCELLANIES: BOOK I (chap 

hap. XV) 

i 

BOOK! 

CHAP. I.-PREFACE--THE AUTHOR'S OBJECT--THE UTILITY OF WRITTEN 
COMPOSITIONS. (1) 

[Wants the beginning] tiiat you may read tiiem under your iiand, and may be able to preserve tiiem. 

Wiietiier written compositions are not to be left behind at all; or if they are, by whom? And if the former, what 
need there is for written compositions? and if the latter, is the composition of them to be assigned to earnest 
men, or the opposite? It were certainly ridiculous for one to disapprove of the writing of earnest men, and 
approve of those, who are not such, engaging in the work of composition. Theopompus and Timaeus, who 
composed fables and slanders, and Epicurus the leader of atheism, and Hipponax and Archilochus, are to 
be allowed to write in their own shameful manner. But he who proclaims the truth is to be prevented from 
leaving behind him what is to benefit posterity. It is a good thing, I reckon, to leave to posterity good children. 
This is the case with children of our bodies. But words are the progeny of the soul. Hence we call those who 
have instructed us, fathers. Wisdom is a communicative and philanthropic thing. Accordingly, Solomon 
says, "My son, if thou receive the saying of my commandment, and hide it with thee, thine ear shall hear 
wisdom. "(2) He points out that the word that is sown is hidden in the soul of the learner, as in the earth, and 
this is spiritual planting. Wherefore also he adds, "And thou shall apply thine heart to understanding, and 
apply it for the admonition of thy son." For soul, me thinks, joined with soul, and spirit with spirit, in the sowing 
of the word, will make that which is sown grow and germinate. And every one who is instructed, is in respect 
of subjection the son of his instructor. "Son," says he, "forget not my laws. "(3) 

And if knowledge belong not to all (set an ass to the lyre, as the proverb goes), yet written compositions are 
for the many. "Swine, for instance, delight in dirt more than in clean water." "Wherefore," says the Lord, "I 
speak to them in parables: because seeing, they see not; and hearing, they hear not, and do not 
understand; "(4) not as if the Lord caused the ignorance: for it were impious to think so. But He prophetically 
exposed this ignorance, that existed in them, and intimated that they would not understand the things 
spoken. And now the Saviour shows Himself, out of His abundance, dispensing goods to His servants 
according to the ability of the recipient, that they may augment them by exercising activity, and then returning 
to reckon with them; when, approving of those that had increased His money, those faithful in little, and 
commanding them to have the charge over many things. He bade them enter into the joy of the Lord. But to 
him who had hid the money, entrusted to him to be given out at interest, and had given it back as he had 
received it, without increase. He said, "Thou wicked and slothful servant, thou oughtest to have given my 
money to the bankers, and at my coming I should have received mine own." Wherefore the useless servant 
"shall be cast into outer darkness. "(5) "Thou, therefore, be strong," says Paul, "in the grace that is in Christ 
Jesus. And the things which thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful 
men, who shall be able to teach others also. "(6) And again: "Study to show thyself approved unto God, a 
workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth." 

If, then, both proclaim the Word-the one by writing, the other by speech-are not both then to be approved, 
making, as they do, faith active by love? It is by one's own fault that he does not choose what is best; God is 
free of blame. As to the point in hand, it is the business of some to lay out the word at interest, and of others 
to test it, and either choose it or not. And the judgment is determined within themselves. But there is that 
species of knowledge which is characteristic of the herald, and that which is, as it were, characteristic of a 
messenger, and it is serviceable in whatever way it operates, both by the hand and tongue. "For he that 
soweth to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting. And let us not be weary in well-doing. "(1) On him 
who by Divine Providence meets in with it, it confers the very highest advantages,-the beginning of faith, 
readiness for adopting a right mode of life, the impulse towards the truth, a movement of inquiry, a trace of 
knowledge; in a word, it gives the means of salvation. And those who have been rightly reared in the words 
of truth, and received provision for eternal life, wing their way to heaven. Most admirably, therefore, the 
apostle says, "In everything approving ourselves as the servants of God; as poor, and yet making many 
rich; as having nothing, yet possessing all things. Our mouth is opened to you. "(2) "I charge thee," he says, 
writing to Timothy, "before God, and Christ Jesus, and the elect angels, that thou observe these things, 
without preferring one before another, doing nothing by partiality. "(3) 

Both must therefore test themselves: the one, if he is qualified to speak and leave behind him written 
records; the other, if he is in a right state to hear and read: as also some in the dispensation of the Eucharist, 
according to(4) custom enjoin that each one of the people individually should take his part. One's own 
conscience is best for choosing accurately or shunning. And its firm foundation is a right life, with suitable 
instruction. But the imitation of those who have already been proved, and who have led correct lives, is most 
excellent for the understanding and practice of the commandments. "So that whosoever shall eat the bread 
and drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. But let a man 
examine himself, and so let him eat of the bread and drink of the cup. "(5) It therefore follows, that every one 
of those who undertake to promote the good of their neighbours, ought to consider whether he has betaken 
himself to teaching rashly and out of rivalry to any; if his communication of the word is out of vainglory; if the 
only reward he reaps is the salvation of those who hear, and if he speaks not in order to win favour: if so, he 
who speaks by writings escapes the reproach of mercenary motives. "For neither at any time used we 
flattering words, as ye know," says the apostle, "nor a cloak of covetousness. God is witness. Nor of men 
sought we glory, neither of you, nor yet of others, when we might have been burdensome as the apostles of 
Christ. But we were gentle among you, even as a nurse cherisheth her children. "(6) 
In the same way, therefore, those who take part in the divine words, ought to guard against betaking 
themselves to this, as they would to the building of cities, to examine them out of curiosity; that they do not 
come to the task for the sake of receiving worldly things, having ascertained that they who are consecrated 
to Christ are given to communicate the necessaries of life. But let such be dismissed as hypocrites. But if 
any one wishes not to seem, but to be righteous, to him it belongs to know the things which are best. If, then, 
"the harvest is plenteous, but the labourers few," it is incumbent on us "to pray" that there may be as great 
abundance of labourers as possible. (7) 

But the husbandry is twofold,-the one unwritten, and the other written. And in whatever way the Lord's 
labourer sow the good wheat, and grow and reap the ears, he shall appear a truly divine husbandman. 
"Labour," says the Lord, "not for the meat which perisheth, but for that which endureth to everlasting life. "(8) 
And nutriment is received both by bread and by words. And truly "blessed are the peace-makers, "(9) who 
instructing those who are at war in their life and errors here, lead them back to the peace which is in the 
Word, and nourish for the life which is according to God, by the distribution of the bread, those "that hunger 
after righteousness." For each soul has its own proper nutriment; some growing by knowledge and science, 
and others feeding on the Hellenic philosophy, the whole of which, like nuts, is not eatable. "And he that 
planteth and he that watereth," "being ministers" of Him "that gives the increase, are one" in the ministry. "But 
every one shall receive his own reward, according to his own work. For we are God's husbandmen, God's 
husbandry. Ye are God's building, "(10) according to the apostle. Wherefore the hearers are not permitted to 
apply the test of comparison. Nor is the word, given for investigation, to be committed to those who have 
been reared in the arts of all kinds of words, and in the power of inflated attempts at proof; whose minds are 
already pre-occupied, and have not been previously emptied. But whoever chooses to banquet on faith, is 
stedfast for the reception of the divine words, having acquired already faith as a power of judging, 
according to reason. Hence ensues to him persuasion in abundance. And this was the meaning of that 
saying of prophecy, "If ye believe not, neither shall ye understand. "(1) "As, then, we have opportunity, let us 
do good to all, especially to the household of faith. "(2) And let each of these, according to the blessed 
David, sing, giving thanks. "Thou shalt sprinkle me with hyssop, and I shall be cleansed. Thou shalt wash 
me, and I shall be whiter than the snow. Thou shalt make me to hear gladness and joy, and the bones which 
have been humbled shall rejoice. Turn Thy face from my sins. Blot out mine iniquities. Create in me a clean 
heart, O God, and renew a right spirit in my inward parts. Cast me not away from Thy face, and take not Thy 
Holy Spirit from me. Restore to me the joy of Thy salvation, and establish me with Thy princely spirit."(3) 
He who addresses those who are present before him, both tests them by time, and judges by his judgment, 
and from the others distinguishes him who can hear; watching the words, the manners, the habits, the life, the 
motions, the attitudes, the look, the voice; the road, the rock, the beaten path, the fruitful land, the wooded 
region, the fertile and fair and cultivated spot, that is able to multiply the seed. But he that speaks through 
books, consecrates himself before God, crying in writing thus: Not for gain, not for vainglory, not to be 
vanquished by partiality, nor enslaved by fear nor elated by pleasure; but only to reap the salvation of those 
who read, which he does, not at present participate in, but awaiting in expectation the recompense which will 
certainly be rendered by Him, who has promised to bestow on the labourers the reward that is meet. But he 
who is enrolled in the number of men(4) ought not to desire recompense. For he that vaunts his good 
services, receives glory as his reward. And he who does any duty for the sake of recompense, is he not 
held fast in the custom of the world, either as one who has done well, hastening to receive a reward, or as an 
evil-doer avoiding retribution? We must, as far as we can, imitate the Lord. I And he will do so, who complies 
with the will of God, receiving freely, giving freely, and receiving as a worthy reward the citizenship itself. 
"The hire of an harlot shall not come into the sanctuary," it is said: accordingly it was forbidden to bring to the 
altar the price of a dog. 

And in whomsoever the eye of the soul has been blinded by ill-nurture and teaching, let him advance to the 
true light, to the truth, which shows by writing the things that are unwritten. "Ye that thirst, go to the waters, "(5) 
says Esaias, And "drink water from thine own vessels, "(6) Solomon exhorts. Accordingly in "The Laws," the 
philosopher who learned from the Hebrews, Plato, commands husbandmen not to irrigate or take water 
from others, until they have first dug down in their own ground to what is called the virgin soil, and found it dry. 
For it is right to supply want, but it is not well to support laziness. For Pythagoras said that, "although it be 
agreeable to reason to take a share of a burden, it is not a duty to take it away." 
Now the Scripture kindles the living spark of the soul, and directs the eye suitably for contemplation; 
perchance inserting something, as the husbandman when he ingrafts, but, according to the opinion of the 
divine apostle, exciting what is in the soul. "For there are certainly among us many weak and sickly, and 
many sleep. But if we judge ourselves, we shall not be judged. "(7) Now this work of mine in writing is not 
artfully constructed for display; but my memoranda are stored up against old age, as a remedy against 
forgetfulness, truly an image and outline of those vigorous and animated discourses which I was privileged 
to hear, and of blessed and truly remarkable men. 

Of these the one, in Greece, an Ionic ;(8) the other in Magna Graecia: the first of these from Coele-Syria, the 
second from Egypt, and others in the East. The one was born in the land of Assyria, and the other a Hebrew 
in Palestine. 

When I came upon the last(9) (he was the first in power), having tracked him out concealed in Egypt, I found 
rest. He, the true, the Sicilian bee, gathering the spoil of the flowers of the prophetic and apostolic meadow, 
engendered in the souls of his hearers a deathless element of knowledge. 

Well, they preserving the tradition of the blessed doctrine derived directly from the holy apostles, Peter, 
James, John, and Paul, the sons receiving it from the father (but few were like the fathers), came by God's 
will to us also to deposit those ancestral and apostolic seeds. And well I know that they will exult; I do not 
mean delighted with this tribute, but solely on account of the preservation of the truth, according as they 
delivered it. For such a sketch as this, will, I think, be agreeable to a soul desirous of preserving from 
escape the blessed tradition. (10) 

"In a man who loves wisdom the father will be glad."(1) Wells, when pumped out, yield purer water; and that 
of which no one partakes, turns to putrefaction. Use keeps steel brighter, but disuse produces rust in it. For, 
in a word, exercise produces a healthy condition both in souls and bodies. "No one lighteth a candle, and 
putteth it under a bushel, but upon a candlestick, that it may give light to those who are regarded worthy of 
the feast."(2) For what is the use of wisdom, if it makes not him who can hear it wise? For still the Saviour 
saves, "and always works, as He sees the Father."(3) For by teaching, one learns more; and in speaking, 
one is often a hearer along with his audience. For the teacher of him who speaks and of him who hears is 
one-who waters both the mind and the word. Thus the Lord did not hinder from doing good while keeping 
the Sabbath;(4) but allowed us to communicate of those divine mysteries, and of that holy light, to those who 
are able to receive them. He did not certainly disclose to the many what did not belong to the many; but to 
the few to whom He knew that they belonged, who were capable of receiving and being moulded according 
to them. But secret things are entrusted to speech, not to writing, as is the case with God. (5) 
And if one say that it is written, "There is nothing secret which shall not be revealed, nor hidden which shall 
not be disclosed, "(6) let him also hear from us, that to him who hears secretly, even what is secret shall be 
manifested. This is what was predicted by this oracle. And to him who is able secretly to observe what is 
delivered to him. that which is veiled shall be disclosed as truth; and what is hidden to the many, shall 
appear manifest to the few. For why do not all know the truth? why is not righteousness loved, if 
righteousness belongs to all? But the mysteries are delivered mystically, that what is spoken may be in the 
mouth of the speaker; rather not in his voice, but in his understanding. "God gave to the Church, some 
apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some pastors and teachers, for the perfecting of 
the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ."(7) 

The writing of these memoranda of mine, I well know, is weak when compared with that spirit, full of grace, 
which I was privileged to hear.(8) But it will be an image to recall the archetype to him who was struck with the 
thyrsus. For "speak," it is said, "to a wise man, and he will grow wiser; and to him that hath, and there shall be 
added to him." And we profess not to explain secret things sufficiently-far from it-but only to recall them to 
memory, whether we have forgot aught, or whether for the purpose of not forgetting. Many things, I well know, 
have escaped us, through length of time, that have dropped away unwritten. Whence, to aid the weakness 
of my memory, and provide for myself a salutary help to my recollection in a systematic arrangement of 
chapters, I necessarily make use of this form. There are then some things of which we have no recollection; 
for the power that was in the blessed men was great. (8) There are also some things which remained 
unnoted long, which have now escaped; and others which are effaced, having faded away in the mind itself, 
since such a task is not easy to those not experienced; these I revive in my commentaries. Some things I 
purposely omit, in the exercise of a wise selection, afraid to write what I guarded against speaking: not 
grudging-for that were wrong-but fearing for my readers, lest they should stumble by taking them in a wrong 

sense; and, as the proverb says, we should be found "reaching a sword to a child." For it is impossible that 
what has been written should not escape, although remaining unpublished by me. But being always 
revolved, using the one only voice, that of writing, they answer nothing to him that makes inquiries beyond 
what is written; for they require of necessity the aid of some one, either of him who wrote, or of some one else 
who has walked in his footsteps. Some things my treatise will hint; on some it will linger; some it will merely 
mention. It will try to speak imperceptibly, to exhibit secretly, and to demonstrate silently. The dogmas taught 
by remarkable sects will be adduced; and to these will be opposed all that ought to be premised in 
accordance with the profoundest contemplation of the knowledge, which, as we proceed to the renowned 
and venerable canon of tradition, from the creation of the world, (9) will advance to our view; setting before us 
what according to natural contemplation necessarily has to be treated of beforehand, and clearing off what 
stands in the way of this arrangement. So that we may have our ears ready for the reception of the tradition 
of true knowledge; the soil being previously cleared of the thorns and of every weed by the husbandman, in 
order to the planting of the vine. For there is a contest, and the prelude to the contest; and them are some 
mysteries before other mysteries. 

Our book will not shrink from making use of what is best in philosophy and other preparatory instruction. "For 
not only for the Hebrews and those that are under the law," according to the apostle, "is it right to become a 
Jew, but also a Greek for the sake of the Greeks, that we may gain all."(1) Also in the Epistle to the 
Colossians he writes, "Admonishing every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present 
every man perfect in Christ. "(2) The nicety of speculation, too, suits the sketch presented in my 
commentaries. In this respect the resources of learning are like a relish mixed with the food of an athlete, 
who is not indulging in luxury, but entertains a noble desire for distinction. 

By music we harmoniously relax the excessive tension of gravity. And as those who wish to address the 
people, do so often by the herald, that what is said may be better heard; so also in this case. For we have 
the word, that was spoken to many, before the common tradition. Wherefore we must set forth the opinions 
and utterances which cried individually to them, by which those who hear shall more readily turn. 
And, in truth, to speak briefly: Among many small pearls there is the one; and in a great take of fish there is 
the beauty-fish; and by time and toil truth will gleam forth, if a good helper is at hand. For most benefits are 
supplied, from God, through men. All of us who make use of our eyes see what is presented before them. 
But some look at objects for one reason, others for another. For instance, the cook and the shepherd do not 
survey the sheep similarly: for the one examines it if it be fat; the other watches to see if it be of good breed. 
Let a man milk the sheep's milk if he need sustenance: let him shear the wool if he need clothing. And in this 
way let me produce the fruit of the Greek erudition. (3) 

For I do not imagine that any composition can be so fortunate as that no one will speak against it. But that is 
to be regarded as in accordance with reason, which nobody speaks against, with reason. And that course 
of action and choice is to be approved, not which is faultless, but which no one rationally finds fault with. For it 
does not follow, that if a man accomplishes anything not purposely, he does it through force of 
circumstances. But he will do it, managing it by wisdom divinely given, and in accommodation to 
circumstances. For it is not he who has virtue that needs the way to virtue, any more than he, that is strong, 
needs recovery. For, like farmers who irrigate the land beforehand, so we also water with the liquid stream 
of Greek learning what in it is earthy; so that it may receive the spiritual seed cast into it, and may be 
capable of easily nourishing it. The Stromata will contain the truth mixed up in the dogmas of philosophy, or 
rather covered over and hidden, as the edible part of the nut in the shell. For, in my opinion, it is fitting that the 
seeds of truth be kept for the husbandmen of faith, and no others. I am not oblivious of what is babbled by 
some, who in their ignorance are frightened at every noise, and say that we ought to occupy ourselves with 
what is most necessary, and which contains the faith; and that we should pass over what is beyond and 
superfluous, which wears out and detains us to no purpose, in things which conduce nothing to the great 
end. Others think that philosophy was introduced into life by an evil influence, for the ruin of men, by an evil 
inventor. But I shall show, throughout the whole of these Stromata, that evil has an evil nature, and can never 
turn out the producer of aught that is good; indicating that philosophy is in a sense a work of Divine 
Providence. (3) 

CHAP. II. --OBJECTION TO THE NUMBER OF EXTRACTS FROM PHILOSOPHICAL 
WRITINGS IN THESE BOOKS ANTICIPATED AND ANSWERED. 

In reference to these commentaries, which contain as the exigencies of the case demand, the Hellenic 
opinions, I say thus much to those who are fond of finding fault. First, even if philosophy were useless, if the 
demonstration of its uselessness does good, it is yet useful. Then those cannot condemn the Greeks, who 
have only a mere hearsay knowledge of their opinions, and have not entered into a minute investigation in 
each department, in order to acquaintance with them. For the refutation, which is based on experience, is 
entirely trustworthy. For the knowledge of what is condemned is found the most complete demonstration. 

Many things, then, though not contributing to the final result, equip the artist. And otherwise erudition 
commends him, who sets forth the most essential doctrines so as to produce persuasion in his hearers, 
engendering admiration in those who are taught, and leads them to the truth. And such persuasion is 
convincing, by which those that love learning admit the truth; so that philosophy does not ruin life by being 
the originator of false practices and base deeds, although some have calumniated it, though it be the clear 
image of truth, a divine gift to the Greeks;(4) nor does it drag us away from the faith, as if we were bewitched 
by some delusive art, but rather, so to speak, by the use of an ampler circuit, obtains a common exercise 
demonstrative of the faith. Further, the juxtaposition of doctrines, by comparison, saves the truth, from which 
follows knowledge. 

Philosophy came into existence, not on its own account, but for the advantages reaped by us from 
knowledge, we receiving a firm persuasion of true perception, through the knowledge of things 
comprehended by the mind. For I do not mention that the Stromata, forming a body of varied erudition, wish 
artfully to conceal the seeds of knowledge. As, then, he who is fond of hunting captures the game after 
seeking, tracking, scenting, hunting it down with dogs; so truth, when sought and got with toil, appears a 
delicious(l) thing. Why, then, you will ask, did you think it fit that such an arrangement should be adopted in 
your memoranda? Because there is great danger in divulging the secret of the true philosophy to those, 
whose delight it is unsparingly to speak against everything, not justly; and who shout forth all kinds of names 
and words indecorously, deceiving themselves and beguiling those who adhere to them. "For the Hebrews 
seek signs," as the apostle says, "and the Greeks seek after wisdom. "(2) 

CHAP. III. --AGAINST THE SOPHISTS. 

There is a great crowd of this description: some of them, enslaved to pleasures and willing to disbelieve, 
laugh at the truth which is worthy of all reverence, making sport of its barbarousness. Some others, exalting 
themselves, endeavour to discover calumnious objections to our words, furnishing captious questions, 
hunters out of paltry sayings, practisers of miserable artifices, wranglers, dealers in knotty points, as that 
Abderite says:- 

"For mortals' tongues are glib, and on them are many speeches; 
And a wide range for words of all sorts in this place and that." 

And- 

"Of whatever sort the word you have spoken, of the same sort you must hear." 

Inflated with this art of theirs, the wretched Sophists, babbling away in their own jargon; toiling their whole life 
about the division of names and the nature of the composition and conjunction of sentences, show 
themselves greater chatterers than turtle-doves; scratching and tickling, not in a manly way, in my opinion, 
the ears of those who wish to be tickled. 

"A river of silly words-not a dropping;" 

just as in old shoes, when all the rest is worn and is falling to pieces, and the tongue alone remains. The 

Athenian Solon most excellently enlarges, and writes:- 

"Look to the tongue, and to the words of the glozing man. 
But you look on no work that has been done; 
But each one of you walks in the steps of a fox. 
And in all of you is an empty mind." 

This, I think, is signified by the utterance of the Saviour, "The foxes have holes, but the Son of man hath not 
where to lay His head. "(3) For on the believer alone, who is separated entirely from the rest, who by the 
Scripture are called wild beasts, rests the head of the universe, the kind and gentle Word, "who taketh the 
wise in their own craftiness. For the LORD knoweth the thoughts of the wise, that they axe vain;"(4) the 
Scripture calling those the wise (<greek>sofous</greek>) who are skilled in words and arts, sophists 
(<greek>sofistas</greek>) Whence the Greeks also applied the denominative appellation of wise and 
sophists (<greek>sofoi</greek> <greek>sofistai</greek>) to those who were versed in anything Cratinus 
accordingly, having in the Archilochii enumerated the poets, said:- 

"Such a hive of sophists have ye examined." 

And similarly lophon, the comic poet, in Flute-playing Satyrs, says:- 

"For there entered 

A band of sophists, all equipped." 

Of these and the like, who devote their attention to empty words, the divine Scripture most excellently says, 
"I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent. "(5) 

CHAP. IV. --HUMAN ARTS AS WELL AS DIVINE KNOWLEDGE PROCEED FROM GOD. 

Homer calls an artificer wise; and of Margites, if that is his work, hethuswrites:- 

"Him, then, the Gods made neither a delver nor a ploughman. 
Nor in any other respect wise; but he missed every art." 

Hesiod further said the musician Linus was "skilled in all manner of wisdom;" and does not hesitate to call a 
mariner wise, seeing he writes:- 

"Having no wisdom in navigation." 

And Daniel the prophet says, "The mystery which the king asks, it is not in the power of the wise, the Magi, 
the diviners, the Gazarenes, to tell the king; but it is God in heaven who revealeth it."(6) 
Here he terms the Babylonians wise. And that Scripture calls every secular science or art by the one name 
wisdom (there are other arts and sciences invented over and above by human reason), and that artistic and 
skilful invention is from God, will be clear if we adduce the following statement: "And the Lord spake to 
Moses, See, I have called Bezaleel, the son of Uri, the son of Or, of the tribe of Judah; and I have filled him 
with the divine spirit of wisdom, and understanding, and knowledge, to devise and to execute in all manner 
of work, to work gold, and silver, and brass, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and in working stone work, 
and in the art of working wood," and even to "all works. "(1) And then He adds the general reason, "And to 
every understanding heart I have given understanding;"(2) that is, to every one capable of acquiring it by 
pains and exercise. And again, it is written expressly in the name of the Lord "And speak thou to all that are 
wise in mind, whom I have filled with the spirit of perception. "(3) 

Those who are wise in mind have a certain attribute of nature peculiar to themselves; and they who have 
shown themselves capable, receive from the Supreme Wisdom a spirit of perception in double measure. 
For those who practise the common arts, are in what pertains to the senses highly gifted: in hearing, he who 
is commonly called a musician; in touch, he who moulds clay; in voice the singer, in smell the perfumer, in 
sight the engraver of devices on seals. Those also that are occupied in instruction, train the sensibility 
according to which the poets are susceptible to the influence of measure; the sophists apprehend 
expression; the dialecticians, syllogisms; and the philosophers are capable of the contemplation of which 
themselves are the objects. For sensibility finds and invents; since it persuasively exhorts to application. 
And practice will increase the application which has knowledge for its end. With reason, therefore, the 
apostle has called the wisdom of God" manifold," and which has manifested its power "in many 
departments and in many modes"(4)-by art, by knowledge, by faith, by prophecy-for our benefit. "For all 
wisdom is from the Lord, and is with Him for ever," as says the wisdom of Jesus. (5) 
For if thou call on wisdom and knowledge with a loud voice, and seek it as treasures of silver, and eagerly 
track it out, thou shalt understand godliness and find divine knowledge. "(6) The prophet says this in 
contradiction to the knowledge according to philosophy, which teaches us to investigate in a magnanimous 
and noble manner, for our progress in piety. He opposes, therefore, to it the knowledge which is occupied 
with piety, when referring to knowledge, when he speaks as follows: "For God gives wisdom out of His own 
mouth, and knowledge along with understanding, and treasures up help for the righteous." For to those who 
have been justified(7) by philosophy, the knowledge which leads to piety is laid up as a help. 

CHAP. V. -PHILOSOPHY THE HANDMAID OF THEOLOGY. 

Accordingly, before the advent of the Lord, philosophy was necessary to the Greeks for righteousness. (8) 
And now it becomes conducive to piety; being a kind of preparatory training to those who attain to faith 
through demonstration. "For thy foot," it is said, "will not stumble, if thou referwhat isgood, whether belonging 
to the Greeks or to us, to Providence. "(9) For God is the cause of all good things; but of some primarily, as of 
the Old and the New Testament; and of others by consequence, as philosophy. Perchance, too, philosophy 
was given to the Greeks directly and primarily, till the Lord should call the Greeks. For this was a 

schoolmaster to bring "the Hellenic mind," as the law, the Hebrews, "to Christ."(10) Philosophy, therefore, 
was a preparation, paving the way for him who is perfected in Christ. (8) 

"Now," says Solomon, "defend wisdom, and it will exalt thee, and it will shield thee with a crown of 
pleasure. "(1 1) For when thou hast strengthened wisdom with a cope by philosophy, and with right 
expenditure, thou wilt preserve it unassailable by sophists. The way of truth is therefore one. But into it, as 
into a perennial river, streams flow from all sides. It has been therefore said by inspiration: "Hear, my son, 
and receive my words; that thine may be the many ways of life. For I teach thee the ways of wisdom; that the 
fountains fail thee not,"(12) which gush forth from the earth itself. Not only did He enumerate several ways of 
salvation for any one righteous man, but He added many other ways of many righteous, speaking thus: 
"The paths of the righteous shine like the light."(13) The commandments and the modes of preparatory 
training are to be regarded as the ways and appliances of life. 

"Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy children, as a hen her chickens!"(14) And 
Jerusalem is, when interpreted, "a vision of peace." He therefore shows prophetically, that those who 
peacefully contemplate sacred things are in manifold ways trained to their calling. What then? He "would," 
and could not. How often, and where? Twice; by the prophets, and by the advent. The expression, then, 
"How often," shows wisdom to be manifold; every mode of quantity and quality, it by all means saves some, 
both in time and in eternity. "For the Spirit of the Lord fills the earth. "(1) And if any should violently say that the 
reference is to the Hellenic culture, when it is said, "Give not heed to an evil woman; for honey drops from 
the lips of a harlot," let him hear what follows: "who lubricates thy throat for the time." But philosophy does not 
flatter. Who, then, does He allude to as having committed fornication? He adds expressly, "For the feet of 
folly lead those who use her, after death, to Hades. But her steps are not supported." Therefore remove thy 
way far from silly pleasure. "Stand not at the doors of her house, that thou yield not thy life to others." And He 
testifies, "Then shall thou repent in old age, when the flesh of thy body is consumed." For this is the end of 
foolish pleasure. Such, indeed, is the case. And when He says, "Be not much with a strange woman, "(2) He 
admonishes us to use indeed, but not to linger and spend time with, secular culture. For what was bestowed 
on each generation advantageously, and at seasonable times, is a preliminary training for the word of the 
Lord. "For already some men, ensnared by the charms of handmaidens, have despised their consort 
philosophy, and have grown old, some of them in music, some in geometry, others in grammar, the most in 
rhetoric. "(3) "But as the encyclical branches of study contribute to philosophy, which is their mistress; so also 
philosophy itself co-operates for the acquisition of wisdom. For philosophy is the study of wisdom, and 
wisdom is the knowledge of things divine and human; and their causes." Wisdom is therefore queen of 
philosophy, as philosophy is of preparatory culture. For if philosophy" professes control of the tongue, and 
the belly, and the parts below the belly, it is to be chosen on its own account. But it appears more worthy of 
respect and pre-eminence, if cultivated for the honour and knowledge of God. "(4) And Scripture will afford a 
testimony to what has been said in what follows. Sarah was at one time barren, being Abraham's wife. Sarah 
having no child, assigned her maid, by name Hagar, the Egyptian, to Abraham, in order to get children. 
Wisdom, therefore, who dwells with the man of faith (and Abraham was reckoned faithful and righteous), was 
still barren and without child in that generation, not having brought forth to Abraham aught allied to virtue. And 
she, as was proper, thought that he, being now in the time of progress, should have intercourse with secular 
culture first (by Egyptian the world is designated figuratively); and afterwards should approach to her 
according to divine providence, and beget Isaac. "(5) 

And Philo interprets Hagar to mean "sojourning. "(6) For it is said in connection with this, "Be not much with a 
strange woman. "(7) Sarah he interprets to mean "my princedom." He, then, who has received previous 
training is at liberty to approach to wisdom, which is supreme, from which grows up the race of Israel. These 
things show that that wisdom can be acquired through instruction, to which Abraham attained, passing from 
the contemplation of heavenly things to the faith and righteousness which are according to God. And Isaac 
is shown to mean "self-taught;" wherefore also he is discovered to be a type of Christ. He was the husband 
of one wife Rebecca, which they translate "Patience." And Jacob is said to have consorted with several, his 
name being interpreted" Exerciser." And exercises are engaged in by means of many and various 
dogmas. Whence, also, he who is really "endowed with the power of seeing" is called Israel, (8) having 
much experience, and being fit for exercise. 

Something else may also have been shown by the three patriarchs, namely, that the sure seal of 
knowledge is composed of nature, of education, and exercise. 

You may have also another image of what has been said, in Thamar sitting by the way, and presenting the 
appearance of a harlot, on whom the studious Judas (whose name is interpreted "powerful"), who left 
nothing unexamined and uninvestigated, looked; and turned aside to her, preserving his profession towards 
God. Wherefore also, when Sarah was jealous at Hagar being preferred to her, Abraham, as choosing only 
what was profitable in secular philosophy, said, "Behold, thy maid is in thine hands: deal with her as it 
pleases thee;"(9) manifestly meaning, "I embrace secular culture as youthful, and a handmaid; but thy 
knowledge I honour and reverence as true wife." And Sarah afflicted her; which is equivalent to corrected 

and admonished her. It has therefore been well said, "My son, despise not thou the correction of God; nor 
faint when thou art rebuked of Him. For whom the LORD loveth He chasteneth, and scourgeth every son 
whom He receiveth."(1) And the foresaid Scriptures, when examined in other places, will be seen to exhibit 
other mysteries. We merely therefore assert here, that philosophy is characterized by investigation into truth 
and the nature of things (this is the truth of which the Lord Himself said, "I am the truth"(2)); and that, again, the 
preparatory training for rest in Christ exercises the mind, rouses the intelligence, and begets an inquiring 
shrewdness, by means of the true philosophy, which the initiated possess, having found it, or rather 
received it, from the truth itself. 

CHAP. VI. --THE BENEFIT OF CULTURE. 

The readiness acquired by previous training conduces much to the perception of such things as are 
requisite; but those things which can be perceived only by mind are the special exercise for the mind. And 
their nature is triple according as we consider their quantity, their magnitude, and what can be predicated of 
them. For the discourse which consists of demonstrations, implants in the spirit of him who follows it, clear 
faith; so that he cannot conceive of that which is demonstrated being different; and so it does not allow us to 
succumb to those who assail us by fraud. In such studies, therefore, the soul is purged from sensible things, 
and is excited, so as to be able to see truth distinctly. For nutriment, and the training which is maintained 
gentle, make noble natures I; and noble natures, when they have received such training, become still better 
than before both in other respects, but especially in productiveness, as is the case with the other creatures. 
Wherefore it is mid, "Go to the ant, thou sluggard, and become wiser than it, which provideth much and, 
varied food in the harvest against the inclemency of winter."(3) Or go to the bee, and learn how laborious 
she is; for she, feeding on the whole meadow, produces one honey-comb. And if "thou prayest in the 
closet," as the Lord taught, "to worship in spirit, "(4) thy management will no longer be solely occupied about 
the house, but also about the soul, what must be bestowed on it, and how, and how much; and what must be 
laid aside and treasured up in it; and when it ought to be produced, and to whom. For it is not by nature, but 
by learning, that people become noble and good, as people also become physicians and pilots. We all in 
common, for example, see the vine and the horse. But the husbandman will know if the vine be good or bad 
at fruit-bearing; and the horseman will easily distinguish between the spiritless and the swift animal. But that 
some are naturally predisposed to virtue above others, certain pursuits of those, who are so naturally 
predisposed above others, show. But that perfection in virtue is not the exclusive property of those, whose 
natures are better, is proved, since also those who by nature are ill-disposed towards virtue, in obtaining 
suitable training, for the most part attain to excellence; and, on the other hand, those whose natural 
dispositions are apt, become evil through neglect. 

Again, God has created us naturally social and just; whence justice must not be said to take its rise from 
implantation alone. But the good imparted by creation is to be conceived of as excited by the 
commandment; the soul being trained to be willing to select what is noblest. 

But as we say that a man can be a believer without learning, (5) so also we assert that it is impossible for a 
man without learning to comprehend the things which are declared in the faith. But to adopt what is well said, 
and not to adopt the reverse, is caused not simply by faith, but by faith combined with knowledge. But if 
ignorance is want of training and of instruction, then teaching produces knowledge of divine and human 
things. But just as it is possible to live rightly in penury of this world's good things, so also in abundance. And 
we avow, that at once with more ease and more speed will one attain to virtue through previous training. But 
it is not such as to be unattainable without it; but it is attainable only when they have learned, and have had 
their senses exercised. (6) "For hatred," says Solomon, "raises strife, but instruction guardeth the ways of 
life;"(7) in such a way that we are not deceived nor deluded by those who are practised in base arts for the 
injury of those who hear. "But instruction wanders reproachless,"(8) it is said. We must be conversant with 
the art of reasoning, for the purpose of confuting the deceitful opinions of the sophists. Well and felicitously, 
therefore, does Anaxarchus write in his book respecting "kingly rule:" "Erudition benefits greatly and hurts 
greatly him who possesses it; it helps him who is worthy, and injures him who utters readily every word, and 
before the whole people. It is necessary to know the measure of time. For this is the end of wisdom. And 
those who sing at the doors, even if they sing skilfully, are not reckoned wise, but have the reputation of 
folly." And Hesiod:- 

"Of the Muses, who make a man loquacious, divine, vocal." 

For him who is fluent in words he calls loquacious; and him who is clever, vocal; and "divine," him who is 
skilled, a philosopher, and acquainted with the truth. 

CHAP. VII. -THE ECLECTIC PHILOSOPHY PAVES THE WAY FOR DIVINE VIRTUE. 

The Greek preparatory culture, therefore, with philosophy itself, is shown to have come down from God to 
men, not with a definite direction but in the way in which showers fail down on the good land, and on the 
dunghill, and on the houses. And similarly both the grass and the wheat sprout; and the figs and any other 
reckless trees grow on sepulchres. And things that grow, appear as a type of truths. For they enjoy the same 
influence of the rain. But they have not the same grace as those which spring up in rich soil, inasmuch as 
they are withered or plucked up. And here we are aided by the parable of the sower, which the Lord 
interpreted. For the husbandman of the soil which is among men is one; He who from the beginning, from the 
foundation of the world, sowed nutritious seeds; He who in each age rained down the Lord, the Word. But the 
times and places which received [such gifts], created the differences which exist. Further, the husbandman 
sows not only wheat (of which there are many varieties), but also other seeds-barley, and beam, and peas, 
and vetches, and vegetable and flower seeds. And to the same husbandry belongs both planting and the 
operations necessary in the nurseries, and gardens, and orchards, and the planning and rearing of all sorts 
of trees 

In like manner, not only the care of sheep, but the care of herds, and breeding of horses, and dogs, and 
bee-craft, all arts, and to speak comprehensively, the care of flocks and the rearing of animals, differ from 
each other more or less, but are all useful for life. And philosophy-l do not mean the Stoic, or the Platonic, or 
the Epicurean, or the Aristotelian, but whatever has been well said by each of those sects, which teach 
righteousness along with a science pervaded by piety, -this eclectic whole I call philosophy. (1) But such 
conclusions of human reasonings, as men have cut away and falsified, I would never call divine. 
And now we must look also at this, that if ever those who know not how to do well, live well;(2) for they have 
lighted on well-doing. Some, too, have aimed well at the word of truth through understanding. "But Abraham 
was not justified by works, but by faith. "(3) It is therefore of no advantage to them after the end of life, even if 
they do good works now, if they have not faith. Wherefore also the Scriptures(4) were translated into the 
language of the Greeks, in order that they might never be able to allege the excuse of ignorance, inasmuch 
as they are able to hear also what we have in our hands, if they only wish. One speaks in one way of the 
truth, in another way the truth interprets itself. The guessing at truth is one thing, and truth itself is another. 
Resemblance is one thing, the thing itself is another. And the one results from learning and practice, the 
other from power and faith. For the teaching of piety is a gift, but faith is grace. "For by doing the will of God 
we know the will of God. "(5) "Open, then," says the Scripture, "the gates of righteousness; and I will enter in, 
and confess to the LORD. "(6) But the paths to righteousness (since God saves in many ways, for He is 
good) are many and various, and lead to the Lord's way and gate. And if you ask the royal and true 
entrance, you will hear, "This is the gate of the LORD, the righteous shall enter in by it. "(7) While there are 
many gates open, that in righteousness is in Christ, by which all the blessed enter, and direct their steps in 
the sanctity of knowledge. Now Clemens, in his Epistle to the Corinthians, while expounding the differences 
of those who are approved according to the Church, says expressly, "One may be a believer; one may be 
powerful in uttering knowledge; one may be wise in discriminating between words; one may be terrible in 
deeds."(8) 

CHAP. VIII. --THE SOPHISTICAL ARTS USELESS. 

But the art of sophistry, which the Greeks cultivated, is a fantastic power, which makes false opinions like 
true by means of words. For it produces rhetoric in order to persuasion, and disputation for wrangling. These 
arts, therefore, if not conjoined with philosophy, will be injurious to every one. For Plato openly called 
sophistry "an evil art." And Aristotle, following him, demonstrates it to be a dishonest art, which abstracts in a 
specious manner the whole business of wisdom, and professes a wisdom which it has not studied. To 
speak briefly, as the beginning of rhetoric is the probable, and an attempted proof(9) the process, and the 
end persuasion, so the beginning of disputation is what is matter of opinion, and the process a contest, and 
the end victory. For in the same manner, also, the beginning of sophistry is the apparent, and the process 
twofold; one of rhetoric, continuous and exhaustive; and the other of logic, and is interrogatory. And its end is 
admiration. 

The dialectic in vogue in the schools, on the other hand, is the exercise of a philosopher in matters of 
opinion, for the sake of the faculty of disputation. But truth is not in these at all. Wth reason, therefore, the 
noble apostle, depreciating these superfluous arts occupied about words, says, "If any man do not give 
heed to wholesome words, but is puffed up by a kind of teaching, knowing nothing, but doting 
(<greek>noswn</greek>) about questions and strifes of words, whereof cometh contention, envy, railings, 
evil surmisings, perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, destitute of the truth. "(1) 
You see how he is moved against them, calling their art of logic-on which, those to whom this garrulous 
mischievous art is dear, whether Greeks or barbarians, plume themselves-a disease 
(<greek>nosos</greek>). Very beautifully, therefore, the tragic poet Euripides says in the Phoenissoe,- 

"But a wrongful speech Is diseased in itself, and needs skilful medicines. "(2) 

For the saving Word(3) is called "wholesome," He being the truth; and what is wholesome (healthful) 

remains ever deathless. But separation from what is healthful and divine is impiety, and a deadly malady. 

These are rapacious wolves hid in sheep-skins, men-stealers, and glozing soul-seducers, secretly, but 

proved to be robbers; striving by fraud and force to catch us who are unsophisticated and have less power 

of speech. 

"Often a man, impeded through want of words, carries less weight 

In expressing what is right, than the man of eloquence. 

But now in fluent mouths the weighflest truths 

They disguise, so that they do not seem what they ought to seem," 

says the tragedy. Such are these wranglers, whether they follow the sects, or pracflse miserable dialecflc 

arts. These are they that "stretch the warp and weave nothing," says the Scripture;(4) prosecuting a bootless 

task, which the apostle has called "cunning craftiness of men whereby they lie in wait to deceive. "(5) "For 

there are," he says, "many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers:"(6) Wherefore it was not said to all, "Ye 

are the salt of the earth. "(7) For there are some even of the hearers of the word who are like the fishes of the 

sea, which, reared from their birth in brine, yet need salt to dress them for food. Accordingly I wholly approve 

of the tragedy, when it says:- 

"O son, false words can be well spoken. 

And truth may be vanquished by beauty of words. 

But this is not what is most correct, but nature and what is right; 

He who practises eloquence is indeed wise. 

But I consider deeds always better than words." 

We must not, then, aspire to please the multitude. For we do not practise what will please them, but what we 

know is remote from their disposiflon. "Let us not be desirous of vainglory,," says the apostle, "provoking 

one another, envying one another."(8) 

Thus the truth-loving Plato says, as if divinely inspired, "Since I am such as to obey nothing but the word, 

which, after reflecflon, appears to me the best. "(9) 

Accordingly he charges those who credit opinions without intelligence and knowledge, with abandoning 

right and sound reason unwarrantably, and believing him who is a partner in falsehood. For to cheat one's 

self of the truth is bad; but to speak the truth, and to hold as our opinions positive realifles, is good. 

Men are deprived of what is good unwillingly. Nevertheless they are deprived either by being deceived or 

beguiled, or by being compelled and not believing. He who believes not, has already made himself a 

willing captive; and he who changes his persuasion is cozened, while he forgets that time imperceptibly 

takes away some things, and reason others. And after an opinion has been entertained, pain and anguish, 

and on the other hand contenflousness and anger, compel. Above all, men are beguiled who are either 

bewitched by pleasure orterrifled by fear. And all these are voluntary changes, but by none of these will 

knowledge ever be attained. 

CHAP. IX. -HUMAN KNOWLEDGE NECESSARY FOR THE UNDERSTANDING OF THE 
SCRIPTURES. 

Some, who think themselves naturally gifted, do not wish to touch either philosophy or logic; nay more, they 
do not wish to learn natural science. They demand bare faith alone, as if they wished, without bestowing any 
care on the vine, straightway to gather clusters from the flrst. Now the Lord is figuratively described as the 
vine, from which, with pains and the art of husbandry, according to the word, the fruit is to be gathered. 
We must lop, dig, bind, and perform the other operaflons. The pruning-knife, I should think, and the pick-axe, 
and the other agricultural implements, are necessary for the culture of the vine, so that it may produce 
eatable fruit. And as in husbandry, so also in medicine: he has learned to purpose, who has pracflsed the 
various lessons, so as to be able to cultivate and to heal. So also here, I call him truly learned who brings 
everything to bear on the truth; so that, from geometry, and music, and grammar, and philosophy itself, 
culling what is useful, he guards the faith against assault. Now, as was said, the athlete is despised who is 
not furnished for the contest. For instance, too, we praise the experienced helmsman who "has seen the 
cifles of many men," and the physician who has had large experience; thus also some describe the 
empiric. (1) And he who brings everything to bear on a fight life, procuring examples from the Greeks and 
barbarians, this man is an experienced searcher after truth, and in reality a man of much counsel, like the 
touch-stone (that is, the Lydian), which is believed to possess the power of disflnguishing the spurious from 
the genuine gold. And our much-knowing gnosflc can distinguish sophistry from philosophy, the art of 
decoraflon from gymnasflcs, cookery from physic, and rhetoric from dialecflcs, and the other sects which 
are according to the barbarian philosophy, from the truth itself. And how necessary is it for him who desires 

to be partaker of the power of God, to treat of intellectual subjects by philosophising! And how serviceable 
is it to distinguish expressions which are ambiguous, and which in the Testaments are used synonymously! 
For the Lord, at the time of His temptation, skilfully matched the devil by an ambiguous expression. And I do 
not yet, in this connection, see how in the world the inventor of philosophy and dialectics, as some suppose, 
is seduced through being deceived by the form of speech which consists in ambiguity. And if the prophets 
and apostles knew not the arts by which the exercises of philosophy are exhibited, yet the mind of the 
prophetic and instructive spirit, uttered secretly, because all have not an intelligent ear, demands skilful 
modes of teaching in order to clear exposition. For the prophets and disciples of the Spirit knew infallibly 
their mind. For they knew it by faith, in a way which others could not easily, as the Spirit has said. But it is not 
possible for those who have not learned to receive it thus. "Write," it is said, "the commandments doubly, in 
counsel and knowledge, that thou mayest answer the words of truth to them who send unto thee. "(2) What, 
then, is the knowledge of answering? or what that of asking? It is dialectics. What then? Is not speaking our 
business, and does not action proceed from the Word? For if we act not for the Word, we shall act against 
reason. But a rational work is accomplished through God. "And nothing," it is said, "was made without 
Him"-theWordofGod.(3) 

And did not the Lord make all things by the Word? Even the beasts work, driven by compelling fear. And do 
not those who are called orthodox apply themselves to good works, knowing not what they do? 

CHAP. X.-TO ACT WELL OF GREATER CONSEQUENCE THAN TO SPEAK WELL. 

Wherefore the Saviour, taking the bread, first spake and blessed. Then breaking the bread, (4) He 
presented it, that we might eat it, according to reason, and that knowing the Scriptures s we might walk 
obediently. And as those whose speech is evil are no better than those whose practice is evil (for calumny 
is the servant of the sword, and evil-speaking inflicts pain; and from these proceed disasters in life, such 
being the effects of evil speech); so also those who are given to good speech are near neighbours to those 
who accomplish good deeds. Accordingly discourse refreshes the soul and entices it to nobleness; and 
happy is he who has the use of both his hands. Neither, therefore, is he who can act well to be vilified by him 
who is able to speak well; nor is he who is able to speak well to be disparaged by him who is capable of 
acting well. But let each do that for which he is naturally fitted. What the one exhibits as actually done, the 
other speaks, preparing, as it were, the way for well-doing, and leading the hearers to the practice of good. 
For there is a saving word, as there is a saving work. Righteousness, accordingly, (6) is not constituted 
without discourse. And as the receiving of good is abolished if we abolish the doing of good; so obedience 
and faith are abolished when neither the command, nor one to expound the command, is taken along with 
us. (7) But now we are benefited mutually and reciprocally by words and deeds; but we must repudiate 
entirely the art of wrangling and sophistry, since these sentences of the sophists not only bewitch and 
beguile the many, but sometimes by violence win a Cadmean victory. (8) For true above all is that Psalm, 
"The just shall live to the end, for he shall not see corruption, when he beholds the wise dying. "(9) And whom 
does he call wise? Hear from the Wisdom of Jesus: "Wisdom is not the knowledge of evil."(1 0) Such he 
calls what the arts of speaking and of discussing have invented. "Thou shalt therefore seek wisdom among 
the wicked, and shalt not find it."(11) And if you inquire again of what sort this is, you are told, "The mouth of 
the righteous man will distil wisdom. "(12) And similarly with truth, the art of sophistry is called wisdom. 
But it is my purpose, as I reckon, and not without reason, to live according to the Word, and to understand 
what is revealed;(1) but never affecting eloquence, to be content merely with indicating my meaning. And by 
what term that which I wish to present is shown, I care not. For I well know that to be saved, and to aid those 
who desire to be saved, is the best thing, and not to compose paltry sentences like gewgaws. "And if," says 
the Pythagorean in the Politicus of Plato, "you guard against solicitude about terms, you will be richer in 
wisdom against old age. "(2) And in the Theaetetus you will find again, "And carelessness about names, 
and expressions, and the want of nice scrutiny, is not vulgar and illiberal for the most part, but rather the 
reverse of this, and is sometimes necessary. "(3) This the Scripture(4) has expressed with the greatest 
possible brevity, when it said, "Be not occupied much about words." For expression is like the dress on the 
body. The matter is the flesh and sinews. We must not therefore care more for the dress than the safety of 
the body. For not only a simple mode of life, but also a style of speech devoid of superfluity and nicety, must 
be cultivated by him who has adopted the true life, if we are to abandon luxury as treacherous and 
profligate, as the ancient Lacedaemonians adjured ointment and purple, deeming and calling them rightly 
treacherous garments and treacherous unguents; since neither is that mode of preparing food right where 
there is more of seasoning than of nutriment; nor is that style of speech elegant which can please rather than 
benefit the hearers. Pythagoras exhorts us to consider the Muses more pleasant than the Sirens, teaching 
us to cultivate wisdom apart from pleasure, and exposing the other mode of attracting the soul as deceptive. 
For sailing past the Sirens one man has sufficient strength, and for answering the Sphinx another one, or, if 
you please, not even one. (5) We ought never, then, out of desire for vainglory, to make broad the 

phylacteries. It suffices the gnostic(6) if only one hearer is found for him. (7) You may hear therefore Pindar 
the Boeotian, (8) who writes, "Divulge not before all the ancient speech. The way of silence is sometimes the 
surest. And the mightiest word is a spur to the fight." Accordingly, the blessed apostle very appropriately 
and urgently exhorts us "not to strive about words to no profit, but to the subverting of the hearers, but to shun 
profane and vain babblings, for they increase unto more ungodliness, and their word will eat as doth a 
canker."(9) 

CHAP. XI. -WHAT IS THE PHILOSOPHY WHICH THE APOSTLE BIDS US SHUN? 

This, then, "the wisdom of the world is foolishness with God," and of those who are "the wise the Lord 
knoweth their thoughts that they are vain."(1 0) Let no man therefore glory on account of pre-eminence in 
human thought. For it is written well in Jeremiah, "Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, and let not the 
mighty man glory in his might, and let not the rich man glory in his riches: but let him that glorieth glory in this, 
that he understandeth and knoweth that I am the LORD, that executeth mercy and judgment and 
righteousness upon the earth: for in these things is my delight, saith the L0RD."(1 1) "That we should trust not 
in ourselves, but in God who raiseth the dead," says the apostle, "who delivered us from so great a death, 
that our faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God." "For the spiritual man judgeth 
all things, but he himself is judged of no man. "(12) I hear also those words of his, "And these things I say, lest 
any man should beguile you with enticing words, or one should enter in to spoil you. "(13) And again, 
"Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the 
rudiments of the world, and not afterChrist;"(14) branding not all philosophy, but the Epicurean, which Paul 
mentions in the Acts of the Apostles, (15) which abolishes providence and deifies pleasure, and whatever 
other philosophy honours the elements, but places not over them the efficient cause, nor apprehends the 
Creator.(16) 

The Stoics also, whom he mentions too, say not well that the Deity, being a body, pervades the vilest 
matter. He calls the jugglery of logic "the tradition of men." Wherefore also he adds, "Avoid juvenile(1 7) 
questions. For such contentions are puerile." "But virtue is no lover of boys," says the philosopher Plato. 
And our struggle, according to Gorgias Leontinus, requires two virtues-boldness and wisdom, -boldness to 
undergo danger, and wisdom to understand the enigma. For the Word, like the Olympian proclamation, 
calls him who is wiring, and crowns him who is able to continue unmoved as far as the truth is concerned. 
And, in truth, the Word does not wish him who has believed to be idle. For He says, "Seek, and ye shall 
find."(1) But seeking ends in finding, driving out the empty trifling, and approving of the contemplaflon which 
confirms our faith. "And this I say, lest any man beguile you with enticing words, "(2) says the apostle, 
evidently as having learned to disflnguish what was said by him, and as being taught to meet objections. 
"As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in Him, rooted and built up in Him, and 
stablished in the faith. "(3) Now persuasion is [the means of] being established in the faith. "Beware lest any 
man spoil you of faith in Christ by philosophy and vain deceit," which does away with providence, "after the 
tradiflon of men;" for the philosophy which is in accordance with divine tradiflon establishes and conflrms 
providence, which, being done away with, the economy of the Saviour appears a myth, while we are 
influenced "after the elements of the world, and not after Christ. "(4) For the teaching which is agreeable to 
Christ deifles the Creator, and traces providence in particular events, (5) and knows the nature of the 
elements to be capable of change and production, and teaches that we ought to aim at rising up to the 
power which assimilates to God, and to prefer the dispensaflon(6) as holding the flrst rank and superior to all 
training. 

The elements are worshipped, -the air by Diogenes, the water by Thales, the fire by Hippasus; and by 
those who suppose atoms to be the flrst principles of things, arrogaflng the name of philosophers, being 
wretched creatures devoted to pleasure. (7) "Wherefore I pray," says the apostle, "that your love may 
abound yet more and more, in knowledge and in all judgment, that ye may approve things that are 
excellent."(8) "Since, when we were children," says the same apostle, "we were kept in bondage under the 
rudiments of the world. And the child, though heir, differeth nothing from a servant. All the flme appointed of 
the father."(9) Philosophers, then, are children, unless they have been made men by Christ. "For if the son of 
the bond woman shall not be heir with the son of the free, "(10) at least he is the seed of Abraham, though not 
of promise, receiving what belongs to him by free gift. "But strong meat belongeth to those that are of full 
age, even those who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil."(1 1) "For 
every one that useth milk is unskilful in the word of righteousness; for he is a babe, "(12) and not yet 
acquainted with the word, according to which he has believed and works, and not able to give a reason in 
himself. "Prove all things," the apostle says, "and hold fast that which is good, "(13) speaking to spiritual 
men, who judge what is said according to truth, whether it seems or truly holds by the truth. "He who is not 
corrected by discipline errs, and stripes and reproofs give the discipline of wisdom," the reproofs manifestly 
that are with love. "For the right heart seeketh knowledge. "(1 4) "For he that seeketh the Lord shall find 

knowledge with righteousness; and they who have sought it rightly have found peace. "(15) "And I will know," 
it is said, "not the speech of those which are puffed up, but the power." In rebuke of those who are wise in 
appearance, and think themselves wise, but are not in reality wise, he writes: "For the kingdom of God is not 
in word. "(16) It is not in that which is not true, but which is only probable according to opinion; but he said "in 
power," for the truth alone is powerful. And again: "If any man thinketh that he knoweth anything, he knoweth 
nothing yet as he ought to know." For truth is never mere opinion. But the "supposition of knowledge 
inflates," and fills with pride; "but charity edifieth," which deals not in supposition, but in truth. Whence it is 
said, "If any man loves, he is known. "(17) 

CHAP. XII. -THE MYSTERIES OF THE FAITH NOT TO BE DIVULGED TO ALL. 

But since this tradition is not published alone for him who perceives the magnificence of the word; it is 
requisite, therefore, to hide in a mystery the wisdom spoken, which the Son of God taught. Now, therefore, 
Isaiah the prophet has his tongue purified by fire, so that he may be able to tell the vision. And we must purify 
not the tongue alone, but also the ears, if we attempt to be partaken of the truth. 

Such were the impediments in the way of my writing. And even now I fear, as it is said, "to cast the pearls 
before swine, lest they tread them under foot, and turn and rend us."(1 8) For it is difficult to exhibit the really 
pure and transparent words respecting the true light, to swinish and untrained hearers. For scarcely could 
anything which they could hear be more ludicrous than these to the multitude; nor any subjects on the other 
hand more admirable or more inspiring to those of noble nature. "But the natural man receiveth not the 
things of the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness to him."(1) But the wise do not utterwith their mouth what 
they reason in council. "But what ye hear in the ear," says the Lord, "proclaim upon the houses;"(2) bidding 
them receive the secret traditions(3) of the true knowledge, and expound them aloft and conspicuously; and 
as we have heard in the ear, so to deliver them to whom it is requisite; but not enjoining us to communicate 
to all without distinction, what is said to them in parables. But there is only a delineation in the memoranda, 
which have the truth sowed sparse(4) and broadcast, that it may escape the notice of those who pick up 
seeds like jackdaws; but when they find a good husbandman, each one of them will germinate and produce 
corn. 

CHAP. XIII. -ALL SECTS OF PHILOSOPHY CONTAIN A GERM OF TRUTH. 

Since, therefore, truth is one (for falsehood has ten thousand by-paths); just as the Bacchantes tore asunder 
the limbs of Pentheus, so the sects both of barbarian and Hellenic philosophy have done with truth, and 
each vaunts as the whole truth the portion which has fallen to its lot. But all, in my opinion, (5) are illuminated 
by the dawn of Light.(6) Let all, therefore, both Greeks and barbarians, who have aspired after the truth,-both 
those who possess not a little, and those who have any portion,-produce whatever they have of the word of 
truth. 

Eternity, for instance, presents in an instant the future and the present, also the past of time. But truth, much 
more powerful than limitless duration, can collect its proper germs, though they have fallen on foreign soil. 
For we shall find that very many of the dogmas that are held by such sects as have not become utterly 
senseless, and are not cut out from the order of nature (by cutting off Christ, as the women of the fable 
dismembered the man), (7) though appearing unlike one another, correspond in their origin and with the truth 
as a whole. For they coincide in one, either as a part, or a species, or a genus. For instance, though the 
highest note is different from the lowest note, yet both compose one harmony. And in numbers an even 
number differs from an odd number; but both suit in arithmetic; as also is the case with figure, the circle, and 
the triangle, and the square, and whatever figures differ from one another. Also, in the whole universe, all the 
parts, though differing one from another, preserve their relation to the whole. So, then, the barbarian and 
Hellenic philosophy has torn off a fragment of eternal truth not from the mythology of Dionysus, but from the 
theology of the ever-living Word. And He who brings again together the separate fragments, and makes 
them one, will without peril, be assured, contemplate the perfect Word, the truth. Therefore it is written in 
Ecclesiastes: "And I added wisdom above all who were before me in Jerusalem; and my heart saw many 
things; and besides, I knew wisdom and knowledge, parables and understanding. And this also is the 
choice of the spirit, because in abundance of wisdom is abundance of knowledge. "(8) He who is 
conversant with all kinds of wisdom, will be pre-eminently a gnostic.(9) Now it is written, "Abundance of the 
knowledge of wisdom will give life to him who is of it. "(10) And again, what is said is confirmed more clearly 
by this saying, "All things are in the sight of those who understand"-all things, both Hellenic and barbarian; 
but the one or the other is not all. "They are right to those who wish to receive understanding. Choose 
instruction, and not silver, and knowledge above tested gold," and prefer also sense to pure gold; "for 
wisdom is better than precious stones, and no precious thing is worth it."(1 1) 

CHAP. XIV. -SUCCESSION OF PHILOSOPHERS IN GREECE. 

The Greeks say, that after Orpheus and Linus, and the most ancient of the poets that appeared among 
them, the seven, called wise, were the first that were admired for their wisdom. Of whom four were of 
Asia-Thales of Miletus, and Bias of Priene, Pittacus of Mitylene, and Cleobulus of Lindos; and two of 
Europe, Solon the Athenian, and Chilon the Lacedaemonian; and the seventh, some say, was Periander of 
Corinth; others, Anacharsis the Scythian; others, Epimenides the Cretan, whom Paul knew as a Greek 
prophet, whom he mentions in the Epistle to Titus, where he speaks thus: "One of themselves, a prophet of 
their own, said. The Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, slow bellies. And this witness is true. "(12) You see 
how even to the prophets of the Greeks he attributes something of the truth, and is not ashamed, (13) when 
discoursing for the edification of some and the shaming of others, to make use of Greek poems. 
Accordingly to the Corinthians (for this is not the only instance), while discoursing on the resurrection of the 
dead, he makes use of a tragic Iambic line, when he said, "What advantageth it me if the dead are not 
raised? Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die. Be not deceived; evil communications corrupt good 
manners. "(1) Others have enumerated Acusilaus the Argive among the seven wise men; and others, 
Pherecydes of Syros. And Plato substitutes Myso the Chenian for Periander, whom he deemed unworthy of 
wisdom, on account of his having reigned as a tyrant. That the wise men among the Greeks flourished after 
the age of Moses, will, a little after, be shown. But the style of philosophy among them, as Hebraic and 
enigmatical, is now to be considered. They adopted brevity, as suited for exhortation, and most useful. 
Even Plato says, that of old this mode was purposely in vogue among all the Greeks, especially the 
Lacedaemonians and Cretans, who enjoyed the best laws. 

The expression, "Know thyself," some supposed to be Chilon's. But Chamaeleon, in his book About the 
Gods, ascribes it to Thales; Aristotle to the Pythian. It may be an injunction to the pursuit of knowledge. For it 
is not possible to know the parts without the essence of the whole; and one must study the genesis of the 
universe, that thereby we may be able to learn the nature of man. Again, to Chilon the Lacedaemonian they 
attribute, "Let nothing be too much. "(2) Strato, in his book Of Inventions, ascribes the apophthegm to 
Stratodemus of Tegea. Didymus assigns it to Solon; as also to Cleobulus the saying, "A middle course is 
best." And the expression, "Come under a pledge, and mischief is at hand," Cleomenes says, in his book 
Concerning Hesiod, was uttered before by Homer in the lines:- 

"Wretched pledges, for the wretched, to be pledged. "(3) 

The Aristotelians judge it to be Chilon's; but Didymus says the advice was that of Thales. Then, next in 
order, the saying, "All men are bad," or, "The most of men are bad" (for the same apophthegm is expressed 
in two ways), Sotades the Byzantian says that it was Bias's. And the aphorism, "Practice conquers 
everything, "(4) they will have it to be Periander's; and likewise the advice, "Know the opportunity," to have 
been a saying of Pittacus. Solon made laws for the Athenians, Pittacus for the Mitylenians. And at a late 
date, Pythagoras, the pupil of Pherecydes, first called himself a philosopher. Accordingly, after the 
fore-mentioned three men, there were three schools of philosophy, named after the places where they lived: 
the Italic from Pythagoras, the Ionic from Thales, the Eleatic from Xenophanes. Pythagoras was a Samian, 
the son of Mnesarchus, as Hippobotus says: cording to Aristoxenus, in his life of Pythagoras and 
Aristarchus and Theopompus, he was a Tuscan; and according to Neanthes, a Syrian or a Tyrian. So that 
Pythagoras was, according to the most, of barbarian extraction. Thales, too, as Leander and Herodotus 
relate, was a Phoenician; as some suppose, a Milesian. He alone seems to have met the prophets of the 
Egyptians. But no one is described as his teacher, nor is any one mentioned as the teacher of Pherecydes 
of Syros, who had Pythagoras as his pupil. But the Italic philosophy, that of Pythagoras, grew old in 
Metapontum in Italy. Anaximander of Miletus, the son of Praxiades, succeeded Thales; and was himself 
succeeded by Anaximenes of Miletus, the son of Eurustratus; after whom came Anaxagoras of 
Clazomenae, the son of Hegesibulus.(5) He transferred his school from Ionia to Athens. He was succeeded 
by Archelaus, whose pupil Socrates was. 
"From these turned aside, the stone-mason; 

Talker about laws; the enchanter of the Greeks," says Timon in his Satirical Poems, on account of his 
quitting physics for ethics. Antisthenes, after being a pupil of Socrates, introduced the Cynic philosophy; and 
Plato withdrew to the Academy. Aristotle, after studying philosophy under Plato, withdrew to the Lyceum, and 
founded the Peripatetic sect. He was succeeded by Theophrastus, who was succeeded by Strato, and he 
by Lycon, then Critolaus, and then Diodorus. Speusippus was the successor of Plato; his successor was 
Xenocrates; and the successor of the latter, Polemo. And the disciples of Polemo were Crates and Crantor, 
in whom the old Academy founded by Plato ceased. Arcesilaus was the associate of Crantor; from whom, 
down to Hegesilaus, the Middle Academy flourished. Then Carneades succeeded Hegesilaus, and others 
came in succession. The disciple of Crates was Zeno of Citium, the founder of the Stoic sect. He was 

succeeded by Cleanthes; and the latter by Chrysippus, and others after him. Xenophanes of Colophon was 
the founder of the Eleatic school, who, Timaeus says, lived in the time of Hiero, lord of Sicily, and 
Epicharmus the poet; and Apollodorus says that he was born in the fortieth Olympiad, and reached to the 
times of Darius and Cyrus. Parmenides, accordingly, was the disciple of Xenophanes, and Zeno of him; 
then came Leucippus, and then Democritus. Disciples of Democritus were Protagoras of Abdera, and 
Metrodorus of Chios, whose pupil was Diogenes of Smyrna; and his again Anaxarchus, and his Pyrrho, and 
his Nausiphanes. Some say that Epicurus was a scholar of his. 

Such, in an epitome, is the succession of the philosophers among the Greeks. The periods of the 
originators of their philosophy are now to be specified successively, in order that, by comparison, we may 
show that the Hebrew: philosophy was older by many generations. (1) 

It has been said of Xenophanes that he was the founder of the Eleatic philosophy. And Eudemus, in the 
Astrological Histories, says that Thales foretold the eclipse of the sun, which took place at the time that the 
Medians and the Lydians fought, in the reign of Cyaxares the father of Astyages over the Modes, and of 
Alyattus the son of Croesus over the Lydians. Herodotus in his first book agrees with him. The date is about 
the fiftieth Olympiad. Pythagoras is ascertained to have lived in the days of Polycrates the tyrant, about the 
sixty-second Olympiad. Mnesiphilus is described as a follower of Solon, and was a contemporary of 
Themistocles. Solon therefore flourished about the forty-sixth Olympiad. For Heraclitus, the son of Bauso, 
persuaded Melancomas the tyrant to abdicate his sovereignty. He despised the invitation of king Darius to 
visit the Persians. 

CHAP. XV. -THE GREEK PHILOSOPHY IN GREAT PART DERIVED FROM THE 
BARBARIANS. 

These are the times of the oldest wise men and philosophers among the Greeks. And that the most of them 
were barbarians by extraction, and were trained among barbarians, what need is there to say? Pythagoras 
is shown to have been either a Tuscan or a Tyrian. And Antisthenes was a Phrygian. And Orpheus was an 
Odrysian or a Thracian. The most, too, show Homer to have been an Egyptian. Thales was a Phoenician 
by birth, and was said to have consorted with the prophets of the Egyptians; as also Pythagoras did with the 
same persons, by whom he was circumcised, that he might enter the adytum and learn from the Egyptians 
the mystic philosophy. He held converse with the chief of the Chaldeans and the Magi; and he gave a hint of 
the church, now so called, in the common hall(2) which he maintained. 

And Plato does not deny that he procured all that is most excellent in philosophy from the barbarians; and 
he admits that he came into Egypt. Whence, writing in the Phoedo that the philosopher can receive aid from 
all sides, he said: "Great indeed is Greece, O Cebes, in which everywhere there are good men, and many 
are the races of the barbarians. "(3) Thus Plato thinks that some of the barbarians, too, are philosophers. But 
Epicurus, on the other hand, supposes that only Greeks can philosophise. And in the Symposium, Plato, 
landing the barbarians as practising philosophy with conspicuous excellence, (4) truly says: "And in many 
other instances both among Greeks and barbarians, whose temples reared for such sons are already 
numerous." And it is clear that the barbarians signally honoured their lawgivers and teachers, designating 
them gods. For, according to Plato, "they think that good souls, on quitting the supercelestial region, submit 
to come to this Tartarus; and assuming a body, share in all the ills which are involved in birth, from their 
solicitude for the race of men;" and these make laws and publish philosophy, "than which no greater boon 
ever came from the gods to the race of men, or will come. "(5) 

And as appears to me, it was in consequence of perceiving the great benefit which is conferred through 
wise men, that the men themselves Were honoured and philosophy cultivated publicly by all the Brahmins, 
and the Odrysi, and the Getae. And such were strictly deified by the race of the Egyptians, by the Chaldeans 
and the Arabians, called the Happy, and those that inhabited Palestine, by not the least portion of the 
Persian race, and by innumerable other races besides these. And it is well known that Plato is found 
perpetually celebrating the barbarians, remembering that both himself and Pythagoras learned the most 
and the noblest of their dogmas among the barbarians. Wherefore he also called the races of the 
barbarians, "races of barbarian philosophers," recognising, in the Phaedrus, the Egyptian king, and shows 
him to us wiser than Theut, whom he knew to be Hermes. But in the Charmides, it is manifest that he knew 
certain Thracians who were said to make the soul immortal. And Pythagoras is reported to have been a 
disciple of Sonches the Egyptian arch-prophet; and Plato, of Sechnuphis of Heliopolis; and Eudoxus, of 
Cnidius of Konuphis, who was also an Egyptian. And in his book. On the Saul, (6) Plato again manifestly 
recognises prophecy, when he introduces a prophet announcing the word of Lachesis, uttering predictions 
to the souls whose destiny is becoming fixed. And in the Timoeus he introduces Solon, the very wise, 
learning from the barbarian. The substance of the declaration is to the following effect: "O Solon, Solon, you 
Greeks are always children. And no Greek is an old man. For you have no learning that is hoary with 
age."(1) 

Democritus appropriated the Babylonian etiiic discourses, for lie is said to iiave combined witii iiis own 
compositions a translation of the column of Acicarus.(2) And you may find the distinction notified by him 
when he writes, "Thus says Democritus." About himself, too, where, pluming himself on his erudition, he 
says, "I have roamed over the most ground of any man of my time, investigating the most remote parts. I 
have seen the most skies and lands, and I have heard of learned men in very great numbers. And in 
composition no one has surpassed me; in demonstration, not even those among the Egyptians who are 
called Arpenodaptae, with all of whom I lived in exile up to eighty years." For he went to Babylon, and 
Persis, and Egypt, to learn from the Magi and the priests. 

Zoroaster the Magus, Pythagoras showed to be a Persian. Of the secret books of this man, those who follow 
the heresy of Prodicus boast to be in possession. Alexander, in his book On the Pythagorean Symbols, 
relates that Pythagoras was a pupil of Nazaratus the Assyrian a (some think that he is Ezekiel; but he is not, 
as will afterwards be shown), and will have it that, in addition to these, Pythagoras was a hearer of the 
Galatae and the Brahmins. Clearchus the Peripatetic says that he knew a Jew who associated with 
Aristotle. (4) Heraclitus says that, not humanly, but rather by God's aid, the Sibyl spoke. (5) They say, 
accordingly, that at Delphi a stone was shown beside the oracle, on which, it is said, sat the first Sibyl, who 
came from Helicon, and had been reared by the Muses. But some say that she came from Milea, being the 
daughter of Lamia of Sidon.(6) And Serapion, in his epic verses, says that the Sibyl, even when dead 
ceased not from divination. And he writes that, what proceeded from her into the air after her death, was what 
gave oracular utterances in voices and omens; and on her body being changed into earth, and the grass 
as natural growing out of it, whatever beasts happening to be in that place fed on it exhibited to men an 
accurate knowledge of futurity by their entrails. He thinks also, that the face seen in the moon is her soul. So 
much for the Sibyl. 

Numa the king of the Romans was a Pythagorean, and aided by the precepts of Moses, prohibited from 
making an image of God in human form, and of the shape of a living creature. Accordingly, during the first 
hundred and seventy years, though building temples, they made no cast or graven image. For Numa 
secretly showed them that the Best of Beings could not be apprehended except by the mind alone. Thus 
philosophy, a thing of the highest utility, flourished in antiquity among the barbarians, shedding its light over 
the nations. And afterwards it came to Greece. First in its ranks were the prophets of the Egyptians; and the 
Chaldeans among the Assyrians; and the Druids among the Gauls; and the Samanaeans among the 
Bactrians; and the philosophers of the Celts; and the Magi of the Persians, who foretold the Saviour's birth, 
and came into the land of Judaea guided by a star. The Indian gymnosophists are also in the number, and 
the other barbarian philosophers. And of these there are two classes, some of them called Sarmanae,(7) 
and others Brahmins. And those of the Sarmanae who are called Hylobii(8) neither inhabit cities, nor have 
roofs over them, but are clothed in the bark of trees, feed on nuts, and drink water in their hands. Like those 
called Encratites in the present day, they know not marriage nor begetting of children. 
Some, too, of the Indians obey the precepts of Buddha;(9) whom, on account of his extraordinary sanctity, 
they have raised to divine honours. 

Anacharsis was a Scythian, and is recorded to have excelled many philosophers among the Greeks. And 
the Hyperboreans, Hellanicus relates, dwelt beyond the Riphaean mountains, and inculcated justice, not 
eating flesh, but using nuts. Those who are sixty years old they take without the gates, and do away with. 
There are also among the Germans those called sacred women, who, by inspecting the whirlpools of rivers 
and the eddies, and observing the noises of streams, presage and predict future events. (10) These did not 
allow the men to fight against Caesar till the new moon shone. 

Of all these, by far the oldest is the Jewish race; and that their philosophy committed to writing has the 
precedence of philosophy among the Greeks, the Pythagorean Philo(1 1) shows at large; and, besides him, 
Aristobulus the Peripatetic, and several others, not to waste time, in going over them by name. Very clearly 
the author Megasthenes, the contemporary of Seleucus Nicanor, writes as follows in the third of his books. 
On Indian Affairs: "All that was said about nature by the ancients is said also by those who philosophise 
beyond Greece: some things by the Brahmins among the Indians, and others by those called Jews in 
Syria." Some more, fabulously say that certain of those called the Idaean Dactyli were the first wise men; to 
whom are attributed the invention of what are called the "Ephesian letters," and of numbers in music. For 
which reason dactyls in music received their name. And the Idaean Dactyli were Phrygians and barbarians. 
Herodotus relates that Hercules, having grown a sage and a student of physics, received from the 
barbarian Atlas, the Phrygian, the columns of the universe; the fable meaning that he received by instruction 
the knowledge of the heavenly bodies. And Hermippus of Berytus calls Charon the Centaur wise; about 
whom, he that wrote The Battle of the Titans says, "that he first led the race of mortals to righteousness, by 
teaching them the solemnity of the oath, and propitiatory sacrifices and the figures of Olympus." By him 
Achilles, who fought at Troy, was taught. And Hippo, the daughter of the Centaur, who dwelt with AEolus, 
taught him her father's science, the knowledge of physics. Euripides also testifies of Hippo as follows:- 

"Who first, by oracles, presaged. 
And by the rising stars, events divine." 

By this AEolus, Ulysses was received as a guest after the taking of Troy. Mark the epochs by comparison 
with the age of Moses, and with the high antiquity of the philosophy promulgated by him. 

CHAP. XVI. -THAT THE INVENTORS OF OTHER ARTS WERE MOSTLY BARBARIANS. 

And barbarians were inventors not only of piiilosopiiy, but almost of every art. The Egyptians were the first 
to introduce astrology among men. Similarly also the Chaldeans. The Egyptians first showed how to burn 
lamps, and divided the year into twelve months, prohibited intercourse with women in the temples, and 
enacted that no one should enter the temples(1) from a woman without bathing. Again, they were the 
inventors of geometry. There are some who say that the Carians invented prognostication by the stars. The 
Phrygians were the first who attended to the flight of birds. And the Tuscans, neighbours of Italy, were adepts 
at the art of the Haruspex. The Isaurians and the Arabians invented augury, as the Telmesians divination by 
dreams. The Etruscans invented the trumpet, and the Phrygians the flute. For Olympus and Marsyas were 
Phrygians. And Cadmus, the inventor of letters among the Greeks, as Euphorus says, was a Phoenician; 
whence also Herodotus writes that they were called Phoenician letters. And they say that the Phoenicians 
and the Syrians first invented letters; and that Apis, an aboriginal inhabitant of Egypt, invented the healing art 
before lo came into Egypt. But afterwards they say that Asclepius improved the art. Atlas the Libyan was the 
first who built a ship and navigated the sea. Kelmis and Damnaneus, Idaean Dactyli, first discovered iron in 
Cyprus. Another Idaean discovered the tempering of brass; according to Hesiod, a Scythian. The 
Thracians first invented what is called a scimitar (<greek>arph</greek>),-it is a curved sword,-and were the 
first to use shields on horseback. Similarly also the lllyrians invented the shield (<greek>pelth</greek>). 
Besides, they say that the Tuscans invented the art of moulding clay; and that Itanus (he was a Samnite) first 
fashioned the oblong shield (<greek>qureos</greek>). Cadmus the Phoenician invented stonecutting, and 
discovered the gold mines on the Pangaean mountain. Further, another nation, the Cappadocians, first 
invented the instrument called the nabla,(2) and the Assyrians in the same way the dichord. The 
Carthaginians were the first that constructed a triterme; and it was built by Bosporus, an aboriginal. (3) 
Medea, the daughter of AEetas, a Colchian, first invented the dyeing of hair. Besides, the Noropes (they are 
a Paeonian race, and are now called the Norici) worked copper, and were the first that purified iron. Amyous 
the king of the Bebryci was the first inventor of boxing-gloves. (4) In music, Olympus the Mysian practised the 
Lydian harmony; and the people called Troglodytes invented the sambuca,(5) a musical instrument. It is 
said that the crooked pipe was invented by Satyrus the Phrygian; likewise also diatonic harmony by 
Hyagnis, a Phrygian too; and notes by Olympus, a Phrygian; as also the Phrygian harmony, and the 
half-Phrygian and the half-Lydian, by Marsyas, who belonged to the same region as those mentioned 
above. And the Doric was invented by Thamyris the Thracian. We have heard that the Persians were the 
first who fashioned the chariot, and bed, and footstool; and the Sidonians the first to construct a trireme. The 
Sicilians, close to Italy, were the first inventors of the phorminx, which is not much inferior to the lyre. And they 
invented castanets. In the time of Semiramis queen of the Assyrians, (1) they relate that linen garments were 
invented. And Hellanicus says that Atossa queen of the Persians was the first who composed a letter. 
These things are reported by Seame of Mitylene, Theophrastus of Ephesus, Cydippus of Mantinea also 
Antiphanes, Aristodemus, and Aristotle and besides these, Philostephanus, and also Strato the Peripatetic, 
in his books Concerning Inventions. I have added a few details from them, in order to confirm the inventive 
and practically useful genius of the barbarians, by whom the Greeks profited in their studies. And if any one 
objects to the barbarous language, Anacharsis says, "All the Greeks speak Scythian to me." It was he who 
was held in admiration by the Greeks, who said, "My covering is a cloak; my supper, milk and cheese." You 
see that the barbarian philosophy professes deeds, not words. The apostle thus speaks: "So likewise ye, 
except ye utter by the tongue a word easy to be understood, how shall ye know what is spoken? for ye shall 
speak into the air. There are, it may be, so many kind of voices in the world, and none of them is without 
signification. Therefore if I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be unto him that speaketh a barbarian, 
and he that speaketh shall be a barbarian unto me." And, "Let him that speaketh in an unknown tongue pray 
that he may interpret."(2) 

Nay more, it was late before the teaching and writing of discourses reached Greece. Alcmaeon, the son of 
Perithus, of Crotona, first composed a treatise on nature. And it is related that Anaxagoras of Clazomenae, 
the son of Hegesibulus, first published a book in writing. The first to adapt music to poetical compositions 
was Terpander of Antissa; and he set the laws of the Lacedaemonians to music. Lasus of Hermione 
invented the dithyramb; Stesichorus of Himera, the hymn; Alcman the Spartan, the choral song; Anacreon of 

Tees, love songs; Pindar the Theban, the dance accompanied with song. Timotheus of IVIiletus was the first 
to execute those musical compositions called <greek>nomoi</greek> on the lyre, with dancing. Moreover, 
the iambus was invented by Archilochus of Pares, and the choliambus by Hipponax of Ephesus. Tragedy 
owed its origin to Thespis the Athenian, and comedy to Susarion of Icaria. Their dates are handed down by 
the grammarians. But it were tedious to specify them accurately: presently, however, Dionysus, on whose 
account the Dionysian spectacles are celebrated, will be shown to be later than Moses. They say that 
Antiphon of Rhamnusium, the son of Sophilus, first invented scholastic discourses and rhetorical figures, 
and was the first who pied causes for a fee, and wrote a forensic speech for delivery, (3) as Diodorus says. 
And Apollodorus of Cuma first assumed the name of critic, and was called a grammarian. Some say it was 
Eratosthenes of Gyrene who was first so called, since he published two books which he entitled 
Grammatica. The first who was called a grammarian, as we now use the term, was Praxiphanes, the son of 
Disnysophenes of Mitylene. Zeleucus the Locrian was reported to have been the first to have framed laws 
(in writing) Others say that it was Menos the son of Zeus, in the time of Lynceus. He comes after Danaus, in 
the eleventh generation from Inachus and Moses; as we shall show a little further on. And Lycurgus, who 
lived many years after the taking of Troy, legislated for the Lacedaemonians a hundred and fifty years 
before the Olympiads. We have spoken before of the age of Solon. Draco (he was a legislator too) is 
discovered to have lived about the three hundred and ninth Olympiad. Antilochus, again, who wrote of the 
learned men from the age of Pythagoras to the death of Epicurus, which took place in the tenth day of the 
month Gamelion, makes up altogether three hundred and twelve years. Moreover, some say that 
Phanothea, the wife of Icarius, invented the heroic hexameter; others Themis, one of the Titanides. Didymus, 
however, in his work On the Pythagorean Philosophy, relates that Theano of Crotona was the first woman 
who cultivated philosophy and composed poems The Hellenic philosophy then, according to some, 
apprehended the truth accidentally, dimly, partially; as others will have it, was set a-going by the devil. 
Several suppose that certain powers, descending from heaven, inspired the whole of philosophy. But if the 
Hellenic philosophy comprehends not the whole extent of the truth, and besides is destitute of strength to 
perform the commandments of the Lord, yet it prepares the way for the truly royal teaching; training in some 
way or other, and moulding the character, and fitting him who believes in Providence for the reception of the 
truth. (4) 

CHAP. XVII. --ON THE SAYING OF THE SAVIOUR, "ALL THAT CAME BEFORE ME WERE 
THIEVES AND ROBBERS. "(5) 

But, say they, it is written, "All who were before the Lord's advent are thieves and robbers." All, then, who are 
in the Word (for it is these that were previous to the incarnation of the Word) are understood generally. But 
the prophets, being sent and inspired by the Lord, were not thieves, but servants. The Scripture accordingly 
says, "Wisdom sent her servants, inviting with loud proclamation to a goblet of wine. "(1) 
But philosophy, it is said, was not sent by the Lord, but came stolen, or given by a thief. It was then some 
power or angel that had learned something of the truth, but abode not in it, that inspired and taught these 
things, not without the Lord's knowledge, who knew before the constitution of each essence the issues of 
futurity, but without His prohibition. 

For the theft which reached men then, had some advantage; not that he who perpetrated the theft had utility 
in his eye, but Providence directed the issue of the audacious deed to utility. I know that many are 
perpetually assailing us with the allegation, that not to prevent a thing happening, is to be the cause of it 
happening. For they say, that the man who does not take precaution against a theft, or does not prevent it, is 
the cause of it: as he is the cause of the conflagration who has not quenched it at the beginning; and the 
master of the vessel who does not reef the sail, is the cause of the shipwreck. Certainly those who are the 
causes of such events are punished by the law. For to him who had power to prevent, attaches the blame of 
what happens. We say to them, that causation is seen in doing, working, acting; but the not preventing is in 
this respect inoperative. Further, causation attaches to activity; as in the case of the shipbuilder in relation to 
the origin of the vessel, and the builder in relation to the construction of the house. But that which does not 
prevent is separated from what takes place. Wherefore the effect will be accomplished; because that which 
could have prevented neither acts nor prevents. For what activity does that which prevents not exert? Now 
their assertion is reduced to absurdity, if they shall say that the cause of the wound is not the dart, but the 
shield, which did not prevent the dart from passing through; and if they blame not the thief, but the man who 
did not prevent the theft. Let them then say, that it was not Hector that burned the ships of the Greeks, but 
Achilles; because, having the power to prevent Hector, he did not prevent him; but out of anger (and it 
depended on himself to be angry or not) did not keep back the fire, and was a concurring cause. Now the 
devil, being possessed of free-will, was able both to repent and to steal; and it was he who was the author of 
the theft, not the Lord, who did not prevent him. But neither was the gift hurtful, so as to require that prevention 
should intervene. 

But if strict accuracy must be employed in dealing with them, let them know, that that which does not prevent 
what we assert to have taken place in the theft, is not a cause at all; but that what prevents is involved in the 
accusation of being a cause. For he that protects with a shield is the cause of him whom he protects not 
being wounded; preventing him, as he does, from being wounded. For the demon of Socrates was a cause, 
not by not preventing, but by exhorting, even if (strictly speaking) he did not exhort. And neither praises nor 
censures, neither rewards nor punishments, are right, when the soul has not the power of inclination and 
disinclination, but evil is involuntary. Whence he who prevents is a cause; while he who prevents not judges 
justly the soul's choice. So in no respect is God the author of evil. But since free choice and inclination 
originate sins, and a mistaken judgment sometimes prevails, from which, since it is ignorance and stupidity, 
we do not take pains to recede, punishments are rightly inflicted. For to take fever is involuntary; but when 
one takes fever through his own fault, from excess, we blame him. Inasmuch, then, as evil is involuntary,-for 
no one prefers evil as evil; but induced by the pleasure that is in it, and imagining it good, considers it 
desirable;-such being the case, to free ourselves from ignorance, and from evil and voluptuous choice, 
and above all, to withhold our assent from those delusive phantasies, depends on ourselves. The devil is 
called "thief and robber;" having mixed false prophets with the prophets, as tares with the wheat. "All, then, 
that came before the Lord, were thieves and robbers;" not absolutely all men, but all the false prophets, and 
all who were not properly sent by Him. For the false prophets possessed the prophetic name dishonestly, 
being prophets, but prophets of the liar. For the Lord says, "Ye are of your father the devil; and the lusts of 
your father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no 
truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own; for he is a liar, and the father of it."(2) 
But among the lies, the false prophets also told some true things. And in reality they prophesied "in an 
ecstasy," as(3) the servants of the apostate. And the Shepherd, the angel of repentance, says to Hermas, of 
the false prophet: "For he speaks some truths. For the devil fills him with his own spirit, if perchance he may 
be able to cast down any one from what is right." All things, therefore, are dispensed from heaven for good, 
"that by the Church may be made known the manifold wisdom of God, according to the eternal 
foreknowledge, (1) which He purposed in Christ. "(2) Nothing withstands God: nothing opposes Him: seeing 
He is Lord and omnipotent. Further, the counsels and activities of those who have rebelled, being partial, 
proceed from a bad disposition, as bodily diseases from a bad constitution, but are guided by universal 
Providence to a salutary issue, even though the cause be productive of disease. It is accordingly the 
greatest achievement of divine Providence, not to allow the evil, which has sprung from voluntary apostasy, 
to remain useless, and for no good, and not to become in all respects injurious. For it is the work of the 
divine wisdom, and excellence, and power, not alone to do good (for this is, so to speak, the nature of God, 
as it is of fire to warm and of light to illumine), but especially to ensure that what happens through the evils 
hatched by any, may come to a good and useful issue, and to use to advantage those things which appear 
to be evils, as also the testimony which accrues from temptation. 

There is then in philosophy, though stolen as the fire by Prometheus, a slender spark, capable of being 
fanned into flame, a trace of wisdom and an impulse from God. Well, be it so that "the thieves and robbers" 
are the philosophers among the Greeks, who from the Hebrew prophets before the coming of the Lord 
received fragments of the truth, not with full knowledge, and claimed these as their own teachings, disguising 
some points, treating others sophistically by their ingenuity, and discovering other things, for perchance they 
had "the spirit of perception. "(3) Aristotle, too, assented to Scripture, and declared sophistry to have stolen 
wisdom, as we intimated before. And the apostle says, "Which things we speak, not in the words which 
man's wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghostteacheth."(4) For of the prophets it is said, "We have all 
received of His fulness, "(5) that is, of Christ's. So that the prophets are not thieves. "And my doctrine is not 
Mine," saith the Lord, "but the Father's which sent me." And of those who steal He says: "But he that 
speaketh of himself, seeketh his own glory. "(6) Such are the Greeks, "lovers of their own selves, and 
boasters. "(7) Scripture, when it speaks of these as wise, does not brand those who are really wise, but 
those who are wise in appearance. 

CHAP. XVIII. -HE ILLUSTRATES THE APOSTLE'S SAYING, "I WILL DESTROY THE 
WISDOM OF THE WISE." 

And of such it is said, "I will destroy the wisdom of the wise: I will bring to nothing the understanding of the 
prudent." The apostle accordingly adds, "Where is the wise? Where is the scribe? Where is the disputer of 
this world?" setting in contradistinction to the scribes, the disputers(8) of this world, the philosophers of the 
Gentiles. "Hath not God made foolish the wisdom of the world?"(9) which is equivalent to, showed it to be 
foolish, and not true, as they thought. And if you ask the cause of their seeming wisdom, he will say, 
"because of the blindness of their heart;" since "in the wisdom of God," that is, as proclaimed by the 
prophets, "the world knew not," in the wisdom "which spake by the prophets," "Him, "(10) that is, God,-"it 
pleased God by the foolishness of preaching"-what seemed to the Greeks foolishness-"to save them that 

believe. For the Jews require signs," in order to faitii; "and tiie Greel<s seel< after wisdom," plainly those 
reasonings styled "irresistible," and those others, namely, syllogisms. "But we preach Jesus Christ crucified; 
to the Jews a stumbling-block," because, though knowing prophecy, they did not believe the event: "to the 
Greeks, foolishness;" for those who in their own estimation are wise, consider it fabulous that the Son of God 
should speak by man and that God should have a Son, and especially that that Son should have suffered. 
Whence their preconceived idea inclines them to disbelieve. For the advent of the Saviour did not make 
people foolish, and hard of heart, and unbelieving, but made them understanding, amenable to persuasion, 
and believing. But those that would not believe, by separating themselves from the voluntary adherence of 
those who obeyed, were proved to be without understanding, unbelievers and fools. "But to them who are 
called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ is the power of God, and the wisdom of God." Should we not 
understand (as is better) the words rendered, "Hath not God made foolish the wisdom of the world?" 
negatively: "God hath not made foolish the wisdom of the world?"-so that the cause of their hardness of 
heart may not appear to have proceeded from God, "making foolish the wisdom of the world." For on all 
accounts, being wise, they incur greater blame in not believing the proclamation. For the preference and 
choice of truth is voluntary. But that declaration, "I will destroy the wisdom ofthe wise," declares Him to have 
sent forth light, by bringing forth in opposition the despised and contemned barbarian philosophy; as the 
lamp, when shone upon by the sun, is said to be extinguished, on account of its not then exerting the same 
power. All having been therefore called, those who are willing to obey have been named(1) "called." For 
there is no unright-eousness with God. Those of either race who have believed, are "a peculiar people. "(2) 
And in the Acts ofthe Apostles you will find this, word for word, "Those then who received his word were 
baptized;"(3) but those who would not obey kept themselves aloof. To these prophecy says, "If ye be willing 
and hear me, ye shall eat the good things ofthe land;"(4) proving that choice or refusal depends on 
ourselves. The apostle designates the doctrine which is according to the Lord, "the wisdom of God," in 
order to show that the true philosophy has been communicated by the Son. Further, he, who has a show of 
wisdom, has certain exhortations enjoined on him by the apostle: "That ye put on the new man, which after 
God is renewed in righteousness and true holiness. Wherefore, putting away lying, speak every man truth. 
Neither give place to the devil. Let him that stole, steal no more; but rather let him labour, working that which 
is good" (and to work is to labour in seeking the truth; for it is accompanied with rational well-doing), "that ye 
may have to give to him that has need, "(5) both of worldly wealth and of divine wisdom. For he wishes both 
that the word be taught, and that the money be put into the bank, accurately tested, to accumulate interest. 
Whence he adds, "Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, "-that is "corrupt 
communication" which proceeds out of conceit,-"but that which is good for the use of edifying, that it may 
minister grace to the hearers." And the word ofthe good God must needs be good. And how is it possible 
that he who saves shall not be good? 

CHAP. XIX. -THAT THE PHILOSOPHERS HAVE ATTAINED TO SOME PORTION OF 
TRUTH. 

Since, then, the Greeks are testified to have laid down some true opinions, we may from this point take a 
glance at the testimonies. Paul, in the Acts ofthe Apostles, is recorded to have said to the Areopagites, "I 
perceive that ye are more than ordinarily religious. For as I passed by, and beheld your devotions, I found 
an altar with the inscription. To The Unknown God. Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship. Him declare I 
unto you. God, that made the world and all things therein, seeing that He is Lord of heaven and earth, 
dwelleth not in temples made with hands; neither is worshipped with men's hands, as though He needed 
anything, seeing He giveth to all life, and breath, and all things; and hath made of one blood all nations of 
men to dwell on all the face ofthe earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of 
their habitation; that they should seek God, if haply they might feel after Him, and find Him; though He be not 
far from every one of us: for in Him we live, and move, and have our being; as certain also of your own poets 
have said. For we also are His offspring. "(6) Whence it is evident that the apostle, by availing himself of 
poetical examples from the Phenomena of Aratus, approves of what had been well spoken by the Greeks; 
and intimates that, by the unknown God, God the Creator was in a roundabout way worshipped by the 
Greeks; but that it was necessary by positive knowledge to apprehend and learn Him by the Son. 
"Wherefore, then, I send thee to the Gentiles," it is said, "to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness 
to light, and from the power of Satan unto God; that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance 
among them that are sanctified by faith which is in Me. "(7) Such, then, are the eyes ofthe blind which are 
opened. The knowledge ofthe Father by the Son is the comprehension ofthe "Greek circumlocution;"(8) 
and to turn from the power of Satan is to change from sin, through which bondage was produced. We do not, 
indeed, receive absolutely all philosophy, but that of which Socrates(9) speaks in Plato. "For there are (as 
they say) in the mysteries many bearers ofthe thyrsus, but few bacchanals;" meaning, "that many are 
called, but few chosen." He accordingly plainly adds: "These, in my opinion, are none else than those who 

have philosophized right; to belong to whose number, I myself have left nothing undone in life, as far as I 
could, but have endeavoured in every way. Whether we have endeavoured rightly and achieved aught, we 
shall know when we have gone there, if God will, a little afterwards." Does he not then seem to declare from 
the Hebrew Scriptures the righteous man's hope, through faith, after death? And in Demodocus(IO) (if that is 
really the work of Plato): "And do not imagine that I call it philosophizing to spend life pottering about the arts, 
or learning many things, but something different; since I , at least, would consider this a disgrace." For he 
knew, I reckon, "that the knowledge of many things does not educate the mind,"(1) according to Heraclitus. 
And in the fifth book of the Republic.(2) he says, "' Shall we then call all these, and the others which study 
such things, and those who apply themselves to the meaner arts, philosophers?' 'By no means,' I said, 'but 
like philosophers.' 'And whom,' said he, 'do you call true?' 'Those,' said I,' who delight in the contemplation 
of truth. For philosophy is not in geometry, with its postulates and hypotheses; nor in music, which is 
conjectural; nor in astronomy, crammed full of physical, fluid, and probable causes. But the knowledge of 
the good and truth itself are requisite,-what is good being one thing, and the ways to the good another.'"(3) 
So that he does not allow that the curriculum of training suffices for the good, but co-operates in rousing and 
training the soul to intellectual objects. Whether, then, they say that the Greeks gave forth some utterances 
of the true philosophy by accident, it is the accident of a divine administration (for no one will, for the sake of 
the present argument with us, deify chance); or by good fortune, good fortune is not unforeseen. Or were 
one, on the other hand, to say that the Greeks possessed a natural conception of these things, we know the 
one Creator of nature; just as we also call righteousness natural; or that they had a common intellect, let us 
reflect who is its father, and what righteousness is in the mental economy. For were one to name 
"prediction, "(4) and assign as its cause "combined utterance, "(5) he specifies forms of prophecy. Further, 
others will have it that some truths were uttered by the philosophers, in appearance. 
The divine apostle writes accordingly respecting us: "For now we see as through a glass;"(6) knowing 
ourselves in it by reflection, and simul-taneously contemplating, as we can, the efficient cause, from that, 
which, in us, is divine. For it is said, "Having seen thy brother, thou hast seen thy God:" methinks that now the 
Saviour God is declared to us. But after the laying aside of the flesh, "face to face, "-then definitely and 
comprehensively, when the heart becomes pure. And by reflection and direct vision, those among the 
Greeks who have philosophized accurately, see God. For such, through our weakness, are our true views, 
as images are seen in the water, and as we see things through pellucid and transparent bodies. Excellently 
therefore Solomon says: "He who soweth righteousness, worketh faith. "(7) "And there are those who, sewing 
their own, make increase. "(8) And again: "Take care of the verdure on the plain, and thou shalt cut grass 
and gather ripe hay, that thou mayest have sheep for clothing. "(9) You see how care must be taken for 
external clothing and for keeping. "And thou shalt intelligently know the souls of thy flock."(1 0) "For when the 
Gentiles, which have not the law, do by nature the things contained in the law, these, having not the law, are a 
law unto themselves; uncircumcision observing the precepts of the law,"(1 1) according to the apostle, both 
before the law and before the advent. As if making comparison of those addicted to philosophy with those 
called heretics, (12) the Word most clearly says: "Better is a friend that is near, than a brother that dwelleth 
afar off."(13) "And he who relies on falsehoods, feeds on the winds, and pursues winged birds. "(14) I do not 
think that philosophy directly declares the Word, although in many instances philosophy attempts and 
persuasively teaches us probable arguments; but it assails the sects. Accordingly it is added: "For he hath 
forsaken the ways of his own vineyard, and wandered in the tracks of his own husbandry." Such are the 
sects which deserted the primitive Church. (12) Now he who has fallen into heresy passes through an arid 
wilderness, abandoning the only true God, destitute of God, seeking waterless water, reaching an 
uninhabited and thirsty land, collecting sterility with his hands. And those destitute of prudence, that is, those 
involved in heresies, "I enjoin," remarks Wisdom, saying, "Touch sweetly stolen bread and the sweet water 
of theft;"(1 5) the Scripture manifestly applying the terms bread and water to nothing else but to those 
heresies, which employ bread and water in the oblation, not according to the canon of the Church. For there 
are those who celebrate the Eucharist with mere water. "But begone, stay not in her place:" dace is the 
synagogue, not the Church. He calls it by the equivocal name, place. Then He subjoins: "For so shalt thou 
pass through the water of another;" reckoning heretical baptism not proper and true water. "And thou shalt 
pass over another's river," that rushes along and sweeps down to the sea; into which he is cast who, having 
diverged from the stability which is according to truth, rushes back into the heathenish and tumultous waves 
of life. 

CHAP. XX. -IN WHAT RESPECT PHILOSOPHY CONTRIBUTES TO THE COMPREHENSION 
OF DIVINE TRUTH. 

As many men drawing down the ship, cannot be called many causes, but one cause consisting of 
many;-for each individual by himself is not the cause of the ship being drawn, but along with the rest;-so 
also philosophy, being the search for truth, contributes to the comprehension of truth; not as being the cause 

of comprehension, but a cause along with other things, and co-operator; perhaps also a joint cause. And as 
the several virtues are causes of the happiness of one individual; and as both the sun, and the fire, and the 
bath, and clothing are of one getting warm: so while truth is one, many things contribute to its investigation. 
But its discovery is by the Son. If then we consider, virtue is, in power, one. But it is the case, that when 
exhibited in some things, it is called prudence, in others temperance, and in others manliness or 
righteousness. By the same analogy, while truth is one, in geometry there is the truth of geometry; in music, 
that of music; and in the right philosophy, there will be Hellenic truth. But that is the only authentic truth, 
unassailable, in which we are instructed by the Son of God. In the same way we say, that the drachma being 
one and the same, when given to the shipmaster, is called the fare; to the tax-gatherer, tax; to the landlord, 
rent; to the teacher, fees; to the seller, an earnest. And each, whether it be virtue or truth, called by the same 
name, is the cause of its own peculiar effect alone; and from the blending of them arises a happy life. For we 
are not made happy by names alone, when we say that a good life is happiness, and that the man who is 
adorned in his soul with virtue is happy. But if philosophy contributes remotely to the discovery of truth, by 
reaching, by diverse essays, after the knowledge which touches close on the truth, the knowledge 
possessed by us, it aids him who aims at grasping it, in accordance with the Word, to apprehend 
knowledge. But the Hellenic truth is distinct from that held by us (although it has got the same name), both in 
respect of extent of knowledge, certainly of demonstration, divine power, and the like. For we are taught of 
God, being instructed in the truly "sacred letters"(1) by the Son of God. Whence those, to whom we refer, 
influence souls not in the way we do, but by different teaching. And if, for the sake of those who are fond of 
fault-finding, we must draw a distinction, by saying that philosophy is a concurrent and cooperating cause of 
true apprehension, being the search for truth, then we shall avow it to be a preparatory training for the 
enlightened man (<greek>tou</greek> <greek>gnwstikou</greek>); not assigning as the cause that which is 
but the joint-cause; nor as the upholding cause, what is merely co-operative; nor giving to philosophy the 
place of a sine qua non. Since almost all of us, without training in arts and sciences, and the Hellenic 
philosophy, and some even without learning at all, through the influence of a philosophy divine and 
barbarous, and by power, have through faith received the word concerning God, trained by self-operating 
wisdom. But that which acts in conjunction with something else, being of itself incapable of operating by 
itself, we describe as co-operating and concausing, and say that it becomes a cause only in virtue of its 
being a joint-cause, and receives the name of cause only in respect of its concurring with something else, 
but that it cannot by itself produce the right effect. 

Although at one time philosophy justified the Greeks, (2) not conducting them to that entire righteousness to 
which it is ascertained to cooperate, as the first and second flight of steps help you in your ascent to the 
upper room, and the grammarian helps the philosopher. Not as if by its abstraction, the perfect Word would 
be rendered incomplete, or truth perish; since also sight, and hearing, and the voice contribute to truth, but it 
is the mind which is the appropriate faculty for knowing it. But of those things which co-operate, some 
contribute a greater amount of power; some, a less. Perspicuity accordingly aids in the communication of 
truth, and logic in preventing us from falling under the heresies by which we are assailed. But the teaching, 
which is according to the Saviour, is complete in itself and without defect, being "the power and wisdom of 
God;"(3) and the Hellenic philosophy does not, by its approach, make the truth more powerful; but rendering 
powerless the assault of sophistry against it, and frustrating the treacherous plots laid against the truth, is 
said to be the proper "fence and wall of the vineyard." And the truth which is according to faith is as 
necessary for life as bread; while the preparatory discipline is like sauce and sweetmeats. "At the end of the 
dinner, the dessert is pleasant," according to the Theban Pindar. And the Scripture has expressly said, 
"The innocent will become wiser by understanding, and the wise will receive knowledge. "(4) "And he that 
speaketh of himself," saith the Lord, "seeketh his own glory; but He that seeketh His glory that sent Him is 
true, and there is no unrighteousness in Him. "(5) On the other hand, therefore, he who appropriates what 
belongs to the barbarians, and vaunts it is his own, does wrong, increasing his own glory, and falsifying the 
truth. It is such an one that is by Scripture called a "thief." It is therefore said, "Son, be not a liar; for falsehood 
leads to theft." Nevertheless the thief possesses really, what he has possessed himself of dishonestly, (1) 
whether it be gold, or silver, or speech, or dogma. The ideas, then, which they have stolen, and which are 
partially true, they know by conjecture and necessary logical deduction: on becoming disciples, therefore, 
they will know them with intelligent apprehension. 

CHAP. XXI. -THE JEWISH INSTITUTIONS AND LAWS OF FAR HIGHER ANTIQUITY THAN 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE GREEKS. 

On the plagiarizing of the dogmas of the philosophers from the Hebrews, we shall treat a little afterwards. But 
first, as due order demands, we must now speak of the epoch of Moses, by which the philosophy of the 
Hebrews will be demonstrated beyond all contradiction to be the most ancient of all wisdom. This has been 
discussed with accuracy by Tatian in his book To the Greeks, and by Cassian in the first book of his 

Exegetics. Nevertheless our commentary demands that we too should run over what has been said on the 
point. Apion, then, the grammarian, surnamed Pleistonices, in the fourth book of The Egyptian Histories, 
although of so hostile a disposition towards the Hebrews, being by race an Egyptian, as to compose a work 
against the Jews, when referring to Amosis king of the Egyptians, and his exploits, adduces, as a witness, 
Ptolemy of Mendes. And his remarks are to the following effect: Amosis, who lived in the time of the Argive 
Inachus, overthrew Athyria, as Ptolemy of Mendes relates in his Chronology. Now this Ptolemy was a priest; 
and setting forth the deeds of the Egyptian kings in three entire books, he says, that the exodus of the Jews 
from Egypt, under the conduct of Moses, took place while Amosis was king of Egypt. Whence it is seen that 
Moses flourished in the time of Inachus. And of the Hellenic states, the most ancient is the Argolic, I mean 
that which took its rise from Inachus, as Dionysius of Halicarnassus teaches in his Times. And younger by 
forty generations than it was Attica, founded by Cecrops, who was an aboriginal of double race, as Tatian 
expressly says; and Arcadia, founded by Pelasgus, younger too by nine generations; and he, too, is said to 
have been an aboriginal. And more recent than this last by fifty-two generations, was Pthiotis, rounded by 
Deucalion. And from the time of Inachus to the Trojan war twenty generations or more are reckoned; let us 
say, four hundred years and more. And if Ctesias says that the Assyrian power is many years older than the 
Greek, the exodus of Moses from Egypt will appear to have taken place in the forty-second year of the 
Assyrian empire, (2) in the thirty-second year of the reign of Belochus, in the time of Amosis the Egyptian, 
and of Inachus the Argive. And in Greece, in the time of Phoroneus, who succeeded Inachus, the flood of 
Ogyges occurred; and monarchy subsisted in Sicyon first in the person of AEgialeus, then of Europs, then of 
Telches; in Crete, in the person of Cres. For Acusilaus says that Phoroneus was the first man. Whence, too, 
the author of Phoronis said that he was "the father of mortal men." Thence Plato in the Timaeus, following 
Acusilaus, writes: "And wishing to draw them out into a discussion respecflng anflquities, he(3) said that he 
ventured to speak of the most remote anflquifles of this city(4) respecting Phoroneus, called the first man, 
and Niobe, and what happened after the deluge." And in the time of Phorbus lived Actaeus, from whom is 
derived Actaia, Atflca; and in the time of Triopas lived Prometheus, and Atlas, and Epimetheus, and 
Cecrops of double race, and Ino. And in the flme of Crotopus occurred the burning of Phaethon, and the 
deluge s of Deucalion; and in the time of Sthenelus, the reign of Amphictyon, and the arrival of Danaus in the 
Peloponnesus; and trader Dardanus happened the building of Dardania, whom, says Homer, 

"First cloud-compelling Zeus begat, "- 

and the transmigration from Crete into Phoenicia. And in the flme of Lynceus took place the abducflon of 
Proserpine, and the dedicaflon of the sacred enclosure in Eleusis, and the husbandry of Triptolemus, and 
the arrival of Cadmus in Thebes, and the reign of Minos. And in the flme of Proetus the war of Eumolpus with 
the Athenians took place; and in the flme of Acrisius, the removal of Pelops from Phrygia, the arrival of Ion at 
Athens; and the second Cecrops appeared, and the exploits of Perseus and Dionysus took place, and 
Orpheus and Musaeus lived. And in the eighteenth year of the reign of Agamemnon, Troy was taken, in the 
first year of the reign of Demophon the son of Theseus at Athens, on the twelfth day of the month Thargelion, 
as Dionysius the Argive says; but AEgias and Dercylus, in the third book, say that it was on the eighth day of 
the last division of the month Panemus; Hellanicus says that it was on the twelfth of the month Thargelion; 
and some of the authors of the Attica say that it was on the eighth of the last division of the month in the last 
year of Menestheus, at full moon. 

"It was midnight," 

says the author of the Little Iliad, 

"And the moon shone clear." 

Others say, it took place on the same day of Scirophorion. But Theseus, the rival of Hercules, is older by a 
generation than the Trojan war. Accordingly TIepolemus, a son of Hercules, is menfloned by Homer, as 
having served at Troy. 

Moses, then, is shown to have preceded the deiflcation of Dionysus six hundred and four years, if he was 
deified in the thirty-second year of the reign of Perseus, as Apollodorus says in his Chronology. From 
Bacchus to Hercules and the chiefs that sailed with Jason in the ship Argo, are comprised sixty-three years. 
AEsculapius and the Dioscuri sailed with them, as Apollonius Rhodius tesflfles in his Argonautics. And from 
the reign of Hercules, in Argos, to the deificaflon of Hercules and of AEsculapius, are comprised thirty-eight 
years, according to Apollodorus the chronologist; from this to the deificaflon of Castor and Pollux, fifty-three 
years. And at this time Troy was taken. And if we may believe the poet Hesiod, let us hear him:- 

"Then to Jove, Maia, Atlas' daughter, bore renowned Hermes, 
Herald of the immortals, having ascended the sacred couch. 
And Semele, the daughter of Cadmus, too, bore an illustrious son, 
Dionysus, the joy-inspiring, when she mingled with him in love."(1) 

Cadmus, the father of Semele, came to Thebes in the time of Lynceus, and was the inventor of the Greek 
letters. Triopas was a contemporary of Isis, in the seventh generation from Inachus. And Isis, who is the 
same as lo, is so called, it is said, from her going (<greek>ienai</greek>) roaming over the whole earth. 
Her, Istrus, in his work on the migration of the Egyptians, calls the daughter of Prometheus. Prometheus lived 
in the time of Triopas, in the seventh generation after Moses. So that Moses appears to have flourished 
even before the birth of men, according to the chronology of the Greeks. Leon, who treated of the Egyptian 
divinities, says that Isis by the Greeks was called Ceres, who lived in the time of Lynceus, in the eleventh 
generation after Moses. And Apis the king of Argos built Memphis, as Aristippus says in the first book of the 
Arcadica. And Aristeas the Argive says that he was named Serapis, and that it is he that the Egyptians 
worship. And Nymphodorus of Amphipolis, in the third book of the Institutions of Asia, says that the bull Apis, 
dead and laid in a coffin (<greek>soros</greek>), was deposited in the temple of the god 
(<greek>daimonos</greek>) there worshipped, and thence was called Soroapis, and afterwards Serapis 
by the custom of the natives. And Apis is third after Inachus. Further, Latona lived in the time of Tityus. "For 
he dragged Latona, the radiant consort of Zeus." Now Tityus was contemporary with Tantalus. Rightly, 
therefor, the Boeotian Pindar writes, "And in time was Apollo born;" and no wonder when he is found along 
with Hercules, serving Admetus "for a long year." Zethus and Amphion, the inventors of music, lived about 
the age of Cadmus. And should one assert that Phemonoe was the first who sang oracles in verse to 
Acrisius, let him know that twenty-seven years after Phemonoe, lived Orpheus, and Musaeus, and Linus the 
teacher of Hercules. And Homer and Hesiod are much more recent than the Trojan war; and after them the 
legislators among the Greeks are far more recent, Lycurgus and Solon, and the seven wise men, and 
Pherecydes of Syros, and Pythagoras the great, who lived later, about the Olympiads, as we have shown. 
We have also demonstrated Moses to be more ancient, not only than those called poets and wise men 
among the Greeks, but than the most of their deities. Nor he alone, but the Sibyl also is more ancient than 
Orpheus. For it is said, that respecting her appellation and her oracular utterances there are several 
accounts; that being a Phrygian, she was called Artemis; and that on her arrival at Delphi, she sang- 

"O Delphians, ministers of far-darting Apollo, 

I come to declare the mind of AEgis-bearing Zeus, 

Enraged as I am at my own brother Apollo." 

There is another also, an Erythraean, called Herophile. These are mentioned by Heraclides of Pontus in 
his work On Oracles. I pass over the Egyptian Sibyl, and the Italian, who inhabited the Carmentale in Rome, 
whose son was Evander, who built the temple of Pan in Rome, called the Lupercal. 
It is worth our while, having reached this point, to examine the dates of the other prophets among the 
Hebrews who succeeded Moses. After the close of Moses's life, Joshua succeeded to the leadership of 
the people, and he, after warring for sixty-five years, rested in the good land other five-and-twenty. As the 
book of Joshua relates, the above mentioned man was the successor of Moses twenty-seven years. Then 
the Hebrews having sinned, were delivered to Chusachar(2) king of Mesopotamia for eight years, as the 
book of Judges mentions. But having afterwards besought the Lord, they receive for leader Gothoniel,(1) the 
younger brother of Caleb, of the tribe of Judah, who, having slain the king of Mesopotamia, ruled over the 
people forty years in succession. And having again sinned, they were delivered into the hands of 
AEglom(2) king of the Moabites for eighteen years. But on their repentance, Aod,(3) a man who had equal 
use of both hands, of the tribe of Ephraim, was their leader.for eighty years. It was he that despatched 
AEglom. On the death of Aod, and on their sinning again, they were delivered into the hand of Jabim(4) king 
of Canaan twenty years. After him Deborah the wife of Lapidoth, of the tribe of Ephraim, prophesied; and 
Oziasthe son of Rhiesu was high priest. At her instance Barak the son of Bener,(5) of the tribe of Naphtali, 
commanding the army, having joined battle with Sisera, Jabim's commander-in-chief, conquered him. And 
after that Deborah ruled, judging the people forty years. On her death, the people having again sinned, were 
delivered into the hands of the Midianites seven years. After these events, Gideon, of the tribe of Manasseh, 
the son of Joas, having fought with his three hundred men, and killed a hundred and twenty thousand, ruled 
forty years; after whom the son of Ahimelech, three years. He was succeeded by Boleas, the son of Bedan, 
the son of Charran,(6) of the tribe of Ephraim, who ruled twenty-three years. After whom, the people having 
sinned again, were delivered to the Ammonites eighteen years; and on their repentance were commanded 
by Jephtha the Gileadite, of the tribe of Manasseh; and he ruled six years. After whom, Abatthan(7) of 
Bethlehem, of the tribe of Juda, ruled seven years. Then Ebron(8) the Zebulonite, eight years. Then Eglom 

of Ephraim, eight years. Some add to the seven years of Abatthan the eight of Ebrom.(9) And after him, the 
people having again transgressed, came under the power of the foreigners, the Philistines, for forty years. 
But on their returning [to God], they were led by Samson, of the tribe of Dan, who conquered the foreigners in 
battle. He ruled twenty years. And after him, there being no governor, Eli the priest judged the people for 
forty years. He was succeeded by Samuel the prophet; contemporaneously with whom Saul reigned, who 
held sway for twenty-seven years. He anointed David. Samuel died two years before Saul, while Abimelech 
was high priest. He anointed Saul as king, who was the first that bore regal sway over Israel after the judges; 
the whole duration of whom, down to Saul, was four hundred and sixty-three years and seven months. 
Then in the first book of Kings there are twenty years of Saul, during which he reigned after he was 
renovated. And after the death of Saul, David the son of Jesse, of the tribe of Judah, reigned next in Hebron, 
forty years, as is contained in the second book of Kings. And Abiatharthe son of Abimelech, of the kindred 
of Eli, was high priest. In his time Gad and Nathan prophesied. From Joshua the son of Nun, then, till David 
received the kingdom, there intervene, according to some, four hundred and fifty years. But, as the 
chronology set forth shows, five hundred and twenty-three years and seven months are comprehended till 
the death of David. 

And after this Solomon the son of David reigned forty years. Under him Nathan continued to prophesy, who 
also exhorted him respecting the building of the temple. Achias of Shilo also prophesied. And both the 
kings, David and Solomon, were prophets. And Sadoc the high priest was the first who ministered in the 
temple which Solomon built, being the eighth from Aaron, the first high priest. From Moses, then, to the age of 
Solomon, as some say, are five hundred and ninety-five years, and as others, five hundred and 
seventy-six. 

And if you count, along with the four hundred and fifty years from Joshua to David, the forty years of the rule 
of Moses, and the other eighty years of Moses's life previous to the exodus of the Hebrews from Egypt, you 
will make up the sum in all of six hundred and ten years. But our chronology will run more correctly, if to the 
five hundred and twenty-three years and seven months till the death of David, you add the hundred and 
twenty years of Moses and the forty years of Solomon. For you will make up in all, down to the death of 
Solomon, six hundred and eighty-three years and seven months. 

Hiram gave his daughter to Solomon about the time of the arrival of Menelaus in Phoenicia, after the capture 
of Troy, as is said by Menan-der of Pergamus, and Laetus in The Phoenicia. And after Solomon, Roboam 
his son reigned for seventeen years; and Abimelech the son of Sadoc was high priest. In his reign, the 
kingdom being divided, Jeroboam, of the tribe of Ephraim, the servant of Solomon, reigned in Samaria; and 
Achias the Shilonite continued to prophesy; also Samaeas the son of Amame, and he who came from 
Judah to Jeroboam, (10) and prophesied against the altar. After him his son Abijam, twenty-three years; and 
likewise his son Asaman.(1) The last, in his old age, was diseased in his feet; and in his reign prophesied 
Jehu the son of Ananias. 

After him Jehosaphat his son reigned twenty-five years. (2) In his reign prophesied Ellas the Thesbite, and 
Michaeas the son of Jebia, and Abdias the son of Ananias. And in the time of Michaeas there was also the 
false prophet Zedekias, the son of Chonaan. These were followed by the reign of Joram the son of 
Jehosaphat, for eight years; during whose time prophesied Ellas; and after Ellas, Elisaeus the son of 
Saphat. In his reign the people in Samaria ate doves' dung and their own children. The period of 
Jehosaphat extends from the close of the third book of Kings to the fourth. And in the reign of Joram, Ellas 
was translated, and Elisaeus the son of Saphat commenced prophesying, and prophesied for six years, 
being forty years old. 

Then Ochozias reigned a year. In his time Elisaeus continued to prophesy, and along with him 
Adadonaeus.(3) After him the mother of Ozias,(4) Gotholia,(5) reigned eight(6) years, having slain the 
children of her brother.(7) For she was of the family of Ahab. But the sister of Ozias, Josabaea, stole Joas 
the son of Ozias, and invested him afterwards with the kingdom. And in the time of this Gotholia, Elisaeus 
was still prophesying. And after her reigned, as I said before, Joash, rescued by Josabaea the wife of 
Jodae the high priest, and lived in all forty years. 

There are comprised, then, from Solomon to the death of Elisaeus the prophet, as some say, one hundred 
and five years; according to others, one hundred and two; and, as the chronology before us shows, from the 
reign of Solomon an hundred and eighty-one. 

Now from the Trojan war to the birth of Homer, according to Philochorus, a hundred and eighty years 
elapsed; and he was posterior to the Ionic migration. But Aristarchus, in the Archilochian Memoirs, says that 
he lived during the Ionic migration, which took place a hundred and twenty years after the siege of Troy. But 
Apollodorus alleges it was an hundred and twenty years after the Ionic migration, while Agesilaus son of 
Doryssaeus was king of the Lacedaemonians: so that he brings Lycurgus the legislator, while still a young 
man, near him. Euthymenes, in the Chronicles, says that he flourished contemporaneously with Hesiod, in 
the time of Acastus, and was born in Chios about the four hundredth year after the capture of Troy. And 
Archimachus, in the third book of his Euboean History), is of this opinion. So that both he and Hesiod were 

later than Elisaeus, the prophet. And if you choose to follow the grammarian Crates, and say that Homer 
was born about the time of the expedition of the Heraclidae, eighty years after the taking of Troy, he will be 
found to be later again than Solomon, in whose days occurred the arrival of Menelaus in Phenicia, as was 
said above. Eratosthenes says that Homer's age was two hundred years after the capture of Troy. Further, 
Theopompus, in the forty-third book of the .Philippics, relates that Homer was born five hundred years after 
the war at Troy. And Euphorion, in his book about the Aleuades, maintains that he was born in the time of 
Gyges, who began to reign in the eighteenth Olympiad, who, also he says, was the first that was called tyrant 
<greek>turannos</greek>. Sosibius Lacon, again, in his Record of Dates, brings Homer down to the eighth 
year of the reign of Charillus the son of Polydectus. Charillus reigned for sixty-four years, after whom the son 
of Nicander reigned thirty-nine years. In his thirty-fourth year it is said that the first Olympiad was instituted; so 
that Homer was ninety years before the introduction of the Olympic games. 

After Joas, Amasias his son reigned as his successor thirty-nine years. He in like manner was succeeded 
by his son Ozias, who reigned for fifty-two years, and died a leper. And in his time prophesied Amos, and 
Isaiah his son, (8) and Hosea the son of Beeri, and Jonas the son of Amathi, who was of Gethchober, who 
preached to the Ninevites, and passed through the whale's belly. 

Then Jonathan the son of Ozias reigned for sixteen years. In his time Esaias still prophesied, and Hosea, 
and Michaeas the Morasthite, and Joel the son of Bethuel. 

Next in succession was his son Ahaz, who reigned for sixteen years. In his time, in the fifteenth year, Israel 
was carried away to Babylon. And Salmanasar the king of the Assyrians carried away the people of 
Samaria into the country of the Modes and to Babylon. 

Again Ahaz was succeeded by Osee,(9) who reigned for eight years. Then followed Hezekiah, for 
twenty-nine years. For his sanctity, when he had approached his end, God, by Isaiah, allowed him to live for 
other fifteen years, giving as a sign the going back of the sun. Up to his times Esaias, Hosea, and Micah 
continued prophesying. 

And these are said to have lived after the age of Lycurgus, the legislator of the Lacedaemonians. For 
Dieuchidas, in the fourth book of the Megarics, places the era of Lycurgus about the two hundred and 
ninetieth year after the capture of Troy. 

After Hezekiah, his son Manasses reigned for fifty-five years. Then his son Amos for two years. After him 
reigned his son Josias, distinguished for his observance of the law, for thirty-one years. He "laid the 
carcases of men upon the carcases of the idols," as is written in the book of Leviticus. (1) In his reign, in the 
eighteenth year, the passover was celebrated, not having been kept from the days of Samuel in the 
intervening period. (2) Then Chelkias the priest, the father of the prophet Jeremiah, having fallen in with the 
book of the law, that had been laid up in the temple, read it and died. (3) And in his days Olda(4) prohesied, 
and Sophonias,(5) and Jeremiah. And in the days of Jeremiah was Ananias the son of Azor,(6) the false 
prophet. He(7) having disobeyed Jeremiah the prophet, was slain by Pharaoh Necho king of Egypt at the 
river Euphrates, having encountered the latter, who was marching on the Assyrians. 
Josiah was succeeded by Jechoniah, called also Joachas,(8) his son, who reigned three months and ten 
days. Necho king of Egypt bound him and led him to Egypt, after making his brother Joachim king in his 
stead, who continued his tributary for eleven years. After him his namesake(9) Joakim reigned for three 
months. Then Zedekiah reigned for eleven years; and up to his time Jeremiah continued to prophesy. 
Along with him Ezekiel(IO) the son of Buzi, and Urias(11) the son of Samaeus, and Ambacum(12) 
prophesied. Here end the Hebrew kings. 

There are then from the birth of Moses till this captivity nine hundred and seventy-two years; but according to 
strict chronological accuracy, one thousand and eighty-five, six months, ten days. From the reign of David to 
the captivity by the Chaldeans, four hundred and fifty-two years and six months; but as the accuracy we have 
observed in reference to dates makes out, four hundred and eighty-two and six months ten days. 
And in the twelfth year of the reign of Zedekiah, forty years before the supremacy of the Persians, 
Nebuchodonosor made war against the Phoenicians and the Jews, as Berosus asserts in his Chaldaean 
Histories. And Joabas,(13) writing about the Assyrians, acknowledges that he had received the history from 
Berosus, and testifies to his accuracy. Nebuchodonosor, therefore, having put out the eyes of Zedekiah, 
took him away to Babylon, and transported the whole people (the captivity lasted seventy years), with the 
exception of a few who fled to Egypt. 

Jeremiah and Ambacum were still prophesying in the flme of Zedekiah. In the fifth year of his reign Ezekiel 
prophesied at Babylon; after him Nahum, then Daniel. After him, again, Haggai and Zechariah prophesied 
in the time of Darius the First for two years; and then the angel among the twelve. (14) After Haggai and 
Zechariah, Nehemiah, the chief cup-bearer of Artaxerxes, the son of Acheli the Israelite, built the city of 
Jerusalem and restored the temple. During the captivity lived Esther and Mordecai, whose book is still 
extant, as also that of the Maccabees. During this captivity Mishael, Ananias, and Azarias, refusing to 
worship the image, and being thrown into a furnace of fire, were saved by the appearance of an angel. At 
that time, on account of the serpent,(15) Daniel was thrown into the den of lions; but being preserved through 

the providence of God by Ambacub, he is restored on the seventh day. At this period, too, occurred the sign 
of Jona; and Tobias, through the assistance of the angel Raphael, married Sarah, the demon having killed 
her seven first suitors; and after the marriage of Tobias, his father Tobit recovered his sight. At that time 
Zorobabel, having by his wisdom overcome his opponents, and obtained leave from Darius for the 
rebuilding of Jerusalem, returned with Esdras to his native land; and by him the redemption of the people 
and the revisal and restoration of the inspired oracles were effected; and the passover of deliverance 
celebrated, and marriage with aliens dissolved. 

Cyrus had, by proclamation, previously enjoined the restoration of the Hebrews. And his promise being 
accomplished in the time of Darius, the feast of the dedication was held, as also the feast of tabernacles. 
There were in all, taking in the duration of the captivity down to the restoration of the people, from the birth of 
Moses, one thousand one hundred and fifty-five years, six months, and ten days; and from the reign of 
David, according to some, four hundred and fifty-two; more correctly, five hundred and seventy-two years, 
six months, and ten days. 

From the captivity at Babylon, which took place in the time of Jeremiah the prophet, was fulfilled what was 
spoken by Daniel the prophet as follows: "Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon thy 
holy city, to finish the transgression, and to seal sins, and to wipe out and make reconciliation for iniquity, 
and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal the vision and the prophet, and to anoint the Holy of 
Holies. Know therefore, and understand, that from the going forth of the word commanding an answer to be 
given, and Jerusalem to be built, to Christ the Prince, are seven weeks and sixty-two weeks; and the street 
shall be again built, and the wall; and the times shall be expended. And after the sixty-two weeks the 
anointing shall be overthrown, and judgment shall not be in him; and he shall destroy the city and the 
sanctuary along with the coming Prince. And they shall be destroyed in a flood, and to the end of the war 
shall be cut off by: desolations. And he shall confirm the covenant with many for one week; and in the middle 
of the week the sacrifice and oblation shall be taken away; and in the holy place shall be the abomination of 
desolations, and until the consummation of time shall the consummation be assigned for desolation. And in 
the midst of the week shall he make the incense of sacrifice cease, and of the wing of destruction, even till 
the consummation, like the destruction of the oblation. "(1) That the temple accordingly was I built in seven 
weeks, is evident; for it is written in Esdras. And thus Christ became King of the Jews, reigning in Jerusalem 
in the fulfilment of the seven weeks. And in the sixty and two weeks the whole of Judaea was quiet, and 
without wars. And Christ our Lord, "the Holy of Holies," having come and fulfilled the vision and the 
prophecy, was anointed in His flesh by the Holy Spirit of His Father. In those "sixty and two weeks," as the 
prophet said, and "in the one week," was He Lord. The half of the week Nero held sway, and in the holy city 
Jerusalem placed the abomination; and in the half of the week he was taken away, and Otho, and Galba, 
and Vitellius. And Vespasian rose to the supreme power, and destroyed Jerusalem, and desolated the 
holy place. And that such are the facts of the case, is clear to him that is able to understand, as the prophet 
said. 

On the completion, then, of the eleventh year, in the beginning of the following, in the reign of Joachim, 
occurred the carrying away captive to Babylon by Nabuchodonosorthe king, in the seventh year of his 
reign over the Assyrians, in the second year of the reign of Vaphres over the Egyptians, in the archonship of 
Philip at Athens, in the first year of the forty-eighth Olympiad. The captivity lasted for seventy years, and 
ended in the second year of Darius Hystaspes, who had become king of the Persians, Assyrians, and 
Egyptians; in whose reign, as I said above, Haggai and Zechariah and the angel of the twelve prophesied. 
And the high priest was Joshua the son of Josedec. And in the second year of the reign of Darius, who, 
Herodotus says, destroyed the power of the Magi, Zorobabel the son of Salathiel was despatched to raise 
and adorn the temple at Jerusalem. 

The times of the Persians are accordingly summed up thus: Cyrus reigned thirty years; Cambyses, 
nineteen; Darius, forty-six; Xerxes, twenty-six; Artaxerxes, forty-one; Darius, eight; Artaxerxes, forty-two; 
Ochus or Arses, three. The sum total of the years of the Persian monarchy is two hundred and thirty-five 
years. 

Alexander of Macedon, having despatched this Darius, during this period, began to reign. Similarly, 
therefore, the times of the Macedonian kings are thus computed: Alexander, eighteen years; Ptolemy the 
son of Lagus, forty years; Ptolemy Philadelphus, twenty-seven years; then Euergetes, five-and-twenty 
years; then Philopator, seventeen years; then Epiphanes, four-and-twenty years; he was succeeded by 
Philometer, who reigned five-and-thirty years; after him Physcon, twenty-nine years; then Lathurus, thirty-six 
years; then he that was surnamed I Dionysus, twenty-nine years; and last Cleopatra reigned twenty-two 
years. And after her was the reign of the Cappadocians for eighteen days. 

Accordingly the period embraced by the Macedonian kings is, in all, three hundred and twelve years and 
eighteen days. 

Therefore those who prophesied in the time of Darius Hystaspes, about the second year of his 
reign,-Haggai, and Zechariah, and the angel of the twelve, who prophesied about the firstyear of the 

forty-eighth Olympiad, -are demonstrated to be older than Pythagoras, who is said to have lived in the 
sixty-second Olympiad, and than Thales, the oldest of the wise men of the Greeks, who lived about the 
fiftieth Olympiad. Those wise men that are classed with Thales were then contemporaneous, as Andron 
says in the Tripos. For Heraclitus being posterior to Pythagoras, mentions him in his book. Whence 
indisputably the first Olympiad, which was demonstrated to be four hundred and seven years later than the 
Trojan war, is found to be prior to the age of the above-mentioned prophets, together with those called the 
seven wise men. Accordingly it is easy to perceive that Solomon, who lived in the time of Menelaus (who 
was during the Trojan war), was earlier by many years than the wise men among the Greeks. And how many 
years Moses preceded him we showed, in what we said above. And Alexander, surnamed Polyhistor, in his 
work on the Jews, has transcribed some letters of Solomon to Vaphres king of Egypt, and to the king of the 
Phoenicians at Tyre, and theirs to Solomon; in which it is shown that Vaphres sent eighty thousand Egyptian 
men to him for the building of the temple, and the other as many, along with a Tyrian artificer, the son of a 
Jewish mother, of the tribe of Dan, (1) as is there written, of the name of Hyperon.(2) Further, Onomacritus the 
Athenian, who is said to have been the author of the poems ascribed to Orpheus, is ascertained to have 
lived in the reign of the Pisistratidae, about the fiftieth Olympiad. And Orpheus, who sailed with Hercules, 
was the pupil of Musaeus. Amphion precedes the Trojan war by two generations. And Demodocus and 
Phemius were posterior to the capture of Troy; for they were famed for playing on the lyre, the former among 
the Phaeacians, and the latter among the suitors. And the Grades ascribed to Musaeus are said to be the 
production of Onomacritus, and the Crateres of Orpheus the production of Zopyrus of Heraclea, and The 
Descent to Hades that of Prodicus of Samos. Ion of Chios relates in the Triagmi,(3) that Pythagoras 
ascribed certain works [of his own] to Orpheus. Epigenes, in his book respecting The Poetry attributed to 
Orpheus, says that The Descent to Hades and the Sacred Discourse were the production of Cecrops the 
Pythagorean; and the Peplus and the Physics of Brontinus. Some also make Terpander out ancient. 
Hellanicus, accordingly, relates that he lived in the time of Midas: but Phanias, who places Lesches the 
Lesbian before Terpander, makes Terpander younger than Archilochus, and relates that Lesches 
contended with Arctinus, and gained the victory. Xanthus the Lydian says that he lived about the eighteenth 
Olympiad; as also Dionysius says that Thasus was built about the fifteenth Olympiad: so that it is clear that 
Archilochus was already known after the twentieth Olympiad. He accordingly relates the destruction of 
Magnetos as having recently taken place. Simonides is assigned to the time of Archilochus. Callinns is not 
much older; for Archilochus refers to Magnetos as destroyed, while the latter refers to it as flourishing. 
Eumelus of Corinth being older, is said to have met Archias, who founded Syracuse. 

We were induced to mention these things, because the poets of the epic cycle are placed amongst those of 
most remote antiquity. Already, too, among the Greeks, many diviners are said to have made their 
appearance, as the Bacides, one a Boeotian, the other an Arcadian, who uttered many predictions to many. 
By the counsel of Amphiletus the Athenian, (5) who showed the time for the onset, Pisistratus, too, 
strengthened his government. For we may pass over in silence Cometes of Crete, Cinyras of Cyprus, 
Admetus the Thessalian, Aristaeas the Cyrenian, Amphiaraus the Athenian, Timoxeus(6) the Corcyraean, 
Demaenetus the Phocian, Epigenes the Thespian, Nicias the Carystian, Aristo the Thessalian, Dionysius 
the Carthaginian, Cleophon the Corinthian, Hippo the daughter of Chiro, and Boeo, and Manto, and the host 
of Sibyls, the Samian, the Colophonian, the Cumaean, the Erythraean, the Pythian, (7) the Taraxandrian, the 
Macetian, the Thessalian, and the Thesprotian. And Calchas again, and Mopsus, who lived during the 
Trojan war. Mopsus, however, was older, having sailed along with the Argonants. And it is said that Battus 
the Cyrenian composed what is called the Divination of Mop-sus. Dorotheus in the first Pandect relates that 
Mopsus was the disciple of Alcyon and Corone. And Pythagoras the Great always applied his mind to 
prognostication, and Abaris the Hyperborean, and Aristaeas the Proconnesian, and Epimenides the 
Cretan, who came to Sparta, and Zoroaster the Mode, and Empedocles of Agrigentum, and Phormion the 
Lacedaemonian; Polyaratus, too, of Thasus, and Empedotimus of Syracuse; and in addition to these, 
Socrates the Athenian in particular. "For," he says in the Theages, "I am attended by a supernatural 
intimation, which has been assigned me from a child by divine appointment. This is a voice which, when it 
comes, prevents What I am about to do, but exhorts never."(8) And Execestus, the tyrant of the Phocians, 
wore two enchanted rings, and by the sound which they uttered one against the other determined the proper 
times for actions. But he died, nevertheless, treacherously murdered, although warned beforehand by the 
sound, as Aristotle says in the Polity of the Phocians. 

Of those, too, who at one time lived as men among the Egyptians, but were constituted gods by human 
opinion, were Hermes the Theban, and Asclepius of Memphis; Tireseus and Manto, again, at Thebes, as 
Euripides says. Helenus, too, and Laocoon, and OEnone, and Crenus in Ilium. For Crenus, one of the 
Heraclidae, is said to have been a noted prophet. Another was Jamus in Elis, from whom came the 
Jamidae; and Polyidus at Argos and Megara, who is mentioned by the tragedy. Why enumerate Telemus, 
who, being a prophet of the Cyclops, predicted to Polyphemus the events of Ulysses' wandering; or 
Onomacritus at Athens; or Amphiaraus, who campaigned with the seven at Thebes, and is reported to be a 

generation older than the capture of Troy; or Theoclymenus in Cephalonia, orTelmisus in Caria, orGaleus 
in Sicily ? 

There are others, too, besides these: Idmon, who was with the Argonauts, Phemonoe of Delphi, Mopsus the 
son of Apollo and Manto in Pamphylia, and Amphilochus the son of Amphiaraus in Cilicia, Alcmaeon 
among the Acarnanians, Anias in Delos, Aristander of Telmessus, who was along with Alexander. 
Philochorus also relates in the first book of the work. On Divination, that Orpheus was a seer. And 
Theopompus, and Ephorus, and Timaeus, write of a seer called Orthagoras; as the Samian Pythocles in 
the fourth book of The Italics writes of Caius Julius Nepos. 

But some of these "thieves and robbers," as the Scripture says, predicted for the most part from observation 
and probabilities, as physicians and soothsayers judge from natural signs; and others were excited by 
demons, or were disturbed by waters, and fumigations, and air of a peculiar kind. But among the Hebrews 
the prophets were moved by the power and inspiration of God. Before the law, Adam spoke prophetically in 
respect to the woman, and the naming of the creatures; Noah preached repentance;(1) Abraham, Isaac, 
and Jacob gave many clear utterances respecting future and present things. Contemporaneous with the 
law, Moses and Aaron; and after these prophesied Jesus the son of Nave, Samuel, Gad, Nathan, Achias, 
Samaeas, Jehu, Ellas, Michaeas, Abdiu, Elisaeus, Abbadonai, Amos, Esaias, Osee, Jonas, Joel, 
Jeremias, Sophonias the son of Buzi, Ezekiel, Urias, Ambacum, Naum, Daniel, Misael, who wrote the 
syllogisms, Aggai, Zacharias, and the angel among the twelve. These are, in all, five-and-thirty prophets. 
And of women (for these too prophesied), Sara, and Rebecca, and Mariam, and Debbora, and Olda, i.e., 
Huldah. 

Then within the same period John prophesied till the baptism of salvation; (2) and after the birth of Christ, 
Anna and Simeon. (3) For Zacaharias, John's father, is said in the Gospels to have prophesied before his 
son. Let us then draw up the chronology of the Greeks from Moses. 

From the birth of Moses to the exodus of the Jews from Egypt, eighty years j and the period down to his 
death, other forty years. The exodus took place in the time of Inachus, before the wandering of Sothis,(4) 
Moses having gone forth from Egypt three hundred and forty-five years before. From the rule of Moses, and 
from Inachus to the flood of Deucalion, I mean the second inundaflon, and to the conflagraflon of Phaethon, 
which events happened in the flme of Crotopus, forty generaflons are enumerated (three generations being 
reckoned for a century). From the flood to the conflagration of Ida, and the discovery of iron, and the Idaean 
Dactyls, are seventy-three years, according to Thrasyllus; and from the conflagration of Ida to the rape of 
Ganymede, sixty-flve years. From this to the expedition of Perseus, when Glaucus established the Isthmian 
games in honour of Melicerta, fifteen years; and from the expediflon of Perseus to the building of Troy, 
thirty-four years. From this to the voyage of the Argo, sixty-four years. From this to Theseus and the Minotaur, 
thirty-two years; then to the seven at Thebes, ten years. And to the Olympic contest, which Hercules 
instituted in honour of Pelops, three years; and to the expedition of the Amazons against Athens, and the 
rape of Helen by Theseus, nine years. From this to the deificaflon of Hercules, eleven years; then to the 
rape of Helen by Alexander, four years. From the taking of Troy to the descent of AEneas and the founding 
of Lavinium, ten years; and to the government of Ascanius, eight years; and to the descent of the 
Heraclidae, sixty-one years; and to the Olympiad of Iphitus, three hundred and thirty-eight years. 
Eratosthenes thus sets down the dates: "From the capture of Troy to the descent of the Heraclidae, eighty 
years. From this to the founding of Ionia, sixty years; and the period following to the protectorate of Lycurgus, 
a hundred and fifty-nine years; and to the first year of the first Olympiad, a hundred and eight years. From 
which Olympiad to the invasion of Xerxes, two hundred and ninety-seven years; from which to the beginning 
of the Peloponnesian war, forty-eight years; and to its close, and the defeat of the Athenians, twenty-seven 
years; and to the battle at Leuctra, thirty-four years; after which to the death of Philip, thirty-five years. And 
after this to the decease of Alexander, twelve years." 

Again, from the first Olympiad, some say, to the building of Rome, are comprehended twenty-four years; 
and after this to the expulsion of the kings,' when consuls were created, about two hundred and forty-three 
years. And from the taking of Babylon to the death of Alexander, a hundred and eighty-six years. From this 
to the victory of Augustus, when Antony killed himself at Alexandria, two hundred and ninety-four years, when 
Augustus was made consul for the fourth flme. And from this flme to the games which Domiflan instituted at 
Rome, are a hundred and fourteen years; and from the first games to the death of Commodus, a hundred 
and eleven years. 

There are some that from Cecrops to Alexander of Macedon reckon a thousand eight hundred and 
twenty-eight years; and from Demophon, a thousand two hundred and fifty; and from the taking of Troy to the 
expediflon of the Heraclidae, a hundred and twenty or a hundred and eighty years. From this to the 
archonship of Evaenetus at Athens, in whose flme Alexander is said to have marched into Asia, according 
to Phanias, are seven hundred and fifty years; according to Ephorus, seven hundred and thirty-five; 
according to Timaeus and Clitarchus, eight hundred and twenty; according to Eratosthenes, seven hundred 
and seventy-four. As also Duris, from the taking of Troy to the march of Alexander into Asia, a thousand 

years; and from that to the archonship of Hegesias, in whose time Alexander died eleven years. From this 

date to the reign of Germanicus Claudius Caesar, three hundred and sixty-five years. From which time the 

years summed up to the death of Commodus are manifest. 

After the Grecian period, and in accordance with the dates, as computed by the barbarians, very large 

intervals are to be assigned. 

From Adam to the deluge are comprised two thousand one hundred and forty-eight years, four days. From 

Shem to Abraham, a thousand two hundred and fifty years. From Isaac to the division of the land, six 

hundred and sixteen years. Then from the judges to Samuel, four hundred and sixty-three years, seven 

months. And after the judges there were five hundred and seventy-two years, six months, ten days of kings. 

After which periods, there were two hundred and thirty-five years of the Persian monarchy. Then of the 

Macedonian, till the death of Antony, three hundred and twelve years and eighteen days. After which time, 

the empire of the Romans, till the death of Commodus, lasted for two hundred and twenty-two years. 

Then, from the seventy years' captivity, and the restoration of the people into their own land to the captivity in 

the time of Vespasian, are comprised four hundred and ten years: Finally, from Vespasian to the death of 

Commodus, there are ascertained to be one hundred and twenty-one years, six months, and twenty-four 

days. 

Demetrius, in his book. On the Kings in Judaea, says that the tribes of Juda, Benjamin, and Levi were not 

taken captive by Sennacherim; but that there were from this captivity to the last, which Nabuchodonosor 

made out of Jerusalem, a hundred and twenty-eight years and six months; and from the time that the ten 

tribes were carried captive from Samaria till Ptolemy the Fourth, were five hundred and seventy-three years, 

nine months; and from the time that the captivity from Jerusalem took place, three hundred and thirty-eight 

years and three months. 

Philo himself set down the kings differently from Demetrius. 

Besides, Eupolemus, in a similar work, says that all the years from Adam to the fifth year of Ptolemy 

Demetrius, who reigned twelve years in Egypt, when added, amount to five thousand a hundred and 

forty-nine; and from the time that Moses brought out the Jews from Egypt to the above-mentioned date, there 

are, in all, two thousand five hundred and eighty years. And from this time till the consulship in Rome of 

Caius Domitian and Casian, a hundred and twenty years are computed. 

Euphorus and many other historians say that there are seventy-five nations and tongues, in consequence of 

hearing the statement made by Moses: "All the souls that sprang from Jacob, which went down into Egypt, 

were seventy-five. "(2) According to the true reckoning, there appear to be seventy-two generic dialects, as 

our Scriptures hand down. The rest of the vulgar tongues are formed by the blending of two, or three, or 

more dialects. A dialect is a mode of speech which exhibits a character peculiar to a locality, or a mode of 

speech which exhibits a character peculiar or common to a race. The Greeks say, that among them are five 

dialects-the Attic, Ionic, Doric, Aeolic, and the fifth the Common; and that the languages of the barbarians, 

which are innumerable, are not called dialects, but tongues. 

Plato attributes a dialect also to the gods, forming this conjecture mainly from dreams and oracles, and 

especially from demoniacs, who do not speak their own language or dialect, but that of the demons who 

have taken possession of them. He thinks also that the irrational creatures have dialects, which those that 

belong to the same genus understand. (1) Accordingly, when an elephant falls into the mud and bellows out 

any other one that is at hand, on seeing what has happened, shortly turns, and brings with him a herd of 

elephants, and saves the one that has fallen in. It is said also in Libya, that a scorpion, if it does not succeed 

in stinging a man, goes away and returns with several more; and that, hanging on one to the other like a 

chain they make in this way the attempt to succeed in their cunning design. 

The irrational creatures do not make use of an obscure intimation, or hint their meaning by assuming a 

particular attitude, but, as I think, by a dialect of their own. (1) And some others say, that if a fish which has 

been taken escape by breaking the line, no fish of the same kind will be caught in the same place that day. 

But the first and generic barbarous dialects have terms by nature, since also men confess that prayers 

uttered in a barbarian tongue are more powerful. And Plato, in the Cratylus, when wishing to interpret 

<greek>pur</greek> (fire), says that it is a barbaric term. He testifies, accordingly, that the Phrygians use this 

term with a slight deviation. 

And nothing, in my opinion, after these details, need stand in the way of stating the periods of the Roman 

emperors, in order to the demonstration of the Saviour's birth. Augustus, forty-three years; Tiberius, 

twenty-two years; Caius, four years; Claudius, fourteen years; Nero, fourteen years; Galba, one year; 

Vespasian, ten years; Titus, three years; Domitian, fifteen years; Nerva, one year; Trajan, nineteen years; 

Adrian, twenty-one years; Antoninus, twenty-one years; likewise again, Antoninus and Commodus, thirty-two. 

In all, from Augustus to Commodus, are two hundred and twenty-two years; and from Adam to the death of 

Commodus, five thousand seven hundred and eighty-four years, two months, twelve days. 

Some set down the dates of the Roman emperors thus:- 

Caius Julius Caesar, three years, four months, five days; after him Augustus reigned forty-six years, four 

months, one day. Then Tiberius, twenty-six years, six months, nineteen days. He was succeeded by Caius 
Caesar, who reigned three years, ten months, eight days; and be by Claudius for thirteen years, eight 
months, twenty-eight days. Nero reigned thirteen years, eight months, twenty-eight days; Galba, seven 
months and six days; Otho, five months, one day; Vitellius, seven months, one day; Vespasian, eleven 
years, eleven months, twenty-two days; Titus, two years, two months; Domitian, fifteen years, eight months, 
five days; Nerva, one year, four months, ten days; Trajan, nineteen years, seven months, ten days; Adrian, 
twenty years, ten months, twenty-eight days. Antoninus, twenty-two years, three months, and seven days; 
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, nineteen years, eleven days; Commodus, twelve years, nine months, fourteen 
days. 

From Julius Caesar, therefore, to the death of Commodus, are two hundred and thirty-six years, six months. 
And the whole from Romulus, who founded Rome, till the death of Commodus, amounts to nine hundred and 
fifty-three years, six months. And our Lord was born in the twenty-eighth year, when first the census was 
ordered to be taken in the reign of Augustus. And to prove that this is true, it is written in the Gospel by Luke 
as follows: "And in the fifteenth year, in the reign of Tiberius Caesar, the word of the Lord came to John, the 
son of Zacharias." And again in the same book: "And Jesus was coming to His baptism, being about thirty 
years old, "(2) and so on. And that it was necessary for Him to preach only a year, this also is written:(3) "He 
hath sent Me to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord." This both the prophet spake, and the Gospel. 
Accordingly, in fifteen years of Tiberius and fifteen years of Augustus; so were completed the thirty years till 
the time He suffered. And from the time that He suffered till the destruction of Jerusalem are forty-two years 
and three months; and from the destruction of Jerusalem to the death of Commodus, a hundred and 
twenty-eight years, ten months, and three days. From the birth of Christ, therefore, to the death of Commodus 
are, in all, a hundred and ninety-four years, one month, thirteen days. And there are those who have 
determined not only the year of our Lord's birth, but also the day; and they say that it took place in the 
twenty-eighth year of Augustus, and in the twenty-fifth day of Pachon. And the followers of Basilides hold the 
day of his baptism as a festival, spending the night before in readings. 

And they say that it was the fifteenth year of Tiberius Caesar, the fifteenth day of the month Tubi; and some 
that it was the eleventh of the same month. And treating of His passion, with very great accuracy, some say 
that it took place in the sixteenth year of Tiberius, on the twenty-fifth of Phamenoth; and others the twenty-fifth 
of Pharmuthi and others say that on the nineteenth of Pharmuthi the Saviour suffered. Further, others say that 
He was born on the twenty-fourth or twenty-fifth of Pharmuthi. (4) 

We have still to add to our chronology the following,-l mean the days which Daniel indicates from the 
desolation of Jerusalem, the seven years and seven months of the reign of Vespasian. For the two years 
are added to the seventeen months and eighteen days of Otho, and Galba, and Vitellius; and the result is 
three years and six months, which is "the half of the week," as Daniel the prophet said. For he said that there 
were two thousand three hundred days from the time that the abomination of Nero stood in the holy city, till its 
destruction. For thus the declaration, which is subjoined, shows: "How long shall be the vision, the sacrifice 
taken away, the abomination of desolation, which is given, and the power and the holy place shall be 
trodden under foot? And he said to him. Till the evening and morning, two thousand three hundred days, and 
the holy place shall be taken away."(1) 

These two thousand three hundred days, then, make six years four months, during the half of which Nero 
held sway, and it was half a week; and for a half, Vespasian with Otho, Galba, and Vitellius reigned. And on 
this account Daniel says, "Blessed is he that cometh to the thousand three hundred and thirty-five days. "(2) 
For up to these days was war, and after them it ceased. And this number is demonstrated from a 
subsequent chapter, which is as follows: "And from the time of the change of continuation, and of the giving 
of the abomination of desolation, there shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety days. Blessed is he that 
waiteth, and cometh to the thousand three hundred and thirty-five days. "(3) 

Flavius Josephus the Jew, who composed the history of the Jews, computing the periods, says that from 
Moses to David were five hundred and eighty-five years; from David to the second year of Vespasian, a 
thousand one hundred and seventy-nine; then from that to the tenth year of Antoninus, seventy-seven. So 
that from Moses to the tenth year of Antoninus there are, in all, two thousand one hundred and thirty-three 
years. 

Of others, counting from Inachus and Moses to the death of Commodus, some say there were three 
thousand one hundred and forty-two years; and others, two thousand eight hundred and thirty-one years. 
And in the Gospel according to Matthew, the genealogy which begins with Abraham is continued down to 
Mary the mother of the Lord. "For," it is said, (4) "from Abraham to David are fourteen generations; and from 
David to the carrying away into Babylon are fourteen generations; and from the carrying away into Babylon 
till Christ are likewise other fourteen generations, "-three mystic intervals completed in six weeks. (5) 

CHAP. XXII. -ON THE GREEK TRANSLATION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

So much for the details respecting dates, as stated variously by many, and as set down by us. 
It is said that the Scriptures both of the law and of the prophets were translated from the dialect of the 
Hebrews into the Greek language in the reign of Ptolemy the son of Lagos, or, according to others, of 
Ptolemy surnamed Philadelphus; Demetrius Phalereus bringing to this task the greatest earnestness, and 
employing painstaking accuracy on the materials for the translation. For the Macedonians being still in 
possession of Asia, and the king being ambitious of adorning the library he had at Alexandria with all 
writings, desired the people of Jerusalem to translate the prophecies they possessed into the Greek 
dialect. And they being the subjects of the Macedonians, selected from those of highest character among 
them seventy elders, versed in the Scriptures, and skilled in the Greek dialect, and sent them to him with the 
divine books. And each having severally translated each prophetic book, and all the translations being 
compared together, they agreed both in meaning and expression. For it was the counsel of God carried out 
for the benefit of Grecian ears. It was not alien to the inspiration of God, who gave the prophecy, also to 
produce the translation, and make it as it were Greek prophecy. Since the Scriptures having perished in the 
captivity of Nabuchodonosor, Esdras(6) the Levite, the priest, in the time of Artaxerxes king of the Persians, 
having become inspired in the exercise of prophecy restored again the whole of the ancient Scriptures. And 
Aristobulus, in his first book addressed to Philometor, writes in these words: "And Plato followed the laws 
given to us, and had manifestly studied all that is said in them." And before Demetrius there had been 
translated by another, previous to the dominion of Alexander and of the Persians, the account of the 
departure of our countrymen the Hebrews from Egypt, and the fame of all that happened to them, and their 
taking possession of the land, and the account of the whole code of laws; so that it is perfectly clear that the 
above-mentioned philosopher derived a great deal from this source, for he was very learned, as also 
Pythagoras, who transferred many things from our books to his own system of doctrines. And Numenius, the 
Pythagorean philosopher, expressly writes: "For what is Plato, but Moses speaking in Attic Greek?" This 
Moses was a theologian and prophet, and as some say, an interpreter of sacred laws. His family, his 
deeds, and life, are related by the Scriptures themselves, which are worthy of all credit; but have 
nevertheless to be stated by us also as well as we can.(1) 

CHAP.XXIII.-THE AGE, BIRTH,AND LIFE OF MOSES. 

Moses, originally of a Chaldean(2) family, was born in Egypt, his ancestors having migrated from Babylon 
into Egypt on account of a protracted famine. Born in the seventh generation(3) and having received a royal 
education, the following are the circumstances of his history. The Hebrews having increased in Egypt to a 
great multitude, and the king of the country being afraid of insurrection in consequence of their numbers, he 
ordered all the female children born to the Hebrews to be reared (woman being unfit for war), but the male to 
be destroyed, being suspicious of stalwart youth. But the child being goodly, his parents nursed him 
secretly three months, natural affection being too strong for the monarch's cruelty. But at last, dreading lest 
they should be destroyed along with the child, they made a basket of the papyrus that grew there, put the 
child in it, and laid it on the banks of the marshy river. The child's sister stood at a distance, and watched 
what would happen. In this emergency, the king's daughter, who for a long time had not been pregnant, and 
who longed for a child, came that day to the river to bathe and wash herself; and hearing the child cry, she 
ordered it to be brought to her; and touched with pity, sought a nurse. At that moment the child's sister ran up, 
and said that, if she wished, she could procure for her as nurse one of the Hebrew women who had recently 
had a child. And on her consenting and desiring her to do so, she brought the child's mother to be nurse for 
a stipulated fee, as if she had been some other person. Thereupon the queen gave the babe the name of 
Moses, with etymological propriety, from his being drawn out of "the water,"(4)-for the Egyptians call water 
"mou,"-in which he had been exposed to die. For they call Moses one who "who breathed [on being taken] 
from the water." It is clear that previously the parents gave a name to the child on his circumcision; and he 
was called Joachim. And he had a third name in heaven, after his ascension, (5) as the mystics say-Melchi. 
Having reached the proper age, he was taught arithmetic, geometry, poetry, harmony, and besides, 
medicine and music, by those that excelled in these arts among the Egyptians; and besides, the philosophy 
which is conveyed by symbols, which they point out in the hieroglyphical inscriptions. The rest of the usual 
course of instruction, Greeks taught him in Egypt as a royal child, as Philo says in his life of Moses. He 
learned, besides, the literature of the Egyptians, and the knowledge of the heavenly bodies from the 
Chaldeans and the Egyptians; whence in the Acts(6) he is said "to have been instructed in all the wisdom of 
the Egyptians." And Eupolemus, in his book On the Kings in Judea, says that "Moses was the first wise man, 
and the first that imparted grammar to the Jews, that the Phoenicians received it from the Jews, and the 
Greeks from the Phoenicians." And betaking himself to their philosophy, (7) he increased his wisdom, being 
ardently attached to the training received from his kindred and ancestors, till he struck and slew the 
Egyptian who wrongfully attacked the Hebrew. And the mystics say that he slew the Egyptian by a word 
only; as, certainly, Peter in the Acts is related to have slain by speech those who appropriated part of the 

price of the field, and lied. (8) And so Artapanus, in his work On the Jews, relates "that Moses, being shut up 
in custody by Chenephres, king of the Egyptians, on account of the people demanding to be let go from 
Egypt, the prison being opened by night, by the interposition of God, went forth, and reaching the palace, 
stood before the king as he slept, and aroused him; and that the latter, struck with what had taken place, 
bade Moses tell him the name of the God who had sent him; and that he, bending forward, told him in his ear; 
and that the king on hearing it fell speechless, but being supported by Moses, revived again." And 
respecting the education of Moses, we shall find a harmonious account in Ezekiel,(9) the composer of 
Jewish tragedies in the drama entitled The Exodus. He thus writes in the person of Moses:- 

"For, seeing our race abundantly increase. 

His treacherous snares King Pharaoh 'gainst us laid. 

And cruelly in brick-kilns some of us. 

And some, in toilsome works of building, plagued. 

And towns and towers by toil of ill-starred men 

He raised. Then to the Hebrew race proclaimed. 

That each male child should in deep-flowing Nile 

Be drowned. My mother bore and hid me then 

Three months (so afterwards she told). Then took. 

And me adorned with fair array, and placed 

On the deep sedgy marsh by Nilus bank. 

While Miriam, my sister, watched afar. 

Then, with her maids, the daughter of the king. 

To bathe her beauty in the cleansing stream. 

Came near, straight saw, and took and raised me up; 

And knew me for a Hebrew. Miriam 

My sister to the princess ran, and said, 

'Is it thy pleasure, that I haste and find 

A nurse for thee to rear this child 

Among the Hebrew women?' The princess 

Gave assent. The maiden to her mother sped. 

And told, who quick appeared. My own 

Dear mother took me in her arms. Then said 

The daughter of the king: 'Nurse me this child. 

And I will give thee wages.' And my name 

Moses she called, because she drew and saved 

Me from the waters on the river's bank. 

And when the days of childhood had flown by. 

My mother brought me to the palace where 

The princess dwelt, after disclosing all 

About my ancestry, and God's great gifts. 

In boyhood's years I royal nurture had. 

And in all princely exercise was trained. 

As if the princess's very son. But when 

The circling days had run their course, 

I left the royal palace." 

Then, after relating the combat between the Hebrew and the Egyptian, and the burying of the Egyptian in the 

sand, he says of the other contest:- 

"Why strike one feebler than thyself? 

And he rejoined: Who made thee judge o'er us. 

Or ruler? Wilt thou slay me, as thou didst 

Him yesterday? And I m terror said. 

How is this known?" 

Then he fled from Egypt and fed sheep, being thus trained beforehand for pastoral rule. For the shepherd's 
life is a preparation for sovereignty in the case of him who is destined to rule over the peaceful flock of men, 
as the chase for those who are by nature warlike. Thence God brought him to lead the Hebrews. Then the 
Egyptians, oft admonished, continued unwise; and the Hebrews were spectators of the calamities that 
others suffered, learning in safety the power of God. And when the Egyptians gave no heed to the effects of 
that power, through their foolish infatuation disbelieving, then, as is said, "the children knew" what was done; 

and the Hebrews afterwards going forth, departed carrying much spoil from the Egyptians, not for avarice, 
as the cavillers say, for God did not persuade them to covet what belonged to others. But, in the first place, 
they took wages for the services they had rendered the Egyptians all the time; and then in a way 
recompensed the Egyptians, by afflicting them in requital as avaricious, by the abstraction of the booty, as 
they had done the Hebrews by enslaving them. Whether, then, as may be alleged is done in war, they 
thought it proper, in the exercise of the rights of conquerors, to take away the property of their enemies, as 
those who have gained the day do from those who are worsted (and there was just cause of hostilities. The 
Hebrews came as suppliants to the Egyptians on account of famine; and they, reducing their guests to 
slavery, compelled them to serve them after the manner of captives, giving them no recompense); or as in 
peace, took the spoil as wages against the will of those who for a long period had given them no 
recompense, but rather had robbed them, [it is all one.] 

CHAP. XXIV.-HOW MOSES DISCHARGED THE PART OF A MILITARY LEADER. 

Our Moses then is a prophet, a legislator, skilled in military tactics and strategy, a politician, a philosopher. 
And in what sense he was a prophet, shall be by and by told, when we come to treat of prophecy. Tactics 
belong to military command, and the ability to command an army is among the attributes of kingly rule. 
Legislation, again, is also one of the functions of the kingly office, as also judicial authority. 
Of the kingly office one kind is divine,-that which is according to God and His holy Son, by whom both the 
good things which are of the earth, and external and perfect felicity too, are supplied. "For," it is said, "seek 
what is great, and the little things shall be added. "(1) And there is a second kind of royalty, inferior to that 
administration which is purely rational and divine, which brings to the task of government merely the high 
mettle of the soul; after which fashion Hercules ruled the Argives, and Alexander the Macedonians. The third 
kind is what aims after one thing-merely to conquer and overturn; but to turn conquest either to a good or a 
bad purpose, belongs not to such rule. Such was the aim of the Persians in their campaign against Greece. 
For, on the one hand, fondness for strife is solely the result of passion, and acquires power solely for the 
sake of domination; while, on the other, the love of good is characteristic of a soul which uses its high spirit 
for noble ends. The fourth, the worst of all, is the sovereignty which acts according to the promptings of the 
passions, as that of Sardanapalus, and those who propose to themselves as their end the gratification of 
the passions to the utmost. But the instrument of regal sway-the instrument at once of that which overcomes 
by virtue, and that which does so by force-is the power of managing (or tact). And it, varies according to the 
nature and the material. In the case of arms and of fighting animals the ordering power is the soul and mind, 
by means animate and inanimate; and in the case of the passions of the soul, which we master by virtue, 
reason is the ordering power, by affixing the seal of continence and self-restraint, along with holiness, and 
sound knowledge with truth, making the result of the whole to terminate in piety towards God. For it is wisdom 
which regulates in the case of those who so practise virtue; and divine things are ordered by wisdom, and 
human affairs by politics-all things by the kingly faculty. He is a king, then, who governs according to the 
laws, and possesses the skill to sway willing subjects. Such is the Lord, who receives all who believe on 
Him and by Him. For the Father has delivered and subjected all to Christ our King," that at the name of Jesus 
every knee may bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth, and every tongue 
confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.'(1) 

Now, generalship involves three ideas: caution, enterprise, and the union of the two. And each of these 
consists of three things, acting as they do either by word, or by deeds, or by both together. And all this can 
be accomplished either by persuasion, or by compulsion, or by inflicting harm in the way of taking 
vengeance on those who ought to be punished; and this either by doing what is right, or by telling what is 
untrue, or by telling what is true, or by adopting any of these means conjointly at the same time. 
Now, the Greeks had the advantage of receiving from Moses all these, and the knowledge of how to make 
use of each of them. And, for the sake of example, I shall cite one or two instances of leadership. Moses, on 
leading the people forth, suspecting that the Egyptians would pursue, left the short and direct route, and 
turned to the desert, and marched mostly by night. For it was another kind of arrangement by which the 
Hebrews were trained in the great wilderness, and for a protracted time, to belief in the existence of one God 
alone, being inured by the wise discipline of endurance to which they were subjected. The strategy of 
Moses, therefore, shows the necessity of discerning what will be of service before the approach of dangers, 
and so to encounter them. It turned out precisely as he suspected, for the Egyptians pursued with horses 
and chariots, but were quickly destroyed by the sea breaking on them and overwhelming them with their 
horses and chariots, so that not a remnant of them was left. Afterwards the pillar of fire, which accompanied 
them (for it went before them as a guide), conducted the Hebrews by night through an untrodden region, 
training and bracing them, by toils and hardships, to manliness and endurance, that after their experience of 
what appeared formidable difficulties, the benefits of the land, to which from the trackless desert he was 
conducting them, might become apparent. Furthermore, he put to flight and slew the hostile occupants of the 

land, falling upon them from a desert and rugged line of march (such was the excellence of his generalship). 

For the taking of the land of those hostile tribes was a work of skill and strategy. 

Perceiving this, Miltiades, the Athenian general, who conquered the Persians in battle at Marathon, imitated 

it in the following fashion. Marching over a trackless desert, he led on the Athenians by night, and eluded the 

barbarians that were set to watch him. For Hippias, who had deserted from the Athenians, conducted the 

barbarians into Attica, and seized and held the points of vantage, in consequence of having a knowledge of 

the ground. The task was then to elude Hippias. Whence rightly Miltiades, traversing the desert and 

attacking by night the Persians commanded by Dates, led his soldiers to victory. 

But further, when Thrasybulus was bringing back the exiles from Phyla, and wished to elude observation, a 

pillar became his guide as he marched over a trackless region. To Thrasybulus by night, the sky being 

moonless and stormy, a fire appeared leading the way, which, having conducted them safely, left them near 

Munychia, where is now the altar of the light-bringer (Phosphorus). 

From such an instance, therefore, let our accounts become credible to the Greeks, namely, that it was 

possible for the omnipotent God to make the pillar of fire, which was their guide on their march, go before the 

Hebrews by night. It is said also in a certain oracle, - 

"A pillar to the Thebans is joy-inspiring Bacchus," 

from the history of the Hebrews. Also Euripides says, in Antiope,- 

"In the chambers within, the herdsman. 
With chaplet of ivy, pillar of the Evoean god." 

The pillar indicates that God cannot be portrayed. The pillar of light, too, in addition to its pointing out that 
God cannot be represented, shows also the stability and the permanent duration of the Deity, and His 
unchangeable and inexpressible light. Before, then, the invention of the forms of images, the ancients 
erected pillars, and reverenced them as statues of the Deity. Accordingly, he who composed the Pharonis 
writes, - 

"Callithoe, key-bearer of the Olympian queen: 
Argive Hera, who first with fillets and with fringes 
The queen's tall column all around adorned." 

Further, the author of Europia relates that the statue of Apollo at Delphi was a pillar in these words:- 

"That to the god first-fruits and tithes we may 
On sacred pillars and on lofty column hang." 

Apollo, interpreted mystically by "privation of many,"(1) means the one God. Well, then, that fire like a pillar, 
and the fire in the desert, is the symbol of the holy light which passed through from earth and returned again 
to heaven, by the wood [of the cross], by which also the gift of intellectual vision was bestowed on us. 

CHAP. XXV.-PLATO AN IMITATOR OF MOSES IN FRAMING LAWS. 

Plato the philosopher, aided in legislation by the books of Moses, censured the polity of Minos, and that of 
Lycurgus, as having bravery alone as their aim; while he praised as more seemly the polity which 
expresses some one thing, and directs according to one precept. For he says that it becomes us to 
philosophize with strength, and dignity, and wisdom,-holding unalterably the same opinions about the same 
things, with reference to the dignity of heaven. Accordingly, therefore, he interprets what is in the law, 
enjoining us to look to one God and to do justly. Of politics, he says there are two kinds,-the department of 
law, and that of politics, strictly so called. 

And he refers to the Creator, as the Statesman (<greek>o</greek> <greek>politikos</greek>) by way of 
eminence, in his book of this name (<greek>o</greek> <greek>politikos</greek>); and those who lead an 
active and just life, combined with contemplation, he calls statesmen (<greek>politiko</greek>). That 
department of politics which is called "Law," he divides into administrative magnanimity and private good 
order, which he calls ordertiness; and harmony, and sobriety, which are seen when rulers suit their subjects, 
and subjects are obedient to their rulers; a result which the system of Moses sedulously aims at effecting. 
Further, that the department of law is founded on generation, that of politics on friendship and consent, Plato, 
with the aid he received, affirms; and so, coupled with the laws the philosopher in the Epinomis, who knew 
the course of all generation, which takes place by the instrumentality of the planets; and the other 
philosopher, Timaeus, who was an astronomer and student of the motions of the stars, and of their 
sympathy and association with one another, he consequently joined to the "polity" (or "republic"). Then, in 
my opinion, the end both of the statesman, and of him who lives according to the law, is contemplation. It is 

necessary, therefore, that public affairs should be rightly managed. But to philosophize is best. For he who 
is wise will live concentrating all his energies on knowledge, directing his life by good deeds, despising the 
opposite, and following the pursuits which contribute to truth. And the law is not what is decided by law (for 
what is seen is not vision), nor every opinion (not certainly what is evil). But law is the opinion which is good, 
and what is good is that which is true, and what is true is that which finds "true being," and attains to it. "He 
who is, "(2) says Moses, "sent me." In accordance with which, namely, good opinion, some have called law, 
right reason, which enjoins what is to be done and forbids what is not to be done. 

CHAP. XXVI. -MOSES RIGHTLY CALLED A DIVINE LEGISLATOR, AND, THOUGH INFERIOR 
TO CHRIST, FAR SUPERIOR TO THE GREAT LEGISLATORS OF THE GREEKS, MINOS 
AND LYCURGUS. 

Whence the law was rightly said to have been given by Moses, being a rule of fight and wrong; and we may 
call it with accuracy the divine ordinance (<greek>qesmos</greek>(3)), inasmuch as it was given by God 
through Moses. It accordingly conducts to the divine. Paul says: "The law was instituted because of 
transgressions, till the seed should come, to whom the promise was made." Then, as if in explanation of his 
meaning, he adds: "But before faith came, we were kept under the law, shut up," manifestly through fear, in 
consequence of sins, "unto the faith which should afterwards be revealed; so that the law was a 
schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, that we should be justified by faith. "(4) The true legislator is he who 
assigns to each department of the soul what is suitable to it and to its operations. Now Moses, to speak 
comprehensively, was a living law, governed by the benign Word. Accordingly, he furnished a good polity, 
which is the right discipline of men in social life. He also handled the administration of justice, which is that 
branch of knowledge which deals with the correction of transgressors in the interests of justice. Co-ordinate 
with it is the faculty of dealing with punishments, which is a knowledge of the due measure to be observed in 
punishments. And punishment, in virtue of its being so, is the correction of the soul. In a word, the whole 
system of Moses is suited for the training of such as are capable of becoming good and noble men, and for 
hunting out men like them; and this is the art of command. And that wisdom, which is capable of treating 
rightly those who have been caught by the Word, is legislative wisdom. For it is the property of this wisdom, 
being most kingly, to possess and use. 

It is the wise man, therefore, alone whom the philosophers proclaim king, legislator, general, just, holy, 
God-beloved. And if we discover these qualities in Moses, as shown from the Scriptures themselves, we 
may, with the most assured persuasion, pronounce Moses to be truly wise. As then we say that it belongs to 
the shepherd's art to care for the sheep; for so "the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep;"[1] so also 
we shall say that legislation, inasmuch as it presides over and cares for the flock of men, establishes the 
virtue of men, by fanning into flame, as far as it can, what good there is in humanity. 

And if the flock figuratively spoken of as belonging to the Lord is nothing but a flock of men, then He Himself 
is the good Shepherd and Lawgiver of the one flock, "of the sheep who hear Him," the one who cares for 
them, "seeking," and finding by the law and the word, "that which was lost;" since, in truth, the law is spiritual 
and leads to felicity. For that which has arisen through the Holy Spirit is spiritual. And he is truly a legislator, 
who not only announces what is good and noble, but understands it. The law of this man who possesses 
knowledge is the saving precept; or rather, the law is the precept of knowledge. For the Word is "the power 
and the wisdom of God. "[2] Again, the expounder of the laws is the same one by whom the law was given; 
the first expounder of the divine commands, who unveiled the bosom of the Father, the only-begotten Son. 
Then those who obey the law, since they have some knowledge of Him. cannot disbelieve or be ignorant of 
the truth. But those who disbelieve, and have shown a repugnance to engage in the works of the law, 
whoever else may, certainly confess their ignorance of the truth. 

What, then, is the unbelief of the Greeks? Is it not their unwillingness to believe the truth which declares that 
the law was divinely given by Moses, whilst they honour Moses in their own writers? They relate that Minos 
received the laws from Zeus in, nine years, by frequenting the cave of Zeus; and Plato, and Aristotle, and 
Ephorus write that Lycurgus was trained in legislation by going constantly to Apollo at Delphi. Chamaeleo of 
Heraclea, in his book On Drunkenness, and Aristotle in The Polity of Locrians, mention that Zaieucus the 
Locrian received the laws from Athene. 

But those who exalt the credit of Greek legislation as far as in them lies, by referring it to a divine source, 
after the model of Mosaic prophecy, are senseless in not owning the truth, and the archetype of what is 
related among them. 

CHAP. XXVII. --THE LAW, EVEN IN CORRECTING AND PUNISHING, AIMS AT THE GOOD 
OF MEN. 

Let no one then, run down law, as if, on account of the penalty, it were not beautiful and good. For shall he 

who drives away bodily disease appear a benefactor; and siiall not lie wiio attempts to deliver tiie soul 
from iniquity, as much more appear a friend, as the soul is a more precious thing than the body? Besides, 
for the sake of bodily health we submit to incisions, and cauterizations, and medicinal draughts; and he who 
administers them is called saviour and healer[3] even though amputating parts, not from grudge or ill-will 
towards the patient, but as the principles of the art prescribe, so that the sound parts may not perish along 
with them, and no one accuses the physician's art of wickedness; and shall we not similarly submit, for the 
soul's Sake, to either banishment, or punishment, or bonds, provided only from unrighteousness we shall 
attain to righteousness? 

For the law, in its solicitude for those who obey, trains up to piety, and prescribes what is to be done, and 
restrains each one from sins, imposing penalties even on lesser sins. 

But when it sees any one in such a condition as to appear incurable, posting to the last stage of 
wickedness, then in its solicitude for the rest, that they may not be destroyed by it (just as if amputating a part 
from the whole body), it condemns such an one to death, as the course most conducive to health. "Being 
judged by the Lord," says the apostle, "we are chastened, that we may not be condemned with the 
world. "[4] For the prophet had said before, "Chastening, the LORD hath chastised me, but hath not given me 
over unto death. "[5] "For in order to teach thee His righteousness," it is said, "He chastised thee and tried 
thee, and made thee to hunger and thirst in the desert land; that all His statutes and His judgments may be 
known in thy heart, as I command thee this day; and that thou mayest know in thine heart, that just as if a man 
were chastising his son, so the LORD our God shall chastise thee. "[6] 

And to prove that example corrects, he says directly to the purpose: "A clever man, when he seeth the 
wicked punished, will himself be severely chastised, for the fear of the Lord is the source of wisdom. "[7] 
But it is the highest and most perfect good, when one is able to lead back any one from the practice of evil 
to virtue and well-doing, which is the very function of the law. So that, when one fails into any incurable 
evil,-when taken possession of, for example, by wrong or covetousness,-it will be for his good if he is put to 
death. For the law is beneficent, being able to make some righteous from unrighteous, if they will only give 
ear to it, and by releasing others from present evils; for those who have chosen to live temperately and 
justly, it conducts to immortality. To know the law is characteristic of a good disposition. And again: "Wicked 
men do not understand the law; but they who seek the LORD shall have understanding in all that is good." 

[1] 

It is essential, certainly, that the providence which manages all, be both supreme and good. For it is the 
power of both that dispenses salvation-the one correcting by punishment, as supreme, the other showing 
kindness in the exercise of beneficence, as a benefactor. It is in your power not to be a son of 
disobedience, but to pass from darkness to life, and lending your ear to wisdom, to be the legal slave of 
God, in the first instance, and then to become a faithful servant, fearing the Lord God. And if one ascend 
higher, he is enrolled among the sons. 

But when "charity covers the multitude of sins, "[2] by the consummation of the blessed hope, then may we 
welcome him as one who has been enriched in love, and received into the elect adoption, which is called 
the beloved of God, while he chants the prayer, saying, "Let the Lord be my God." 
The beneficent action of the law, the apostle showed in the passage relating to the Jews, writing thus: 
"Behold, thou art called a Jew and restest in the law, and makest thy boast in God, and knowest the will of 
God, and approvestthe things that are more excellent, being instructed out of the law, and art confident that 
thou thyself art a guide of the blind, a light of them who are in darkness, an instructor of the foolish, a teacher 
of babes, who hast the form of knowledge and of truth in the law."[3] For it is admitted that such is the power 
of the law, although those whose conduct is not according to the law, make a false pretence, as if they lived 
in the law. "Blessed is the man that hath found wisdom, and the mortal who has seen understanding; for out 
of its mouth," manifestly Wisdom's, "proceeds righteousness, and it bears law and mercy on its tongue. "[4] 
For both the law and the Gospel are the energy of one Lord, who is "the power and wisdom of God;" and the 
terror which the law begets is merciful and in order to salvation. "Let not alms, and faith, and truth fail thee, but 
hang them around thy neck."[5] In the same way as Paul, prophecy upbraids the people with not 
understanding the law. "Destruction and misery are in their ways, and the way of peace have they not 
known. "[6] "There is no fear of God before their eyes. "[7] "Professing themselves wise, they became 
fools. "[8] "And we know that the law is good, if a man use it lawfully. "[9] "Desiring to be teachers of the law, 
they understand," says the apostle, "neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm. "[1 0] "Now the end of the 
commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, and faith unfeigned." [11] 

CHAP. XXVIII. -THE FOURFOLD DIVISION OF THE MOSAIC LAW. 

The Mosaic philosophy is accordingly divided into four parts,-into the historic, and that which is specially 
called the legislative, which two properly belong to an ethical treatise; and the third, that which, relates to 
sacrifice, which belongs to physical science; and the fourth, above all, the department of theology. 

"vision, "[12] wiiicii Plato predicates of tiie truly great mysteries. And this species Aristotle calls 
metaphysics. Dialectics, according to Plato, is, as he says in The Statesman, a science devoted to the 
discovery of the explanation of things. And it is to be acquired by the wise man, not for the sake of saying or 
doing aught of what we find among men (as the dialecticians, who occupy themselves in sophistry, do), but 
to be able to say and do, as far as possible, what is pleasing to God. But the true dialectic, being 
philosophy mixed with truth, by examining things, and testing forces and powers, gradually ascends in 
relation to the most excellent essence of all, and essays to go beyond to the God of the universe, 
professing not the knowledge of mortal affairs, but the science of things divine and heavenly; in accordance 
with which follows a suitable course of practice with respect to words and deeds, even in human affairs. 
Rightly, therefore, the Scripture, in its desire to make us such dialecticians, exhorts us: "Be ye skilful 
money-changers"[3] rejecting some things, but retaining what is good. For this true dialectic is the science 
which analyses the objects of thought, and shows abstractly and by itself the individual substratum of 
existences, or the power of dividing things into genera, which descends to their most special properties, and 
presents each individual object to be contemplated simply such as it is. 

Wherefore it alone conducts to the true wisdom, which is the divine power which deals with the knowledge of 
entities as entities, which grasps what is perfect, and is freed from all passion; not without the Saviour, who 
withdraws, by the divine word, the gloom of ignorance arising from evil training, which had overspread the 
eye of the soul, and bestows the best of gifts, - 

"That we might well know or God or man."[1] 

It is He who truly shows how we are to know ourselves. It is He who reveals the Father of the universe to 
whom He wills, and as far as human nature can comprehend. "For no man knoweth the Son but the Father, 
nor the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son shall reveal Him. "[2] Rightly, then, the apostle says that 
it was by revelation that he knew the mystery: "As I wrote afore in few words, according as ye are able to 
understand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ. "[3] "According as ye are able," he said, since he knew 
that some had received milk only, and had not yet received meat, nor even milk simply. The sense of the 
law is to be taken in three ways,[4]-either as exhibiting a symbol, or laying down a precept for right conduct, 
or as uttering a prophecy. But I well know that it belongs to men [of full age] to distinguish and declare these 
things. For the whole Scripture is not in its meaning a single Myconos, as the proverbial expression has it; 
but those who hunt after the connection of the divine teaching, must approach it with the utmost perfection of 
the logical faculty. 

CHAP. XXIX.-THE GREEKS BUT CHILDREN COMPARED WITH THE HEBREWS. 

Whence most beautifully the Egyptian priest in Plato said, "O Solon, Solon, you Greeks are always children, 
not having in your souls a single ancient opinion received through tradition from antiquity. And not one of the 
Greeks is an old man;"[5] meaning by old, I suppose, those who know what belongs to the more remote 
antiquity, that is, our literature; and by young, those who treat of what is more recent and made the subject of 
study by the Greeks, -things of yesterday and of recent date as if they were old and ancient. Wherefore he 
added, "and no study hoary with time;" for we, in a kind of barbarous way, deal in homely and rugged 
metaphor. Those, therefore, whose minds are rightly constituted approach the interpretation utterly destitute 
of artifice. And of the Greeks, he says that their opinions" differ but little from myths." For neither puerile 
fables nor stories current among children are fit for listening to. And he called the myths themselves 
"children," as if the progeny of those, wise in their own conceits among the Greeks, who had but little insight 
meaning by the "hoary studies" the truth which was possessed by the barbarians, dating from the highest 
antiquity. To which expression he opposed the phrase "child fable," censuring the mythical character of the 
attempts of the moderns, as, like children, having nothing of age in them, and affirming both in common-their 
fables and their speeches-to be puerile. 

Divinely, therefore, the power which spoke to Hermas by revelation said, "The visions and revelations are 
for those who are of double mind, who doubt in their hearts if these things are or are not."[6] 
Similarly, also, demonstrations from the resources of erudition, strengthen, confirm, and establish 
demonstrative reasonings, in so far as men's minds are in a wavering state like young people's. "The good 
commandment," then, according to the Scripture, "is a lamp, and the law is a light to the path; for instruction 
corrects the ways of life. "[7] "Law is monarch of all, both of mortals and of immortals," says Pindar. I 
understand, however, by these words. Him who enacted law. And I regard, as spoken of the God of all, the 
following utterance of Hesiod, though spoken by the poet at random and not with comprehension:- 

"Forthe Saturnian framed for men this law: 
Fishes, and beasts, and winged birds may eat 

Each other, since no rule of right is theirs; 
But Right (by far the best) to men he gave." 

Whether, then, it be the law which is connate and natural, or that given afterwards, which is meant, it is 
certainly of God; and both the law of nature and that of instruction are one. Thus also Plato, in The 
Statesman, says that the lawgiver is one; and in The Laws, that he who shall understand music is one; 
teaching by these words that the Word is one, and God is one. And Moses manifestly calls the Lord a 
covenant: "Behold I am my Covenant with thee, "[8] having previously told him not to seek the covenant in 
writing. [9] For it is a covenant which God, the Author of all, makes. For God is called from 
<greek>qesis</greek> (placing), and order or arrangement. And in the Preaching[10] of Peter you will find 
the Lord called Law and Word. But at this point, let our first Miscellany[1 1] of gnostic notes, according to the 
true philosophy, come to a close. 

BOOK II. 

CHAP. I.-INTR0DUCT0RY.[1] 

As Scripture has called the Greeks pilferers of the Barbarian[2] philosophy, it will next have to be 
considered how this may be briefly demonstrated. For we shall not only show that they have imitated and 
copied the marvels recorded in our books; but we shall prove, besides, that they have plagiarized and 
falsified (our writings being, as we have shown, older) the chief dogmas they hold, both on faith and 
knowledge and science, and hope and love, and also on repentance and temperance and the fear of 
God,-a whole swarm, verily, of the virtues of truth. 

Whatever the explication necessary on the point in hand shall demand, shall be embraced, and especially 
what is occult in the barbarian philosophy, the department of symbol and enigma; which those who have 
subjected the teaching of the ancients to systematic philosophic study have affected, as being in the 
highest degree serviceable, nay, absolutely necessary to the knowledge of truth. In addition, it will in my 
opinion form an appropriate sequel to defend those tenets, on account of which the Greeks assail us, 
making use of a few Scriptures, if perchance the Jew also may listen[3] and be able quietly to turn from what 
he has believed to Him on whom he has not believed. The ingenuous among the philosophers will then with 
propriety be taken up in a friendly exposure both of their life and of the discovery of new dogmas, not in the 
way of our avenging ourselves on our detractors (for that is far from being the case with those who have 
learned to bless those who curse, even though they needlessly discharge on us words of blasphemy), but 
with a view to their conversion; if by any means these adepts in wisdom may feel ashamed, being brought 
to their senses by barbarian demonstration; so as to be able, although late, to see clearly of what sort are 
the intellectual acquisitions for which they make pilgrimages over the seas. Those they have stolen are to 
be pointed out, that we may thereby pull down their conceit; and of those on the discovery of which through 
investigation they plume themselves, the refutation will be furnished. By consequence, also we must treat of 
what is called the curriculum of study -how far it is serviceable;[4] and of astrology, and mathematics, and 
magic, and sorcery. For all the Greeks boast of these as the highest sciences. "He who reproves boldly is a 
peacemaker."[5] We lave often said already that we have neither practised nor do we study the expressing 
ourselves in pure Greek; for this suits those who seduce the multitude from the truth. But true philosophic 
demonstration will contribute to the profit not of the listeners' tongues, but of their minds. And, in my opinion, 
he who is solicitous about truth ought not to frame his language with artfulness and care, but only to try to 
express his meaning as he best can. For those who are particular about words, and devote their time to 
them, miss the things. [6] It is a feat fit for the gardener to pluck without injury the rose that is growing among 
the thorns; and for the craftsman to find out the pearl buried in the oyster's flesh. And they say that fowls have 
flesh of the most agreeable quality, when, through not being supplied with abundance of food, they pick their 
sustenance with difficulty, scraping with their feet. If any one, then, speculating on what is similar, wants to 
arrive[1] at the truth [that is] in the numerous Greek plausibilities, like the real face beneath masks, he will 
hunt it out with much pains. For the power that appeared in the vision to Hermas said, "Whatever may be 
revealed to you, shall be revealed. "[2] 

CHAP. II. -THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD CAN BE ATTAINED ONLY THROUGH FAITH. 

"Be not elated on account of thy wisdom," say the Proverbs. "In all thy ways acknowledge her, that she may 
direct thy ways, and that thy foot may not stumble." By these remarks he means to show that our deeds 
ought to be conformable to reason, and to manifest further that we ought to select and possess what is 
useful out of all culture. Now the ways of wisdom are various that lead right to the way of truth. Faith is the 
way. "Thy foot shall not stumble" is said with reference to some who seem to oppose the one divine 
administration of Providence. Whence it is added, "Be not wise in thine own eyes," according to the impious 
ideas which revolt against the administration of God. "But fear God," who alone is powerful. Whence it 
follows as a consequence that we are not to oppose God. The sequel especially teaches clearly, that "the 
fear of God is departure from evil;" for it is said, "and depart from all evil." Such is the discipline of wisdom 
("for whom the Lord loveth He chastens"[3]), causing pain in order to produce understanding, and restoring 
to peace and immortality. Accordingly, the Barbarian philosophy, which we follow, is in reality perfect and 
true. And so it is said in the book of Wisdom: "For He hath given me the unerring knowledge of things that 

exist, to know the constitution of tiie word," and so fortii, down to "and tiie virtues of roots." Among all these 
he comprehends natural science, which treats of all the phenomena in the world of sense. And in 
continuation, he alludes also to intellectual objects in what he subjoins: "And what is hidden or manifest I 
know; for Wisdom, the artificer of all things, taught me. "[4] You have, in brief, the professed aim of our 
philosophy; and the learning of these branches, when pursued with right course of conduct, leads through 
Wisdom, the artificer of all things, to the Ruler of all,-a Being difficult to grasp and apprehend, ever receding 
and withdrawing from him who pursues. But He who is far off has-oh ineffable marvel!-come very near. "I 
am a God: that draws near," says the Lord. He is in essence remote; "for how is it that what is begotten can 
have approached the Unbegotten?" But He is very near in virtue of that power which holds all things in its 
embrace. "Shall one do aught in secret, and I see him not?"[5] For the power of God is always present, in 
contact with us, in the exercise of inspection, of beneficence, of instruction. Whence Moses, persuaded that 
God is not to be known by human wisdom, said, "Show me Thy glory;"[6] and into the thick darkness where 
God's voice was, pressed to enter-that is, into the inaccessible and invisible ideas respecting Existence. 
For God is not in darkness or in place, but above both space and time, and qualities of objects. Wherefore 
neither is He at any time in a part, either as containing or as contained, either by limitation or by section. "For 
what house will ye build to Me?" saith the Lord? Nay, He has not even built one for Himself, since He cannot 
be contained. And though heaven be called His throne, not even thus is He contained, but He rests 
delighted in the creation. 

It is clear, then, that the truth has been hidden from us; and if that has been already shown by one example, 
we shall establish it a little after by several more. How entirely worthy of approbation are they who are both 
willing to learn, and able, according to Solomon, "to know wisdom and instruction, and to perceive the words 
of wisdom, to receive knotty words, and to perceive true righteousness," there being another [righteousness 
as well], not according to the truth, taught by the Greek laws, and by the rest of the philosophers. "And to 
direct judgments," it is said-not those of the bench, but he means that we must preserve sound and free of 
error the judicial faculty which is within us-"That I may give subtlety to the simple, to the young man sense 
and understanding. "[8] "For the wise man," who has been persuaded to obey the commandments, "having 
heard these things, will become wiser" by knowledge; and "the intelligent man will acquire rule, and will 
understand a parable and a dark word, the sayings and enigmas of the wise. "[9] For it is not spurious words 
which those inspired by God and those who are gained over by them adduce, nor is it snares in which the 
most of the sophists entangle the young, spending their time on nought true. But those who possess the 
Holy Spirit "search the deep things of God,"[10]-that is, grasp the secret that is in the prophecies. "To impart 
of holy things to the dogs" is forbidden, so long as they remain beasts. For never ought those who are 
envious and perturbed, and still infidel in conduct, shameless in barking at investigation, to dip in the divine 
and clear stream of the living water. "Let not the waters of thy fountain overflow, and let thy waters spread 
over thine own streets. "[1] For it is not many who understand such things as they fall in with; or know them 
even after learning them, though they think they do, according to the worthy Heraclitus. Does not even he 
seem to thee to censure those who believe not? "Now my just one shall live by faith, "[2] the prophet said. 
And another prophet also says, "Except ye believe, neither shall ye understand. "[3] For how ever could the 
soul admit the transcendental contemplation of such themes, while unbelief respecting what was to be 
learned struggled within? But faith, which the Greeks disparage, deeming it futile and barbarous, is a 
voluntary preconception[4] the assent of piety-" the subject of things hoped for, the evidence of things not 
seen," according to the divine apostle. "For hereby," pre-eminently, "the elders obtained a good report. But 
without faith it is impossible to please God. "[5] Others have defined faith to be a uniting assent to an unseen 
object, as certainly the proof of an unknown thing is an evident assent. If then it be choice, being desirous of 
something, the desire is in this instance intellectual. And since choice is the beginning of action, faith is 
discovered to be the beginning of action, being the foundation of rational choice in the case of any one who 
exhibits to himself the previous demonstration through faith. Voluntarily to follow what is useful, is the first 
principle of understanding. Unswerving choice, then, gives considerable momentum in the direction of 
knowledge. The exercise of faith directly becomes knowledge, reposing on a sure foundation. Knowledge, 
accordingly, is defined by the sons of the philosophers as a habit, which cannot be overthrown by reason. Is 
there any other true condition such as this, except piety, of which alone the Word is teacher?[6] I think not. 
Theophrastus says that sensation is the root of faith. For from it the rudimentary principles extend to the 
reason that is in us, and the understanding. He who believeth then the divine Scriptures with sure judgment, 
receives in the voice of God, who bestowed the Scripture, a demonstration that cannot be impugned. Faith, 
then, is not established by demonstration. "Blessed therefore those who, not having seen, yet have 
believed. "[7] The Siren's songs, exhibiting a power above human, fascinated those that came near, 
conciliating them, almost against their will, to the reception of what was said. 

CHAP. III. -FAITH NOT A PRODUCT OF NATURE. 

Now the followers of Basilides regard faith as natural, as they also refer it to choice, [representing it] as 
finding ideas by intellectual comprehension without demonstration; while the followers of Valentinus assign 
faith to us, the simple, but will have it that knowledge springs up in their own selves (who are saved by 
nature) through the advantage of a germ of superior excellence, saying that it is as far removed from faith as 
s the spiritual is from the animal. Further, the followers of Basilides say that faith as well as choice is proper 
according to every interval; and that in consequence of the supramundane selection mundane faith 
accompanies all nature, and that the free gift of faith is comformable to the hope of each. Faith, then, is no 
longer the direct result of free choice, if it is a natural advantage. 

Nor will he who has not believed, not being the author [of his unbelief], meet with a due recompense; and he 
that has believed is not the cause [of his belief]. And the entire peculiarity and difference of belief and 
unbelief will not fall under either praise or censure, if we reflect rightly, since there attaches to it the 
antecedent natural necessity proceeding from the Almighty. And if we are pulled like inanimate things by the 
puppet-strings of natural powers, willingness[9] and unwillingness, and impulse, which is the antecedent of 
both, are mere redundancies. And for my part, I am utterly incapable of conceiving such an animal as has its 
appetencies, which are moved by external causes, under the dominion of necessity. And what place is 
there any longer for the repentance of him who was once an unbeliever, through which comes forgiveness 
of sins? So that neither is baptism rational, nor the blessed seal,[1 0] nor the Son, nor the Father. But God, as 
I think, turns out to be the distribution to men of natural powers, which has not as the foundation of salvation 
voluntary faith. 

CHAP. IV. -FAITH THE FOUNDATION OF ALL KNOWLEDGE. 

But we, who have heard by the Scriptures that self-determining choice and refusal have been given by the 
Lord to men, rest in the infallible criterion of faith, manifesting a willing spirit, since we have chosen life and 
believe God through His voice. And he who has believed the Word knows the matter to be true; for the Word 
is truth. But he who has disbelieved Him that speaks, has disbelieved God. 

"By faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that what is seen was not made 
of things which appear," says the apostle. "By faith Abel offered to God a fuller sacrifice than Cain, by which 
he received testimony that he was righteous, God giving testimony to him respecting his gifts; and by it he, 
being dead, yet speaketh," and so forth, down to "than enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. "[1] Faith 
having, therefore, justified these before the law, made them heirs of the divine promise. Why then should I 
review and adduce any further testimonies of faith from the history in our hands? "For the time would fail me 
were I to tell of Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jephtha, David, and Samuel, and the prophets," and what 
follows. [2] Now, inasmuch as there are four things in which the truth resides-Sensation, Understanding, 
Knowledge, Opinion, -intellectual apprehension is first in the order of nature; but in our case, and in relation 
to ourselves. Sensation is first, and of Sensation and Understanding the essence of Knowledge is formed; 
and evidence is common to Understanding and Sensation. Well Sensation is the ladder to Knowledge; 
while Faith, advancing over the pathway of the objects of sense, leaves Opinion behind, and speeds to 
things free of deception, and reposes in the truth. 

Should one say that Knowledge is founded on demonstration by a process of reasoning, let him hear that 
first principles are incapable of demonstration; for they are known neither by art nor sagacity. For the latter is 
conversant about objects that are susceptible of change, while the former is practical solely, and not 
theoretical. [3] Hence it is thought that the first cause of the universe can be apprehended by faith alone. For 
all knowledge is capable of being taught; and what is capable of being taught is rounded on what is known 
before. But the first cause of the universe was not previously known to the Greeks; neither, accordingly, to 
Thales, who came to the conclusion that water was the first i cause; nor to the other natural philosophers who 
succeeded him, since it was Anaxagoras who was the first who assigned to Mind the supremacy over 
material things. But not even he preserved the dignity suited to the efficient cause, describing as he did 
certain silly vortices, together with the inertia and even foolishness of Mind. Wherefore also the Word says, 
"Call no man master on earth. "[4] For knowledge is a state of mind that results from demonstration; but faith 
is a grace which from what is indemonstrable conducts to what is universal and simple, what is neither with 
matter, nor matter, nor under matter. But those who believe not, as to be expected, drag all down from 
heaven, and the region of the invisible, to earth, "absolutely grasping with their hands rocks and oaks," 
according to Plato. For, clinging to all such things, they asseverate that that alone exists which can be 
touched and handled, defining body and essence to be identical: disputing against themselves, they very 
piously defend the existence of certain intellectual and bodiless forms descending somewhere from above 
from the invisible world, vehemently maintaining that there is a true essence. "Lo, I make new things," saith 
the Word, "which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor hath it entered into the heart of man. "[5] Wth a new 
eye, a new ear, a new heart, whatever can be seen and heard is to be apprehended, by the faith and 
understanding of the disciples of the Lord, who speak, hear, and act spiritually. For there is genuine coin. 

and other that is spurious; which no less deceives unprofessionals, that it does not the money-changers; 
who l<now through having learned how to separate and distinguish what has a false stamp from what is 
genuine. So the money-changer only says to the unprofessional man that the coin is counterfeit. But the 
reason why, only the banker's apprentice, and he that is trained to this department, learns. 
Now Aristotle says that the judgment which follows knowledge is in truth faith. Accordingly, faith is something 
superior to knowledge, and is its criterion. Conjecture, which is only a feeble supposition, counterfeits faith; 
as the flatterer counterfeits a friend, and the wolf the dog. And as the workman sees that by learning certain 
things he becomes an artificer, and the helmsman by being instructed in the art will be able to steer; he does 
not regard the mere wishing to become excellent and good enough, but he must learn it by the exercise of 
obedience. But to obey the Word, whom we call Instructor, is to believe Him, going against Him in nothing. 
For how can we take up a position of hostility to God? Knowledge, accordingly, is characterized by faith; and 
faith, by a kind of divine mutual and reciprocal correspondence, becomes characterized by knowledge. 
Epicurus, too, who very greatly preferred pleasure to truth, supposes faith to be a preconception of the mind; 
and defines preconception to be a grasping at something evident, and at the clear understanding of the 
thing; and asserts that, without preconception, no one can either inquire, or doubt, or judge, or even argue. 
How can one, without a preconceived idea of what he is aiming after, learn about that which is the subject of 
his investigation? He, again, who has learned has already turned his preconception[1] into comprehension. 
And if he who learns, learns not without a preconceived idea which takes, in what is expressed, that man has 
ears to hear the truth. And happy is the man that speaks to the ears of those who hear; as happy certainly 
also is he who is a child of obedience. Now to hear is to understand. If, then, faith is nothing else than a 
preconception of the mind in regard to what is the subject of discourse, and obedience is so called, and 
understanding and persuasion; no one shall learn aught without faith, since no one [learns aught] without 
preconception. Consequently there is a more ample demonstration of the complete truth of what was 
spoken by the prophet, "Unless ye believe, neither will ye understand." Paraphrasing this oracle, Heraclitus 
of Ephesus says, "If a man hope not, he will not find that which is not hoped for, seeing it is inscrutable and 
inaccessible." Plato the philosopher, also, in The Laws, says, "that he who would be blessed and happy, 
must be straight from the beginning a partaker of the truth, so as to live true for as long a period as possible; 
for he is a man of faith. But the unbeliever is one to whom voluntary falsehood is agreeable; and the man to 
whom involuntary falsehood is agreeable is senseless;[2] neither of which is desirable. For he who is 
devoid of friendliness, is faithless and ignorant." And does he not enigmatically say in Euthydemus, that this 
is "the regal wisdom"? In The Statesman he says expressly, "So that the knowledge of the true king is 
kingly; and he who possesses it, whether a prince or private person, shall by all means, in consequence of 
this act, be rightly styled royal." Now those who have believed in Christ both are and are called Chrestoi 
(good), [3] as those who are cared for by the true king are kingly. For as the wise are wise by their wisdom, 
and those observant of law are so by the law; so also those who belong to Christ the King are kings, and 
those that are Christ's Christians. Then, in continuation, he adds clearly, "What is right will turn out to be 
lawful, law being in its nature right reason, and not found in writings or elsewhere." And the stranger of Elea 
pronounces the kingly and statesmanlike man "a living law." Such is he who fulfils the law, "doing the will of 
the Father,"[4] inscribed on a lofty pillar, and set as an example of divine virtue to all who possess the power 
of seeing. The Greeks are acquainted with the staves of the Ephori at Lacedaemon, inscribed with the law 
on wood. But my law, as was said above, is both royal and living; and it is right reason. "Law, which is king of 
all-of mortals and immortals," as the Boeotian Pindar sings. For Speusippus,[5] in the first book against 
Cleophon, seems to write like Plato on this wise: "For if royalty be a good thing, and the wise man the only 
king and ruler, the law, which is fight reason, is good;"[6] which is the case. The Stoics teach what is in 
conformity with this, assigning kinghood, priesthood, prophecy, legislation, riches, true beauty, noble birth, 
freedom, to the wise man alone. But that he is exceedingly difficult to find, is confessed even by them. 

CHAP. V.--HE PROVES BY SEVERAL EXAMPLES THAT THE GREEKS DREW FROM THE 
SACRED WRITERS. 

Accordingly all those above-mentioned dogmas appear to have been transmitted from Moses the great to 
the Greeks. That all things belong to the wise man, is taught in these words: "And because God hath 
showed me mercy, I have all things. "[7] And that he is beloved of God, God intimates when He says, "The 
God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of Jacob. "[8] For the first is found to have been expressly called 
"friend;"[9] and the second is shown to have received a new name, signifying "he that sees God ;"[10] while 
Isaac, God in a figure selected for Himself as a consecrated sacrifice, to be a type to us of the economy of 
salvation. 

Now among the Greeks, Minos the king of nine years' reign, and familiar friend of Zeus, is celebrated in 
song; they having heard how once God conversed with Moses, "as one speaking with his friend. "[1 1] 
Moses, then, was a sage, king, legislator. But our Saviour surpasses all human nature." He is so lovely, as 

to be alone loved by us, whose hearts are set on the true beauty, for "He was the true light. "[13] He is shown 
to be a King, as such hailed by unsophisticated children and by the unbelieving and ignorant Jews, and 
heralded by the prophets. So rich is He, that He despised the whole earth, and the gold above and beneath 
it, with all glory, when given to Him by the adversary. What need is there to say that He is the only High 
Priest, who alone possesses the knowledge of the worship of God?[1] He is Melchizedek, "King of 
peace, "[2] the most fit of all to head the race of men. A legislator too, inasmuch as He gave the law by the 
mouth of the prophets, enjoining and teaching most distinctly what things are to be done, and what not. Who 
of nobler lineage than He whose only Father is God? Come, then, let us produce Plato assenting to those 
very dogmas. The wise man he calls rich in the Phoedrus, when he says, "O dear Pan, and whatever other 
gods are here, grant me to become fair within; and whatever external things I have, let them be agreeable to 
what is within. I would reckon the wise man rich. "[3] And the Athenian stranger,[4] finding fault with those who 
think that those who have many possessions are rich, speaks thus: "For the very rich to be also good is 
impossible-those, I mean, whom the multitude count rich. Those they call rich, who, among a few men, are 
owners of the possessions worth most money; which any bad man may possess." "The whole world of 
wealth belongs to the believer,"[5] Solomon says, "but not a penny to the unbeliever." Much more, then, is 
the Scripture to be believed which says, "It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a 
rich man "[6] to lead a philosophic life. But, on the other hand, it blesses "the poor;"[7] as Plato understood 
when he said, "It is not the diminishing of one's resources, but the augmenting of insatiableness, that is to be 
considered poverty; for it is not slender means that ever constitutes poverty, but insatiableness, from which 
the good man being free, will also be rich." And in Alcibiades he calls vice a servile thing, and virtue the 
attribute of freemen. "Take away from you the heavy yoke, and take up the easy one, "[8] says the Scripture; 
as also the poets call [vice] a slavish yoke. And the expression, "Ye have sold yourselves to your sins," 
agrees with what is said above: "Every one, then, who committeth sin is a slave; and the slave abideth not in 
the house for ever. But if the Son shall make you free, then shall ye be free, and the truth shall make you 
free. "[9] 

And again, that the wise man is beautiful, the Athenian stranger asserts, in the same way as if one were to 
affirm that certain persons were just, even should they happen to be ugly in their persons. And in speaking 
thus with respect to eminent rectitude of character, no one who should assert them to be on this account 
beautiful would be thought to speak extravagantly. And "His appearance was inferior to all the Sons of 
men, "[10] prophecy predicted. 

Plato, moreover, has called the wise man a king, in The Statesman. The remark is quoted above. 
These points being demonstrated, let us recur again to our discourse on faith. Well, with the fullest 
demonstration, Plato proves, that there is need of faith everywhere, celebrating peace at the same time: 
"For no man will ever be trusty and sound in seditions without entire virtue. There are numbers of 
mercenaries full of fight, and willing to die in war; but, with a very few exceptions, the most of them are 
desperadoes and villains, insolent and senseless." If these observations are right, "every legislator who is 
even of slight use, will, in making his laws, have an eye to the greatest virtue. Such is fidelity, which we need 
at all times, both in peace and in war, and in all the rest of our life, for it appears to embrace the other virtues. 
"But the best thing is neither war nor sedition, for the necessity of these is to be deprecated. But peace with 
one another and kindly feeling are what is best." From these remarks the greatest prayer evidently is to 
have peace, according to Plato. And faith is the greatest mother of the I virtues. Accordingly it is rightly said 
in Solomon, "Wisdom is in the mouth of the faithful." Since also Xenocrates, in his book on "Intelligence," 
says "that wisdom is the knowledge of first causes and of intellectual essence." He considers intelligence 
as twofold, practical and theoretical, which latter is human wisdom. Consequently wisdom is intelligence, but 
all intelligence is not wisdom. And it has been shown, that the knowledge of the first cause of the universe is 
of faith, but is not demonstration. For it were strange that the followers of the Samian Pythagoras, rejecting 
demonstrations of subjects of question, should regard the bare ipse dixit[13] as ground of belief; and that 
this expression alone sufficed for the confirmation of what they heard, while those devoted to the 
contemplation of the truth, presuming to disbelieve the trustworthy Teacher, God the only Saviour, should 
demand of Him tests of His utterances. But He says, "He that hath ears to hear, let him hear." And who is he? 
Let Epicharmus say:- 

"Mind sees, mind hears; all besides is deaf and blind. "[14] 

Rating some as unbelievers, Heraclitus says, 

"Not knowing how to hear or to speak;" aided doubtless by Solomon, who says, "If thou lovestto hear, thou 
Shalt comprehend; and if thou incline thine ear, thou shalt be wise.[1] 

CHAP. VI. --THE EXCELLENCE AND UTILITY OF FAITH. 

"Lord, who hath believed our report?"[2] Isaiah says. For "faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word 
of God," saith the apostle. "How then shall they call on Him in whom they have not believed? And how shall 
they believe on Him whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a preacher? And how shall 
they preach except they be sent? As it is written. How beautiful are the feet of those that publish glad tidings 
of good things ! "3 You see how he brings faith by hearing, and the preaching of the apostles, up to the word 
of the Lord, and to the Son of God. We do not yet understand the word of the Lord to be demonstration. 
As, then, playing at ball not only depends on one throwing the ball skilfully, but it requires besides one to 
catch it dexterously, that the game may be gone through according to the rules for ball; so also is it the case 
that teaching is reliable when faith on the part of those who hear, being, so to speak, a sort of natural art, 
contributes to the process of learning. So also the earth co-operates, through its productive power, being fit 
for the sowing of the seed. For there is no good of the very best instruction without the exercise of the 
receptive faculty on the part of the learner, not even of prophecy, when there is the absence of docility on the 
part of those who hear. For dry twigs, being ready to receive the power of fire, are kindled with great ease; 
and the far-famed stone[4] attracts steel through affinity, as the amber tear-drop drags to itself twigs, and the 
lump sets chaff in motion. And the substances attracted obey them, influenced by a subtle spirit, not as a 
cause, but as a concurring cause. 

There being then a twofold species of vice-that characterized by craft and stealth, and that which leads and 
drives with violence-the divine Word cries, calling all together; knowing perfectly well those that will not 
obey; notwithstanding then since to obey or not is in our own power, provided we have not the excuse of 
ignorance to adduce. He makes a just call, and demands of each according to his strength. For some are 
able as well as willing, having reached this point through practice and being purified; while others, if they are 
not yet able, already have the will. Now to will is the act of the soul, but to do is not without the body. Nor are 
actions estimated by their issue alone; but they are judged also according to the element of free choice in 
each,-if he chose easily, if he repented of his sins, if he reflected on his failures and repented 
(<greek>metegnw</greek>), which is (<greek>meta</greek> <greek>tauta</greek> <greek>egnw</greek> 
) "afterwards knew." For repentance is a tardy knowledge, and primiflve innocence is knowledge. 
Repentance, then, is an effect of faith. For unless a man believe that to which he was addicted to be sin, he 
will not abandon it; and if he do not believe punishment to be impending over the transgressor, and 
salvation to be the portion of him who lives according to the commandments, he will not reform. 
Hope, too, is based on faith. Accordingly the followers of Basilides deflne faith to be, the assent of the soul 
to any of those things, that do not affect the senses through not being present. And hope is the expectation of 
the possession of good. Necessarily, then, is expectaflon founded on faith. Now he is faithful who keeps 
inviolably what is entrusted to him; and we are entrusted with the utterances respecting God and the divine 
words, the commands along with the execution of the injuncflons. This is the faithful servant, who is praised 
by the Lord. And when it is said, "God is faithful," it is intimated that He is worthy to be believed when 
declaring aught. Now His Word declares; and "God" Himself is "faithful. "[5] How, then, if to believe is to 
suppose, do the philosophers think that what proceeds from themselves is sure? For the voluntary assent to 
a preceding demonstraflon is not supposiflon, but it is assent to something sure. Who is more powerful than 
God? Now unbelief is the feeble negative supposiflon of one opposed to Him: as incredulity is a condiflon 
which admits faith with difflculty. Faith is the voluntary supposition and anflcipation of pre-comprehension. 
Expectaflon is an opinion about the future, and expectation about other things is opinion about uncertainty. 
Confidence is a strong judgment about a thing. Wherefore we believe Him in whom we have confidence 
unto divine glory and salvaflon. And we confide in Him, who is God alone, whom we know, that those things 
nobly [promised to us, and for this end benevolently created and bestowed by Him on us, will not fail. 
Benevolence is the wishing of good things to another for his sake. For He needs nothing; and the 
beneficence and benignity which flow from the Lord terminate in us, being divine benevolence, and 
benevolence resulflng in beneficence. And if to Abraham on his believing it was counted for righteousness; 
and if we are the seed of Abraham, then we must also believe through heating. For we are Israelites, who 
are convinced not by signs, but by hearing. Wherefore it is said, "Rejoice, O barren, that barest not; break 
forth and cry, thou that didst not travail with child: for more are the children of the desolate than of her who 
hath an husband. "[1] "Thou hast lived for the fence of the people, thy children were blessed in the tents of 
their fathers. "[2] And if the same mansions are promised by prophecy to us and to the patriarchs, the God of 
both the covenants is shown to be one. Accordingly it is added more clearly, "Thou hast inherited the 
covenant of Israel, "[3] speaking to those called from among the naflons that were once barren, being 
formerly destitute of this husband, who is the Word, -desolate formerly, -of the bridegroom. "Now the just 
shall live by faith, "[4] which is according to the covenant and the commandments; since these, which are two 
in name and time, given in accordance with the [divine] economy-being in power one-the old and the new, 
are dispensed through the Son by one God. As the apostle also says in the Epistle to the Romans, "For 
therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith," teaching the one salvaflon which from 

prophecy to the Gospel is perfected by one and the same Lord. "This charge," he says, "I commit to thee, 
son Timothy, according to the prophecies which went before on thee, that thou by them mightest war the 
good warfare; holding faith, and a good conscience; which some having put away concerning faith have 
made shipwreck,"[5] because they defiled by unbelief the conscience that comes from God. Accordingly, 
faith may not, any more, with reason, be disparaged in an offhand way, as simple and vulgar, appertaining 
to anybody. For, if it were a mere human habit, as the Greeks supposed, it would have been extinguished. 
But if it grow, and there be no place where it is not; then I affirm, that faith, whether founded in love, or in fear, 
as its disparagers assert, is something divine; which is neither rent asunder by other mundane friendship, 
nor dissolved by the presence of fear. For love, on account of its friendly alliance with faith, makes men 
believers; and faith, which is the foundation of love, in its turn introduces the doing of good; since also fear, 
the paedagogue of the law, is believed to be fear by those, by whom it is believed. For, if its existence is 
shown in its working, it is yet believed when about to do and threatening, and when not working and present; 
and being believed to exist, it does not itself generate faith, but is by faith tested and proved trustworthy. 
Such a change, then, from unbelief to faith-and to trust in hope and fear, is divine. And, in truth, faith is 
discovered, by us, to be the first movement towards salvation; after which fear, and hope, and repentance, 
advancing in company with temperance and patience, lead us to love and knowledge. Rightly, therefore, 
the Apostle Barnabas says, "From the portion I have received I have done my diligence to send by little 
and little to you; that along with your faith you may also have perfect knowledge. [6] Fear and patience are 
then helpers of your faith; and our allies are long-suffering and temperance. These, then," he says, "in what 
respects the Lord, continuing in purity, there rejoice along with them, wisdom, understanding, intelligence, 
knowledge." The fore-mentioned virtues being, then, the elements of knowledge; the result is that faith is 
more elementary, being as necessary to the Gnostic, [7] as respiration to him that lives in this world is to life. 
And as without the four elements it is not possible to live, so neither can knowledge be attained without faith. 
It is then the support of truth. 

CHAP. VII. -THE UTILITY OF FEAR. OBJECTIONS ANSWERED. 

Those, who denounce fear, assail the law; and if the law, plainly also God, who gave the law. For these 
three elements are of necessity presented in the subject on hand: the ruler, his administration, and the ruled. 
If, then, according to hypothesis, they abolish the law; then, by necessary consequence, each one who is 
led by lust, courting pleasure, must neglect what is right and despise the Deity, and fearlessly indulge in 
impiety and injustice together, having dashed away from the truth. 

Yea, say they, fear is an irrational aberration[8] and perturbation of mind. What sayest thou? And how can 
this definition be any longer maintained, seeing the commandment is given me by the Word? But the 
commandment forbids, hanging fear over the head of those who have incurred[9] admonition for their 
discipline. 

Fear is not then irrational. It is therefore rational. How could it be otherwise, exhorting as it does. Thou shalt 
not kill. Thou shalt not commit adultery. Thou shalt not steal. Than shalt not bear false witness? But if they will 
quibble about the names, let the philosophers term the fear of the law, cautious fear, 
(<greek>eulabeia</greek>) which is a shunning (<greek>ekklisis</greek>) agreeable to reason. Such 
Critolaus of Phasela not inaptly called fighters about names (<greek>onomatomakoi</greek>). The 
commandment, then, has already appeared fair and lovely even in the highest degree, when conceived 
under a change of name. Cautious fear (<greek>eulabeia</greek>) is therefore shown to be reasonable 
being the shunning of what hurts; from which arises repentance for previous sins. "For the fear of the LORD is 
the beginning of wisdom; good understanding is to all that do it."[1] He calls wisdom a doing, which is the 
fear of the Lord paving the way for wisdom. But if the law produces fear, the knowledge of the law is the 
beginning of wisdom; and a man is not wise without law. Therefore those who reject the law are unwise; and 
in consequence they are reckoned godless (<greek>aqeoi</greek>). Now instruction is the beginning of 
wisdom. "But the ungodly despise wisdom and instruction, "[2] saith the Scripture. 

Let us see what terrors the law announces. If it is the things which hold an intermediate place between virtue 
and vice, such as poverty, disease, obscurity, and humble birth, and the like, these things civil laws hold 
forth, and are: praised for so doing. And those of the Peripatetic school, who introduce three kinds of good 
things, and think that their opposites are evil, this opinion suits. But the law given to us enjoins us to shun 
what are in reality bad things-adultery, uncleanness, paederasty, ignorance, wickedness, soul-disease, 
death (not that which severs the soul from the body, but that which severs the soul from truth). For these are 
vices in reality, and the workings that proceed from them are dreadful and terrible. "For not unjustly," say the 
divine oracles, "are the nets spread for birds; for they who are accomplices in blood treasure up evils to 
themselves. "[3] How, then, is the law still said to be not good by certain heresies that clamorously appeal to 
the apostle, who says, "For by the law is the knowledge of sin?"[4] To whom we say. The law did not cause, 
but showed sin. For, enjoining what is to be done, it reprehended what ought not to be done. And it is the part 

of the good to teach what is salutary, and to point out what is deleterious; and to counsel the practice of the 
one, and to command to shun the other. Now the apostle, whom they do not comprehend, said that by the 
law the knowledge of sin was manifested, not that from it it derived its existence. And how can the law be not 
good, which trains, which is given as the instructor (<greek>paidagwgos</greek>) to Christ, s that being 
corrected by fear, in the way of discipline, in order to the attainment of the perfection which is by Christ? "I will 
not," it is said, "the death of the sinner, as his repentance. "[6] Now the commandment works repentance; 
inasmuch as it deters[7] from what ought not to be done, and enjoins good deeds. By ignorance he means, 
in my opinion, death. "And he that is near the Lord is full of stripes. "[8] Plainly, he, that draws near to 
knowledge, has the benefit Of perils, fears, troubles, afflictions, by reason of his desire for the truth. "For the 
son who is instructed turns out wise, and an intelligent son is saved from burning. And an intelligent son will 
receive the commandments. "[9] And Barnabas the apostle having said, "Woe to those who are wise in their 
own conceits, clever in their own eyes, "[10] added, "Let us become spiritual, a perfect temple to God; let us, 
as far as in us lies, practise the fear of God, and strive to keep His commands, that we may rejoice in His 
judgments. "[11] Whence "the fear of God" is divinely said to be the beginning of wisdom. [12] 

CHAP. VIII. --THE VAGARIES OF BASILIDES AND VALENTINUS AS TO FEAR BEING THE 
CAUSE OF THINGS, 

Here the followers of Basilides, interpreting this expression, say, "that the Prince, [13] having heard the 
speech of the Spirit, who was being ministered to, was struck with amazement both with the voice and the 
vision, having had glad tidings beyond his hopes announced to him; and that his amazement was called 
fear, which became the origin of wisdom, which distinguishes classes, and discriminates, and perfects, and 
restores. For not the world alone, but also the election. He that is over all has set apart and sent forth." 
And Valentinus appears also in an epistle to have adopted such views. For he writes in these very words: 
"And as[14] terror fell on the angels at this creature, because he uttered things greater than proceeded from 
his formation, by reason of the being in him who had invisibly communicated a germ of the supernal 
essence, and who spoke with free utterance; so also among the tribes of men in the world, the works of men 
became terrors to those who made them,-as, for example, images and statues. And the hands of all fashion 
things to bear the name of God: for Adam formed into the name of man inspired the dread attaching to the 
pre-existent man, as having his being in him; and they were terror-stricken, and speedily marred the work." 
But there being but one First Cause, as will be shown afterwards, these men will be shown to be inventors of 
chatterings and chirpings. But since God deemed it advantageous, that from the law and the prophets, men 
should receive a preparatory discipline by the Lord, the fear of the Lord was called the beginning of 
wisdom, being given by the Lord, through Moses, to the disobedient and hard of heart. For those whom 
reason convinces not, fear tames; which also the Instructing Word, foreseeing from the first, and purifying by 
each of these methods, adapted the instrument suitably for piety. Consternation is, then, fear at a strange 
apparition, or at an unlooked-for representation-such as, for example, a message; while fear is an 
excessive wonderment on account of something which arises or is. They do not then perceive that they 
represent by means of amazement the God who is highest and is extolled by them, as subject to 
perturbation and antecedent to amazement as having been in ignorance. If indeed ignorance preceded 
amazement; and if this amazement and fear, which is the beginning of wisdom, is the fear of God, then in all 
likelihood ignorance as cause preceded both the wisdom of God and all creative work, and not only these, 
but restoration and even election itself. Whether, then, was it ignorance of what was good or what was evil? 
Well, if of good, why does it cease through amazement? And minister and preaching and baptism are [in 
that case] superfluous to them. And if of evil, how can what is bad be the cause of what is best? For had not 
ignorance preceded, the minister would not have come down, nor would have amazement seized on "the 
Prince," as they say; nor would he have attained to a beginning of wisdom from fear, in order to 
discrimination between the elect and those that are mundane. And if the fear of the pre-existent man made 
the angels conspire against their own handiwork, under the idea that an invisible germ of the supernal 
essence was lodged within that creation, or through unfounded suspicion excited envy, which is incredible, 
the angels became murderers of the creature which had been entrusted to them, as a child might be, they 
being thus convicted of the grossest ignorance. Or suppose they were influenced by being involved in 
foreknowledge. But they would not have conspired against what they foreknew in the assault they made; nor 
would they have been terror-struck at their own work, in consequence of foreknowledge, on their perceiving 
the supernal germ. Or, finally, suppose, trusting to their knowledge, they dared (but this also were 
impossible for them), on learning the excellence that is in the Pleroma, to conspire against man. 
Furthermore also they laid hands on that which was according to the image, in which also is the archetype, 
and which, along with the knowledge that remains, is indestructible. 

To these, then, and certain others, especially the Marcionites, the Scripture cries, though they listen not, "He 
that heareth Me shall rest with confidence in peace, and shall be tranquil, fearless of all evil."[1] 

What, then, will they have the law to be? They will not call it evil, but just; distinguishing what is good from 
what is just. But the Lord, when He enjoins us to dread evil, does not exchange one evil for another, but 
abolishes what is opposite by its opposite. Now evil is the opposite of good, as what is just is of what is 
unjust. If, then, that absence of fear, which the fear of the Lord produces, is called the beginning of what is 
good, [2] fear is a good thing. And the fear which proceeds from the law is not only just, but good, as it takes 
away evil. But introducing absence of fear by means of fear, it does not produce apathy by means of mental 
perturbation, but moderation of feeling by discipline. When, then, we hear, "Honour the Lord, and be strong: 
but fear not another besides Him, "[3] we understand it to be meant fearing to sin, and following the 
commandments given by God, which is the honour that cometh from God. For the fear of God is 
<greek>Deos</greek> [in Greek]. But if fear is perturbation of mind, as some will have it that fear is 
perturbation of mind, yet all fear is not perturbation. Superstition is indeed perturbation of mind; being the 
fear of demons, that produce and are subject to the excitement of passion. On the other hand, consequently, 
the fear of God, who is not subject to perturbation, is free of perturbation. For it is not God, but failing away 
from God, that the man is terrified for. And he who fears this-that is, falling into evils-fears and dreads those 
evils. And he who fears a fall, wishes himself to be free of corruption and perturbation. "The wise man, 
fearing, avoids evil: but the foolish, trusting, mixes himself with it," says the Scripture; and again it says, "In 
the fear of the LORD is the hope of strength."[4] 

CHAP. IX. -THE CONNECTION OF THE CHRISTIAN VIRTUES. 

Such a fear, accordingly, leads to repentance and hope. Now hope is the expectation of good things, or an 
expectation sanguine of absent good; and favourable circumstances are assumed in order to good hope, 
which we have learned leads on to love. Now love turns out to be consent in what pertains to reason, life, 
and manners, or in brief, fellowship in life, or it is the intensity of friendship and of affection, with fight reason, 
in the enjoyment of associates. And an associate (<greek>etairos</greek>) is another self;[1] just as we call 
those, brethren, who are regenerated by the same word. And akin to love is hospitality, being a congenial 
an devoted to the treatment of strangers. And those are strangers, to whom the things of the world are 
strange. For we regard as worldly those, who hope in the earth and carnal lusts. "Be not conformed," says 
the apostle, "to this world: but be ye transformed in the renewal of the mind, that ye may prove what is that 
good, and acceptable, and perfect, will of God. "[2] 

Hospitality, therefore, is occupied in what is useful for strangers; and guests (<greek>epixenoi</greek>) are 
strangers (<greek>xenoi</greek>); and friends are guests; and brethren are friends. "Dear brother,"[3] says 
Homer. 

Philanthropy, in order to which also, is natural affection, being a loving treatment of men, and natural 
affection, which is a congenial habit exercised in the love of friends or domestics, follow in the train of love. 
And if the real man within us is the spiritual, philanthropy is brotherly love to those who participate, in the 
same spirit. Natural affection, on the other hand, the preservation of good-will, or of affection; and affection is 
its perfect demonstration; [4] and to be beloved is to please in behaviour, by drawing and attracting. And 
persons are brought to sameness by consent, which is the knowledge of the good things that are enjoyed in 
common. For community of sentiment (<greek>omognwmosunh</greek>) is harmony of opinions 
(<greek>sumfwnia</greek> <greek>gnwmpn</greek>). "Let your love be without dissimulation," it is said; 
"and abhorring what is evil, let us become attached to what is good, to brotherly love," and so on, down to "If 
it be possible, as much as lieth in you, living peaceably with all men." Then "be not overcome of evil," it is 
said, "but overcome evil with good. "[5] And the same apostle owns that he bears witness to the Jews, "that 
they have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge. For, being ignorant of God's righteousness, and 
seeking to establish their own, they have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God. "[6] For they 
did not know and do the will of the law; but what they supposed, that they thought the law wished. And they 
did not believe the law as prophesying, but the bare word; and they followed through fear, not through 
disposition and faith. "For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness, "[7] who was prophesied by the law 
to every one that believeth. Whence it was said to them by Moses, "I will provoke you to jealousy by them 
that are not a people; and I will anger you by a foolish nation, that is, by one that has become disposed to 
obedience. "[8] And by Isaiah it is said, "I was found of them that sought Me not; I was made manifest to them 
that inquired not after Me,"[9]-manifestly previous to the coming of the Lord; after which to Israel, the things 
prophesied, are now appropriately spoken: "I have stretched out My hands all the day long to a 
disobedient and gainsaying people." Do you see the cause of the calling from among the nations, clearly 
declared, by the prophet, to be the disobedience and gainsaying of the people? Then the goodness of 
God is shown also in their case. For the apostle says, "But through their transgression salvation is come to 
the Gentiles, to provoke them to jealousy, "[1 0] and to willingness to repent. And the Shepherd, speaking 
plainly of those who had fallen asleep, recognises certain righteous among Gentiles and Jews, not only 
before the appearance of Christ, but before the law, in virtue of acceptance before God,-as Abel, as Noah, 

as any other righteous man. He says accordingly, "that the apostles and teachers, who had preached the 
name of the Son of God, and had fallen asleep, in power and by faith, preached to those that had fallen 
asleep before." Then he subjoins: "And they gave them the seal of preaching. They descended, therefore, 
with them into the water, and again ascended. But these descended alive, and again ascended alive. But 
those, who had fallen asleep before, descended dead, but ascended alive. By these, therefore, they were 
made alive, and knew the name of the Son of God. Wherefore also they ascended with them, and fitted into 
the structure of the tower, and unhewn were built up together; they fell asleep in righteousness and in great 
purity, but wanted only this seal. "[1 1] "For when the Gentiles, which have not the law, do by nature the things 
of the law, these, having not the law, are a law unto themselves, "[12] according to the apostle. 
As, then, the virtues follow one another, why need I say what has been demonstrated already, that faith 
hopes through repentance, and fear through faith; and patience and practice in these along with learning 
terminate in love, which is perfected by knowledge? But that is necessarily to be noticed, that the Divine 
alone is to be regarded as naturally wise. Therefore also wisdom, which has taught the truth, is the power of 
God; and in it the perfection of knowledge is embraced. The philosopher loves and likes the truth, being 
now considered as a friend, on account of his love, from his being a true servant. The beginning of 
knowledge is wondering at objects, as Plato says is in his Theoetetus; and Matthew exhorting in the 
Traditions, says, "Wonder at what is before you;" laying this down first as the foundation of further 
knowledge. So also in the Gospel to the Hebrews it is written, "He that wonders shall reign, and he that has 
reigned shall rest. It is impossible, therefore, for an ignorant man, while he remains ignorant, to philosophize, 
not having apprehended the idea of wisdom; since philosophy is an effort to grasp that which truly is, and 
the studies that conduce thereto. And it is not the rendering of one[1] accomplished in good habits of 
conduct, but the knowing how we are to use and act and labour, according as one is assimilated to God. I 
mean God the Saviour, by serving the God of the universe through the High Priest, the Word, by whom what 
is in truth good and right is beheld. Piety is conduct suitable and corresponding to God. 

CHAP. X.-TO WHAT THE PHILOSOPHER APPLIES HIMSELF. 

These three things, therefore, our philosopher attaches himself to: first, speculation; second, the 
performance of the precepts; third, the forming of good men;-which, concurring, form the Gnostic. Whichever 
of these is wanting, the elements of knowledge limp. Whence the Scripture divinely says, "And the Lord 
spake to Moses, saying. Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them, I am the LORD your 
God. According to the customs of the land of Egypt, in which ye have dwelt, ye shall not do; and according 
to the customs of Canaan, into which I bring you, ye shall not do; and in their usages ye shall not walk. Ye 
shall perform My judgments, and keep My precepts, and walk in them: I am the LORD your God. And ye 
shall keep all My commandments, and do them. He that doeth them shall live in them. I am the LORD your 
God. "[2] Whether, then, Egypt and the land of Canaan be the symbol of the world and of deceit, or of 
sufferings and afflictions; the oracle shows us what must be abstained from, and what, being divine and not 
worldly, must be observed. And when it is said, "The man that doeth them shall live in them, "[3] it declares 
both the correction of the Hebrews themselves, and the training and advancement of us who are nigh:[4] it 
declares at once their life and ours. For "those who were dead in sins are quickened together with Christ, "[5] 
by our covenant. For Scripture, by the frequent reiteration of the expression, "I am the LORD your God," 
shames in such a way as most powerfully to dissuade, by teaching us to follow God who gave the 
commandments, and gently admonishes us to seek God and endeavour to know Him as far as possible; 
which is the highest speculation, that which scans the greatest mysteries, the real knowledge, that which 
becomes irrefragable by reason. This alone is the knowledge of wisdom, from which rectitude of conduct is 
never disjoined. 

CHAP. XI. -THE KNOWLEDGE WHICH COMES THROUGH FAITH THE SUREST OF ALL. 

But the knowledge of those who think themselves wise, whether the barbarian sects or the philosophers 
among the Greeks, according to the apostle, " puffeth up."[6] But that knowledge, which is the scientific 
demonstration of what is delivered according to the true philosophy, is rounded on faith. Now, we may say 
that it is that process of reason which, from what is admitted, procures faith in what is disputed. Now, faith 
being twofold-the faith of knowledge and that of opinion-nothing prevents us from calling demonstration 
twofold, the one resting on knowledge, the other on opinion; since also knowledge and foreknowledge are 
designated as twofold, that which is essentially accurate, that which is defective. And is not the 
demonstration, which we possess, that alone which is true, as being supplied out of the divine Scriptures, 
the sacred writings, and out of the "God-taught wisdom," according to the apostle? Learning, then, is also 
obedience to the commandments, which is faith in God. And faith is a power of God, being the strength of the 
truth. For example, it is said, "If ye have faith as a grain of mustard, ye shall remove the mountain. "[7] And 

again, "According to tiiy faitii let it be to tliee."[8] And one is cured, receiving iiealing by faitii; and tiie dead 
is raised up in consequence of tiie power of one believing that he would be raised. The demonstration, 
however, which rests on opinion is human, and is the result of rhetorical arguments or dialectic syllogisms. 
For the highest demonstration, to which we have alluded, produces intelligent faith by the adducing and 
opening up of the Scriptures to the souls of those who desire to learn; the result of which is knowledge 
(gnosis). For if what is adduced in order to prove the point at issue is assumed to be true, as being divine 
and prophetic, manifestly the conclusion arrived at by inference from it will consequently he inferred truly; 
and the legitimate result of the demonstration will be knowledge. When, then, the memorial of the celestial 
and divine food was commanded to be consecrated in the golden pot, it was said, "The omer was the tenth 
of the three measures. "[1] For in ourselves, by the three measures are indicated three criteria; sensation of 
objects of sense, speech, -of spoken names and words, and the mind,-of intellectual objects. The Gnostic, 
therefore, will abstain from errors in speech, and thought, and sensation, and action, having heard "that he 
that looks so as to lust hath committed adultery;"[2] and reflecting that "blessed are the pure in heart, for they 
shall see God;"[3] and knowing this, "that not what enters into the mouth defileth, but that it is what cometh 
forth by the mouth that defileth the man. For out of the heart proceed thoughts. "[4] This, as I think, is the true 
and just measure according to God, by which things capable of measurement are measured, the decad 
which is comprehensive of man; which summarily the three above-mentioned measures pointed out. There 
are body and soul, the five senses, speech, the power of reproduction-the intellectual or the spiritual faculty, 
or whatever you choose to call it. And we must, in a word, ascending above all the others, stop at the mind; 
as also certainly in the universe overleaping the nine divisions, the first consisting of the four elements put in 
one place for equal interchange: and then the seven wandering stars and the one that wanders not, the 
ninth, to the perfect number, which is above the nine, [5] and the tenth division, we must reach to the 
knowledge of God, to speak briefly, desiring the Maker after the creation. Wherefore the tithes both of the 
ephah and of the sacrifices were presented to God; and the paschal feast began with the tenth day, being 
the transition from all trouble, and from all objects of sense. 

The Gnostic is therefore fixed by faith; but the man who thinks himself wise touches not what pertains to the 
truth, moved as he is by unstable and wavering impulses. It is therefore reasonably written, "Cain went forth 
from the face of God, and dwelt in the land of Naid, over against Eden." Now Naid is interpreted commotion, 
and Eden delight; and Faith, and Knowledge, and Peace are delight, from which he that has disobeyed is 
cast out. But he that is wise in his own eyes will not so much as listen to the beginning of the divine 
commandments; but, as if his own teacher, throwing off the reins, plunges voluntarily into a billowy 
commotion, sinking down to mortal and created things from the uncreated knowledge, holding various 
opinions at various times. "Those who have no guidance fall like leaves. "[6] 

Reason, the governing principle, remaining unmoved and guiding the soul, is called its pilot. For access to 
the Immutable is obtained by a truly immutable means. Thus Abraham was stationed before the Lord, and 
approaching spoke. [7] And to Moses it is said, "But do thou stand there with Me. "[8] And the followers of 
Simon wish be assimilated in manners to the standing form which they adore. Faith, therefore, and the 
knowledge of the truth, render the soul, which makes them its choice, always uniform and equable. For 
congenial to the man of falsehood is shifting, and change, and turning away, as to the Gnostic are calmness, 
and rest, and peace. As, then, philosophy has been brought into evil repute by pride and self-conceit, so 
also ghosts by false ghosts called by the same name; of which the apostle writing says, "O Timothy, keep 
that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding the profane and vain babblings and oppositions of science 
(gnosis) falsely so called; which some professing, have erred concerning the faith. "[9] 
Convicted by this utterance, the heretics reject the Epistles, to Timothy. [10] Well, then, if the Lord is the truth, 
and wisdom, and power of God, as in truth He is, it is shown that the real Gnostic is he that knows Him, and 
His Father by Him. For his sentiments are the same with him who said, "The lips of the righteous know high 
things."[11] 

CHAP. XII. -TWOFOLD FAITH. 

Faith as also Time being double, we shall find virtues in pairs both dwelling together. For memory is related 
to past time, hope to future. We believe that what is past did, and that what is future will take place. And, on 
the other I hand, we love, persuaded by faith that the past was as it was, and by hope expecting the future. 
For in everything love attends the Gnostic, who knows one God. "And, behold, all things which He created 
were very good. "[12] He both knows and admires. Godliness adds length of life; and the fear of the Lord 
adds days. As, then, the days are a portion of life in its progress, so also fear is the beginning of love, 
becoming by development faith, then love. But it is not as I fear and hate a wild beast (since fear is twofold) 
that I fear the father, whom I fear and love at once. Again, fearing lest I be punished, I love myself in 
assuming fear. He who fears to offend his father, loves himself. Blessed then is he who is found possessed 
of faith, being, as he is, composed of love and fear. And faith is power in order to salvation, and strength to 

eternal life. Again, prophecy is foreknowledge; and knowledge the understanding of prophecy; being the 
knowledge of those things known before by the Lord who reveals all things. 

The knowledge, then, of those things which have been predicted shows a threefold result-either one that 
has happened long ago, or exists now, or about to be. Then the extremes[1] either of what is accomplished 
or of what is hoped for fall under faith; and the present action furnishes persuasive arguments of the 
confirmation of both the extremes. For if, prophecy being one, one part is accomplishing and another is 
fulfilled; hence the truth, both what is hoped for and what is passed is confirmed. For it was first present; then 
it became past to us; so that the belief of what is past is the apprehension of a past event, and a hope which 
is future the apprehension of a future event. 

And not only the Platonists, but the Stoics, say that assent is in our own power. All opinion then, and 
judgment, and supposition, and knowledge, by which we live and have perpetual intercourse with the 
human race, is an assent; which is nothing else than faith. And unbelief being defection from faith, shows 
both assent and faith to be possessed of power; for non-existence cannot be called privation. And if you 
consider the truth, you will find man naturally misled so as to give assent to what is false, though possessing 
the resources necessary for belief in the truth. "The virtue, then, that encloses the Church in its grasp," as the 
Shepherd says, [2] "is Faith, by which the elect of God are saved; and that which acts the man is 
Self-restraint. And these are followed by Simplicity, Knowledge, Innocence, Decorum, Love," and all these 
are the daughters of Faith. And again, "Faith leads the way, fear upbuilds, and love perfects." Accordingly 
he[3] says, the Lord is to be feared in order to edification, but not the devil to destruction. And again, the 
works of the Lord-that is. His commandments-are to be loved and done; but the works of the devil are to be 
dreaded and not done. For the fear of God trains and restores to love; but the fear of the works of the devil 
has hatred dwelling along with it. The same also says" that repentance is high intelligence. For he that 
repents of what he did, no longer does or says as he did. But by torturing himself for his sins, he benefits his 
soul. Forgiveness of sins is therefore different from repentance; but both show what is in our power." 

CHAP. XIII. --ON FIRST AND SECOND REPENTANCE. 

He, then, who has received the forgiveness of sins ought to sin no more. For, in addition to the first and only 
repentance from sins (this is from the previous sins in the first and heathen life-l mean that in ignorance), 
there is forthwith proposed to those who have been called, the repentance which cleanses the seat of the 
soul from transgressions, that faith may be established. And the Lord, knowing the heart, and foreknowing 
the future, foresaw both the fickleness of man and the craft and subtlety of the devil from the first, from the 
beginning; how that, envying man for the forgiveness of sins, he would present to the servants of God certain 
causes of sins; skilfully working mischief, that they might fall together with himself. Accordingly, being very 
merciful. He has vouch-safed, in the case of those who, though in faith, fall into any transgression, a second 
repentance; so that should any one be tempted after his calling, overcome by force and fraud, he may 
receive still a repentance not to be repented of. "For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the 
knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment 
and fiery indignation, which shah devour the adversaries. "[4] But continual and successive repentings for 
sins differ nothing from the case of those who have not believed at all, except only in their consciousness 
that they do sin. And I know not which of the two is worst, whether the case of a man who sins knowingly, or of 
one who, after having repented of his sins, transgresses again. For in the process of proof sin appears on 
each side,-the sin which in its commission is condemned by the worker of the iniquity, and that of the man 
who, foreseeing what is about to be done, yet puts his hand to it as a wickedness. And he who perchance 
gratifies himself in anger and pleasure, gratifies himself in he knows what; and he who, repenting of that in 
which he gratified himself, by rushing again into pleasure, is near neighbour to him who has sinned wilfully at 
first. For one, who does again that of which he has repented, and condemning what he does, performs it 
willingly. 

He, then, who from among the Gentiles and from that old life has betaken himself to faith, has obtained 
forgiveness of sins once. But he who has sinned after this, on his repentance, though he obtain pardon, 
ought to fear, as one no longer washed to the forgiveness of sins. For not only must the idols which he 
formerly held as gods, but the works also of his former life, be abandoned by him who has been "born 
again, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, "[1] but in the Spirit; which consists in repenting by not giving 
way to the same fault. For frequent repentance and readiness to change easily from want of training, is the 
practice of sin again. [2] The frequent asking of forgiveness, then, for those things in which we often 
transgress, is the semblance of repentance, not repentance itself. "But the righteousness of the blameless 
cuts straight paths, "[3] says the Scripture. And again, "The righteousness of the innocent will make his way 
right."[4] Nay, "as a father pitieth his children, so the LORD pifleth them that fear Him. "[5] David writes, "They 
who sow," then, "in tears, shall reap in joy; "[6] those, namely, who confess in penitence. "For blessed are all 
those that fear the LORD. "[7] You see the corresponding blessing in the Gospel. "Fear not," it is said, "when 

a man is enriched, and wiien tiie glory of iiis iiouse is increased: because wiien lie dietii lie siiall leave all, 
and his glory shall not descend after him. "[8] "But I in Thy I mercy will enter into Thy house. I will worship I 
toward Thy holy temple, in Thy fear: LORD, lead me in Thy righteousness. "[9] Appetite is then the 
movement of the mind to or from something. [10] Passion is an excessive appetite exceeding the measures 
of reason, or appetite unbridled and disobedient to the word. Passions, then, are a perturbation of the soul 
contrary to nature, in disobedience to reason. But revolt and distraction and disobedience are in our own 
power, as obedience is in our power. Wherefore voluntary actions are judged. But should one examine 
each one of the passions, he will find them irrational impulses. 

CHAP. XIV.-HOW A THING MAY BE INVOLUNTARY. 

What is involuntary is not matter for judgment. But this is twofold, -what is done in ignorance, and what is 
done through necessity. For how will you judge concerning those who are said to sin in involuntary modes? 
For either one knew not himself, as Cleomenes and Athamas, who were mad; or the thing which he does, as 
Aeschylus, who divulged the mysteries on the stage, who, being tried in the Areopagus, was absolved on 
his showing that he had not been initiated. Or one knows not what is done, as he who has let off his 
antagonist, and slain his domestic instead of his enemy; or that by which it is done, as he who, in exercising 
with spears having buttons on them, has killed some one in consequence of the spear throwing off the 
button; or knows not the manner how, as he who has killed his antagonist in the stadium, for it was not for his 
death but for victory that he contended; or knows not the reason why it is done, as the physician gave a 
salutary antidote and killed, for it was not for this purpose that he gave it, but to save. The law at that time 
punished him who had killed involuntarily, as e.g., him who was subject involuntarily to gonorrhoea, but not 
equally with him who did so voluntarily. Although he also shall be punished as for a voluntary action, if one 
transfer the affection to the truth. For, in reality, he that cannot contain the generative word is to be punished; 
for this is an irrational passion of the soul approaching garrulity. "The faithful man chooses to conceal things 
in his spirit."[11] Things, then, that depend on choice are subjects for judgment. "For the Lord searcheth the 
hearts and reins. "[12] "And he that looketh so as to lust"[13] is judged. Wherefore it is said, "Thou shalt not 
lust."[1 4] And "this people honoureth Me with their lips," it is said, "but their heart is far from Me."[1 5] For God 
has respect to the very thought, since Lot's wife, who had merely voluntarily turned towards worldly 
wickedness. He left a senseless mass, rendering her a pillar of salt, and fixed her so that she advanced no 
further, not as a stupid and useless image, but to season and salt him who has the power of spiritual 
perception. 

CHAP. XV. --ON THE DIFFERENT KINDS OF VOLUNTARY ACTIONS, AND THE SINS 
THENCE PROCEEDING. 

What is voluntary is either what is by desire, or what is by choice, or what is of intention. Closely allied to 
each other are these things-sin, mistake, crime. It is sin, for example, to live luxuriously and licentiously; a 
misfortune, to wound one's friend in ignorance, taking him for an enemy; and crime, to violate graves or 
commit sacrilege. Sinning arises from being unable to determine what ought to be done, or being unable to 
do it; as doubtless one falls into a ditch either through not knowing, or through inability to leap across through 
feebleness of body. But application to the training of ourselves, and subjection to the commandments, is in 
our own power; with which if we will have nothing to do, by abandoning ourselves wholly to lust, we shall sin, 
nay rather, wrong our own soul. For the noted Laius says in the tragedy:- 

"None of these things of which you admonish me have escaped me; 
But notwithstanding that I am in my senses. Nature compels me;" 

i.e., his abandoning himself to passion. Medea, too, herself cries on the stage:- 

"And I am aware what evils I am to perpetrate. 
But passion is stronger than my resolutions. "[1] 

Further, not even Ajax is silent; but, when about to kill himself, cries: - 

"No pain gnaws the soul of a free man like dishonour. 
Thus do I suffer; and the deep stain of calamity 
Ever stirs me from the depths, agitated 
By the bitter stings of rage. "[2] 

Anger made these the subjects of tragedy, and lust made ten thousand others-Phaedra, Anthia, Eriphyle,- 

"Who took the precious gold for her dear husband." 

For another play represents Thrasonides of the comic drama as saying:- 

"A worthless wench made me her slave." 

Mistake is a sin contrary to calculation; and voluntary sin is crime (<greek>adikia</greek>); and crime is 
voluntary wickedness. Sin, then, is on my part voluntary. Wherefore says the apostle, "Sin shall not have 
dominion over you; for ye are not under the law, but under grace. "[3] Addressing those who have believed, 
he says, "For by His stripes we were healed. "[4] Mistake is the involuntary action of another towards me, 
while a crime (<greek>adikia</greek>) alone is voluntary, whether my act or another's. These differences of 
sins are alluded to by the Psalmist, when he calls those blessed whose iniquities 
(<greek>anomias</greek>) God hath blotted out, and whose sins (<greek>amartias</greek>) He hath 
covered. Others He does not impute, and the rest He forgives. For it is written, "Blessed are they whose 
iniquities are forgiven, whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man to whom the LORD will not impute sin, 
and in whose mouth there is no fraud. "[5] This blessedness came on those who had been chosen by Cod 
through Jesus Christ our Lord. For "love hides the multitude of sins. "[6] And they are blotted out by Him "who 
desireth the repentance rather than the death of a sinner."[7] And those are not reckoned that are not the 
effect of choice; "for he who has lusted has already committed adultery, "[8] it is said. And the illuminating 
Word forgives sins: "And in that time, saith the LORD, they shall seek for the iniquity of Israel, and it shall not 
exist; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found. "[9] "For who is like Me? and who shall stand before 
My face?[10] You see the one God declared good, rendering according to desert, and forgiving sins. John, 
too, manifestly teaches the differences of sins, in his larger Epistle, in these words: "If any man see his 
brother sin a sin that is not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life: for these that sin not unto 
death," he says. For "there is a sin unto death: I do not say that one is to pray for it. All unrighteousness is sin; 
and there is a sin not unto death. "[1 1] 

David, too, and Moses before David, show the knowledge of the three precepts in the following words: 
"Blessed is the man who walks not in the counsel of the ungodly;" as the fishes go down to the depths in 
darkness; for those which have not scales, which Moses prohibits touching, feed at the bottom of the sea. 
"Norstandeth in the way of sinners," as those who, while appearing to fear the Lord, commit sin, like the sow, 
for when hungry it cries, and when full knows not its owner. "Nor sitteth in the chair of pestilences," as birds 
ready for prey. And Moses enjoined not to eat the sow, nor the eagle, nor the hawk, nor the raven, nor any 
fish without scales. So far Barnabas. [12] And I heard one skilled in such matters say that "the counsel of the 
ungodly" was the heathen, and "the way of sinners" the Jewish persuasion, and explain "the chair of 
pestilence" of heresies. And another said, with more propriety, that the first blessing was assigned to those 
who had not followed wicked sentiments which revolt from God; the second to those who do not remain in 
the wide and broad road, whether they be those who have been brought up in the law, or Gentiles who have 
repented. And "the chair of pestilences" will be the theatres and tribunals, or rather the compliance with 
wicked and deadly powers, and complicity with their deeds. "But his delight is in the law of the L0RD."[1 3] 
Peter in his Preaching called the Lord, Law and Logos. The legislator seems to teach differently the 
interpretation of the three forms of sin-understanding by the mute fishes sins of word, for there are times in 
which silence is better than speech, far silence has a safe recompense; sins of deed, by the rapacious and 
carnivorous birds. The sow delights in dirt and dung; and we ought not to have "a conscience" that is 
"defiled. "[1] 

Justly, therefore, the prophet says, "The ungodly are not so: but as the chaff which the wind driveth away 
from the face of the earth. Wherefore the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment"[2] (being already 
condemned, for "he that believeth not is condemned already"[3]), "nor sinners in the counsel of the 
righteous," inasmuch as they are already condemned, so as not to be united to those that have lived without 
stumbling. "For the LORD knoweth the way of the righteous; and the way of the ungodly shall perish. "[4] 
Again, the Lord clearly shows sins and transgressions to be in our own power, by prescribing modes of cure 
corresponding to the maladies; showing His wish that we should be Corrected by the shepherds, in Ezekiel; 
blaming, I am of opinion, some of them for not keeping the commandments. "That which was enfeebled ye 
have not strengthened," and so forth, down to, "and there was none to search out or turn away. "[5] 
For "great is the joy before the Father when one sinner is saved, "[6] saith the Lord. So Abraham was much 
to be praised, because "he walked as the Lord spake to him." Drawing from this instance, one of the wise 
men among the Greeks uttered the maxim, "Follow God. "[7] "The godly," says Esaias, "framed wise 
counsels. "[8] Now counsel is seeking for the right way of acting in present circumstances, and good 
counsel is wisdom in our counsels. And what? Does not God, after the pardon bestowed on Cain, suitably 

not long after introduce Enoch, who had repented?[9] showing that it is the nature of repentance to produce 
pardon; but pardon does not consist in remission, but in remedy. An instance of the same is the mailing of 
the calf by the people before Aaron. Thence one of the wise men among the Greeks uttered the maxim, 
"Pardon is better than punishment;" as also, "Become surety, and mischief is at hand," is derived from the 
utterance of Solomon which says, "My son, if thou becomesurety for thy friend, thou wilt give thine hand to 
thy enemy; for a man's own lips are a strong snare to him, and he is taken in the words of his own mouth. "[10] 
And the saying, "Know thyself," has been taken rather more mystically from this, "Thou hast seen thy brother, 
thou hast seen thy God."[1 1] Thus also, "Thou shalt love the Load thy God with all thy heart, and thy 
neighbour as thyself;" for it is said, "On these commandments the law and the prophets hang and are 
suspended. "[12] With these also agree the following: "These things have I spoken to you, that My joy might 
be fulfilled: and this is My commandment. That ye love one another, as I have loved you. "[13] "For the 
LORD is merciful and pitiful; and gracious[14] is the LORD to all. "[15] "Know thyself" is more clearly and 
often expressed by Moses, when he enjoins, "Take heed to thyself."[16] "By alms then, and acts of faith, 
sins are purged. "[17] "And by the fear of the LORD each one departs from evil. "[18] "And the fear of the Lord 
is instruction and wisdom. "[19] 

CHAP. XVI. -HOW WE ARE TO EXPLAIN THE PASSAGES OF SCRIPTURE WHICH 
ASCRIBE TO GOD HUMAN AFFECTIONS. 

Here again arise the cavaliers, who say that joy and pain are passions of the soul: for they define joy as a 
rational elevation and exultation, as rejoicing on account of what is good; and pity as pain for one who 
suffers undeservedly; and that such affections are moods and passions of the soul. But we, as would 
appear, do not cease in such matters to understand the Scriptures carnally; and starting from our own 
affections, interpret the will of the impassible Deity similarly to our perturbations; and as we are capable of 
hearing; so, supposing the same to be the case with the Omnipotent, err impiously. For the Divine Being 
cannot be declared as it exists: but as we who are lettered in the flesh were able to listen, so the prophets 
spake to us; the Lord savingly accommodating Himself to the weakness of men. [20] Since, then, it is the will 
of God that he, who is obedient to the commands and repents of his sins should be saved, and we rejoice 
on account of our salvation, the Lord, speaking by the prophets, appropriated our joy to Himself; as 
speaking lovingly in the Gospel He says, "I was hungry, and ye gave Me to eat: I was thirsty, and ye gave 
Me to drink. For inasmuch as ye did it to one of the least of these, ye did it to Me."[1] As, then. He is 
nourished, though not personally, by the nourishing of one whom He wishes nourished; so He rejoices, 
without suffering change, by reason of him who has repented being in joy, as He wished. And since God 
pities richly, being good, and giving commands by the law and the prophets, and more nearly still by the 
appearance of his Son, saving and pitying, as was said, those who have found mercy; and properly the 
greater pities the less; and a man cannot be greater than man, being by nature man; but God in everything 
is greater than man; if, then, the greater pities the less, it is God alone that will pity us. For a man is made to 
communicate by righteousness, and bestows what he received from God, in consequence of his natural 
benevolence and relation, and the commands which he obeys. But God has no natural relation to us, as the 
authors of the heresies will have it; neither on the supposition of His having made us of nothing, nor on that of 
having formed us from matter; since the former did not exist at all, and the latter is totally distinct from God 
unless we shall dare to say that we are a part of Him, and of the same essence as God. And I know not how 
one, who knows God, can bear to hear this when he looks to our life, and sees in what evils we are involved. 
For thus it would turn out, which it were impiety to utter, that God sinned in [certain] portions, if the portions are 
parts of the whole and complementary of the whole; and if not complementary, neither can they be parts. But 
God being by nature rich in pity, in consequence of His own goodness, cares for us, though neither portions 
of Himself, nor by nature His children. And this is the greatest proof of the goodness of God: that such being 
our relation to Him, and being by nature wholly estranged. He nevertheless cares for us. For the affection in 
animals to their progeny is natural, and the friendship of kindred minds is the result of intimacy. But the mercy 
of God is rich toward us, who are in no respect related to Him; I say either in our essence or nature, or in the 
peculiar energy of our essence, but only in our being the work of His will. And him who willingly, with 
discipline and teaching, accepts the knowledge of the truth. He calls to adoption, which is the greatest 
advancement of all. "Transgressions catch a man; and in the cords of his own sins each one is bound. "[2] 
And God is without blame. And in reality, "blessed is the man who feareth alway through piety. "[3] 

CHAP. XVII. --ON THE VARIOUS KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE. 

As, then. Knowledge (<greek>episthmh</greek>) is an intellectual state, from which results the act of 
knowing, and becomes apprehension irrefragable by reason; so also ignorance is a receding impression, 
which can be dislodged by reason. And that which is overthrown as well as that which is elaborated by 

reason, is in our power. Al<in to Knowledge is experience, cognition (<greel<>eidlisis</greel<>), 
Compreiiension (<greel<>sunesis</greel<>), perception, and Science. Cognition (<greel<>eidlisis</greel<>) 
is tiie l<nowledge of universals by species; and Experience is compreiiensive l<nowledge, wiiicii 
investigates tiie nature of eacii tiling. Perception (<greel<>nolisis</greel<>) is tiie l<nowledge of intellectual 
objects; and Comprehension (<greek>sunesis</greek>) is the knolwedge of what is compared, or a 
comparison that cannot be annulled, or the faculty of comparing the objects with which Judgment and 
Knowledge are occupied, both of one and each and all that goes to make up one reason. And Science 
(<greek>gnwsis</greek>) is the knowledge of the thing in itself, or the knowledge which harmonizes with 
what takes place. Truth is the knowledge of the true; and the mental habit of truth is the knowledge of the 
things which are true. Now knowledge is constituted by the reason, and cannot be overthrown by another 
reason. [4] What we do not, we do not either from not being able, or not being willing-or both. Accordingly we 
don't fly, since we neither can nor wish; we do not swim at present, for example, since we can indeed, but do 
not choose; and we are not as the Lord, since we wish, but cannot be: "for no disciple is above his master, 
and it is sufficient if we be as the master:"[5] not m essence (for it is impossible for that, which is by adoption, 
to be equal in substance to that, which is by nature); but [we are as Him] only in our[6] having been made 
immortal, and our being conversant with the contemplation of realities, and beholding the Father through 
what belongs to Him. 

Therefore volition takes the precedence of all; for the intellectual powers are ministers of the Will. "Will," it is 
said, "and thou shalt be able. "[7] And in the Gnostic, Will, Judgment, and Exertion are identical. For if the 
determinations are the same, the opinions and judgments will be the same too; so that both his words, and 
life, and conduct, are conformable to rule. "And a right heart seeketh knowledge, and heareth it." "God 
taught me wisdom, and I knew the knowledge of the holy."[1] 

CHAP. XVIII. -THE MOSAIC LAW THE FOUNTAIN OF ALL ETHICS, AND THE SOURCE 
FROM WHICH THE GREEKS DREW THEIRS. [2] 

It is then clear also that all the other virtues, delineated in Moses, supplied the Greeks with the rudiments of 
the whole department of morals. I mean valour, and temperance, and wisdom, and justice, and endurance, 
and patience, and decorum, and self-restraint; and in addition to these, piety. 

But it is clear to every one that piety, which teaches to worship and honour, is the highest and oldest cause; 
and the law itself exhibits justice, and teaches wisdom, by abstinence from sensible images, and by inviting 
to the Maker and Father of the universe. And from this sentiment, as from a fountain, all intelligence 
increases. "For the sacrifices of the wicked are abomination to the LORD; but the prayers of the upright are 
acceptable before Him, "[3] since "righteousness is more acceptable before God than sacrifice." Such also 
as the following we find in Isaiah: "To what purpose to me is the multitude of your sacrifices? saith the 
LORD;" and the whole section. [4] "Break every bond of wickedness; for this is the sacrifice that is 
acceptable to the Lord, a contrite heart that seeks its Maker."[5] "Deceitful balances are abomination before 
God; but a just balance is acceptable to Him. "[6] Thence Pythagoras exhorts "not to step over the balance;" 
and the profession of heresies is called deceitful righteousness; and "the tongue of the unjust shall be 
destroyed, but the mouth of the righteous droppeth wisdom. "[7] "For they call the wise and prudent 
worthless. "[8] But it were tedious to adduce testimonies respecting these virtues, since the whole Scripture 
celebrates them. Since, then, they define manliness to be knowledge[9] of things formidable, and not 
formidable, and what is intermediate; and temperance to be a state of mind which by choosing and 
avoiding preserves the judgments of wisdom; and conjoined with manliness is patience, which is called 
endurance, the knowledge of what is bearable and what is unbearable; and magnanimity is the knowledge 
which rises superior to circumstances. With temperance also is conjoined caution, which is avoidance in 
accordance with reason. And observance of the commandments, which is the innoxious keeping of them, is 
the attainment of a secure life. And there is no endurance without manliness, nor the exercise of self-restraint 
without temperance. And these virtues follow one another; and with whom are the sequences of the virtues, 
with him is also salvation, which is the keeping of the state of well-being. Rightly, therefore, in treating of 
these virtues, we shall inquire into them all; for he that has one virtue gnostically, by reason of their 
accompanying each other, has them all. Self-restraint is that quality which does not overstep what appears 
in accordance with right reason. He exercises self-restraint, who curbs the impulses that are contrary to right 
reason, or curbs himself so as not to indulge in desires contrary to right reason. Temperance, too, is not 
without manliness; since from the commandments spring both wisdom, which follows God who enjoins, and 
that which imitates the divine character, namely righteousness; in virtue of which, in the exercise of 
self-restraint, we address ourselves in purity to piety and the course of conduct thence resulting, in 
conformity with God; being assimilated to the Lord as far as is possible for us beings mortal in nature. And 
this is being just and holy with wisdom; for the Divinity needs nothing and suffers nothing; whence it is not, 
strictly speaking, capable of self-restraint, for it is never subjected to perturbation, over which to exercise 

control; while our nature, being capable of perturbation, needs self-constraint, by which disciplining itself to 
the need of little, it endeavours to approximate in character to the divine nature. For the good man, standing 
as the boundary between an immortal and a mortal nature, has few needs; having wants in consequence of 
his body, and his birth itself, but taught by rational self-control to want few things. 
What reason is there in the law's prohibiting a man from "wearing woman's clothing "?[10] Is it not that it 
would have us to be manly, and not to be effeminate neither in person and actions, nor in thought and word? 
For it would have the man, that devotes himself to the truth, to be masculine both in acts of endurance and 
patience, in life, conduct, word, and discipline by night and by day; even if the necessity were to occur, of 
witnessing by the shedding of his blood. Again, it is said, "If any one who has newly built a house, and has 
not previously inhabited it; or cultivated a newly-planted vine, and not yet partaken of the fruit; or betrothed a 
virgin, and not yet married her;"[1 1]-such the humane law orders to be relieved from military service: from 
military reasons in the first place, lest, bent on their desires, they turn out sluggish in war; for it is those who 
are untrammelled by passion that boldly encounter perils; and from motives of humanity, since, in view of 
the uncertainties of war, the law reckoned it not right that one should not enjoy his own labours, and another 
should without bestowing pains, receive what belonged to those who had laboured. The law seems also to 
point out manliness of soul, by enacting that he who had planted should reap the fruit, and he that built 
should inhabit, and he that had betrothed should marry: for it is not vain hopes which it provides for those 
who labour; according to the gnostic word: "For the hope of a good man dead or living does not perish, "[1] 
says Wisdom; "I love them that love me; and they who seek me shall find peace, "[2] and so forth. What 
then? Did not the women of the Midianites, by their beauty, seduce from wisdom into impiety, through 
licentiousness, the Hebrews when making war against them? For, having seduced them from a grave mode 
of life, and by their beauty ensnared them in wanton delights, they made them insane upon idol sacrifices 
and strange women; and overcome by women and by pleasure at once, they revolted from God, and 
revolted from the law. And the whole people was within a little of falling under the power of the enemy 
through female stratagem, until, when they were in peril, fear by its admonitions pulled them back. Then the 
survivors, valiantly undertaking the struggle for piety, got the upper hand of their foes. "The beginning, then, 
of wisdom is piety, and the knowledge of holy things is understanding; and to know the law is the 
characteristic of a good understanding. "[3] Those, then, who suppose the law to be productive of agitating 
fear, are neither good at understanding the law, nor have they in reality comprehended it; for "the fear of the 
LORD causes life, but he who errs shall be afflicted with pangs which knowledge views not."[4] Accordingly, 
Barnabas says mystically, "May God who rules the universe vouchsafe also to you wisdom, and 
understanding, and science, and knowledge of His statutes, and patience. Be therefore God-taught, 
seeking what the Lord seeks from you, that He may find you in the day of judgment lying in wait for these 
things." "Children of love and peace," he called them gnostically.[5] 

Respecting imparting and communicating, though much might be said, let it suffice to remark that the law 
prohibits a brother from taking usury: designating as a brother not only him who is born of the same parents, 
but also one of the same race and sentiments, and a participator in the same word; deeming it right not to 
take usury for money, but with open hands and heart to bestow on those who need. For God, the author and 
the dispenser of such grace, takes as suitable usury the most precious things to be found among 
men-mildness, gentleness, magnanimity, reputation, renown. Do you not regard this command as marked 
by philanthropy? As also the following, "To pay the wages of the poor daily," teaches to discharge without 
delay the wages due for service; for, as I think, the alacrity of the poor with reference to the future is 
paralyzed when he has suffered want. Further, it is said, "Let not the creditor enter the debtor's house to take 
the pledge with violence." But let the former ask it to be brought out, and let not the latter, if he have it, 
hesitate. [6] And in the harvest the owners are prohibited from appropriating what falls from the handfuls; as 
also in reaping [the law] enjoins a part to be left unreaped; signally thereby training those who possess to 
sharing and to large-heartedness, by foregoing of their own to those who are in want, and thus providing 
means of subsistence for the poor? You see how the law proclaims at once the righteousness and 
goodness of God, who dispenses food to all ungrudgingly. And in the vintage it prohibited the 
grape-gatherers from going back again on what had been left, and from gathering the fallen grapes; and the 
same injunctions are given to the olive-gatherers. [8] Besides, the tithes of the fruits and of the flocks taught 
both piety towards the Deity, and not covetously to grasp everything, but to communicate gifts of kindness to 
one's neighbours. For it was from these, I reckon, and from the first-fruits that the priests were maintained. 
We now therefore understand that we are instructed in piety, and in liberality, and injustice, and in humanity 
by the law. For does it not command the land to be left fallow in the seventh year, and bids the poor 
fearlessly use the fruits that grow by divine agency, nature cultivating the ground for behoof of all and 
sundry?[9] How, then, can it be maintained that the law is not humane, and the teacher of righteousness? 
Again, in the fiftieth year, it ordered the same things to be performed as in the seventh; besides restoring to 
each one his own land, if from any circumstance he had parted with it in the meantime; setting bounds to the 
desires of those who covet possession, by measuring the period of enjoyment, and choosing that those 

who have paid the penalty of protracted penury should not suffer a life-long punishment. "But alms and acts 
of faith are royal guards, and blessing is on the head of him who bestows; and he who pities the poor shall 
be blessed. "[1] For he shows love to one like himself, because of his love to the Creator of the human race. 
The above-mentioned particulars have other explanations more natural, both respecting rest and the 
recovery of the inheritance; but they are not discussed at present. 

Now love is conceived in many ways, in the form of meekness, of mildness, of patience, of liberality, of 
freedom from envy, of absence of hatred, of forgetfulness of injuries. In all it is incapable of being divided or 
distinguished: its nature is to communicate. Again, it is said, "If you See the beast of your relatives, or 
friends, or, in general, of anybody you know, wandering in the wilderness, take it back and restore it;[2] and if 
the owner be far away, keep it among your own till he return, and restore it." It teaches a natural 
communication, that what is found is to be regarded as a deposit, and that we are not to bear malice to an 
enemy. "The command of the Lord being a fountain of life" truly, "causeth to turn away from the snare of 
death. "[3] And what? Does it not command us "to love strangers not only as friends and relatives, but as 
ourselves, both in body and soul?"[4] Nay more, it honoured the nations, and bears no grudge[5] against 
those who have done ill. Accordingly it is expressly said, "Thou shalt not abhor an Egyptian, for thou wast a 
sojourner in Egypt;"[6] designating by the term Egyptian either one of that race, or any one in the world. And 
enemies, although drawn up before the walls attempting to take the city, are not to be regarded as enemies 
till they are by the voice of the herald summoned to peace. [7] 

Further, it forbids intercourse with a female captive so as to dishonour her. "But allow her," it says, "thirty 
days to mourn according to her wish, and changing her clothes, associate with her as your lawful wife." s For 
it regards it not right that this should take place either in wantonness or for hire like harlots, but only for the 
birth of children. Do you see humanity combined with continence? The master who has fallen in love with his 
captive maid it does not allow to gratify his pleasure, but puts a check on his lust by specifying an interval of 
time; and further, it cuts off the captive's hair, in order to shame disgraceful love: for if it is reason that induces 
him to marry, he will cleave to her even after she has become disfigured. Then if one, after his lust, does not 
care to consort any longer with the captive, it ordains that it shall not be lawful to sell her, or to have her any 
longer as a servant, but desires her to be freed and released from service, lest on the introduction of 
another wife she bear any of the intolerable miseries caused through jealousy. 

What more? The Lord enjoins to ease and raise up the beasts of enemies when labouring beneath their 
burdens; remotely teaching us not to indulge in joy at our neighbour's ills, or exult over our enemies; in order 
to teach those who are trained in these things to pray for their enemies. For He does not allow us either to 
grieve at our neighbour's good, or to reap joy at our neighbour's ill. And if you find any enemy's beast 
straying, you are to pass over the incentives of difference, and take it back and restore it. For oblivion of 
injuries is followed by goodness, and the latter by dissolution of enmity. From this we are fitted for 
agreement, and this conducts to felicity. And should you suppose one habitually hostile, and discover him 
to be unreasonably mistaken either through lust or anger, turn him to goodness. Does the law then which 
conducts to Christ appear humane and mild? And does not the same God, good, while characterized by 
righteousness from the beginning to the end, employ each kind suitably in order to salvation? "Be merciful," 
says the Lord, "that you may receive mercy; forgive, that you may be forgiven. As ye do, so shall it be done 
to you; as ye give, so shall it be given to you; as ye judge, so shall ye be judged; as ye show kindness, so 
shall kindness be shown to you: with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again. "[9] 
Furthermore, [the law] prohibits those, who are in servitude for their subsistence, to be branded with 
disgrace; and to those, who have been reduced to slavery through money borrowed, it gives a complete 
release in the seventh year. Further, it prohibits suppliants from being given up to punishment. True above 
all, then, is that oracle. "As gold and silver are tried in the furnace, so the Lord chooseth men's hearts. The 
merciful man is long-suffering; and in every one who shows solicitude there is wisdom. For on a wise man 
solicitude will fall; and exercising thought, he will seek life; and he who seeketh God shall find knowledge 
with righteousness. And they who have sought Him rightly have found peace. "[10] And Pythagoras seems 
to me, to have derived his mildness towards irrational creatures from the law. For instance, he interdicted the 
immediate use of the young in the flocks of sheep, and goats, and herds of cattle, on the instant of their birth; 
not even on the pretext of sacrifice allowing it, both on account of the young ones and of the mothers; training 
man to gentleness by what is beneath him, by means of the irrational creatures. "Resign accordingly," he 
says, "the young one to its dam for even the first seven days." For if nothing takes place without a cause, 
and milk comes in a shower to animals in parturition for the sustenance of the progeny, he that tears that, 
which has been brought forth, away from the supply of the milk, dishonours nature. Let the Greeks, then, feel 
ashamed, and whoever else inveighs against the law; since it shows mildness in the case of the irrational 
creatures, while they expose the offspring of men though long ago and prophetically, the law, in the 
above-mentioned commandment, threw a check in the way of their cruelty. For if it prohibits the progeny of 
the irrational creatures to be separated from the dam before sucking, much more in the case of men does it 
provide beforehand a cure for cruelty and savageness of disposition; so that even if they despise nature. 

they may not despise teaching. For they are permitted to satiate themselves with l<ids and lambs, and 
perhaps there might be some excuse for separating the progeny from its dam. But what cause is there for 
the exposure of a child? For the man who did not desire to beget children had no right to marry at first; 
certainly not to have become, through licentious indulgence, the murderer of his children. Again, the humane 
law forbids slaying the offspring and the dam together on the same day. Thence also the Romans, in the 
case of a pregnant woman being condemned to death, do not allow her to undergo punishment till she is 
delivered. The law too, expressly prohibits the slaying of such animals as are pregnant till they have 
brought forth, remotely restraining the proneness of man to do wrong to man. Thus also it has extended its 
clemency to the irrational creatures; that from the exercise of humanity in the case of creatures of different 
species, we might practise among those of the same species a large abundance of it. Those, too, that kick 
the bellies of certain animals before parturition, in order to feast on flesh mixed with milk, make the womb 
created for the birth of the foetus its grave, though the law expressly commands, "But neither shalt thou 
seethe a lamb in its mother's milk."[1] For the nourishment of the living animal, it is meant, may not become 
sauce for that which has been deprived of life; and that, which is the cause of life, may not co-operate in the 
consumption of the body. And the same law commands "not to muzzle the ox which treadeth out the corn: for 
the labourer must be reckoned worthy of his food. "[2] 

And it prohibits an ox and ass to be yoked in the plough together;[3] pointing perhaps to the want of 
agreement in the case of the animals; and at the same time teaching not to wrong any one belonging to 
another race, and bring him under the yoke, when there is no other cause to allege than difference of race, 
which is no cause at all, being neither wickedness nor the effect of wickedness. To me the allegory also 
seems to signify that the husbandry of the Word is not to be assigned equally to the clean and the unclean, 
the believer and the unbeliever; for the ox is clean, but the ass has been reckoned among the unclean 
animals. But the benignant Word, abounding in humanity, teaches that neither is it right to cut down cultivated 
trees, or to cut down the grain before the harvest, for mischiefs sake; nor that cultivated fruit is to be 
destroyed at ail-either the fruit of the soil or that of the soul: for it does not permit the enemy's country to be 
laid waste. 

Further, husbandmen derived advantage from the law in such things. For it orders newly planted trees to be 
nourished three years in succession, and the superfluous growths to be cut off, to prevent them being 
loaded and pressed down; and to prevent their strength being exhausted from want, by the nutriment being 
frittered away, enjoins tilling and digging round them, so that [the tree] may not, by sending out suckers, 
hinder its growth. And it does not allow imperfect fruit to be plucked from immature trees, but after three 
years, in the fourth year; dedicating the first-fruits to God after the tree has attained maturity. 
This type of husbandry may serve as a mode of instruction, teaching that we must cut the growths of sins, 
and the useless weeds of the mind that spring up round the vital fruit, till the shoot of faith is perfected and 
becomes strong. [4] For in the fourth year, since there is need of time to him that is being solidly catechized, 
the four virtues are consecrated to God, the third alone being already joined to the fourth, [5] the person of 
the Lord. And a sacrifice of praise is above holocausts: "for He," it is said, "giveth strength to get power."[6] 
And if your affairs are in the sunshine of prosperity, get and keep strength, and acquire power in knowledge. 
For by these instances it is shown that both good things and gifts are supplied by God; and that we, 
becoming ministers of the divine grace, ought to sow the benefits of God, and make those who approach us 
noble and good; so that, as far as possible, the temperate man may make others continent, he that is manly 
may make them noble, he that is wise may make them intelligent, and the just may make them just. 

CHAP. XIX. -THE TRUE GNOSTIC IS AN IMITATOR OF GOD, ESPECIALLY IN 
BENEFICENCE. 

He is the Gnostic, who is after the image and likeness of God, who imitates God as far as possible, deficient 
in none of the things which contribute to the likeness as far as compatible, practising self-restraint and 
endurance, living righteously, reigning over the passions, bestowing of what he has as far as possible, and 
doing good both by word and deed. "He is the greatest," it is said, "in the kingdom who shall do and 
teach;"[1] imitating God in conferring like benefits. For God's gifts are for the common good. "Whoever shall 
attempt to do aught with presumption, provokes God, "[2] it is said. For haughtiness is a vice of the soul, of 
which, as of other sins. He commands us to repent; by adjusting our lives from their state of derangement to 
the change for the better in these three things-mouth, heart, hands. These are signs-the hands of action, the 
heart of volition, the mouth of speech. Beautifully, therefore, has this oracle been spoken with respect to 
penitents: "Thou hast chosen God this day to be thy God; and God hath chosen thee this day to be His 
people. "[3] For him who hastes to serve the self-existent One, being a suppliant,[4] God adopts to Himself; 
and though he be only one in number, he is honoured equally with the people. For being a part of the 
people, he becomes complementary of it, being restored from what he was; and the whole is named from a 
part. 

But nobility is itself exhibited in choosing and practising what is best. For what benefit to Adam was such a 
nobility as he had? No mortal was his father; for he himself was father of men that are born. What is base he 
readily chose, following his wife, and neglected what is true and good; on which account he exchanged his 
immortal life for a mortal life, but not for ever. And Noah, whose origin was not the same as Adam's, was 
saved by divine care. For he took and consecrated himself to God. And Abraham, who had children by 
three wives, not for the indulgence of pleasure, but in the hope, as I think, of multiplying the race at the first, 
was succeeded by one alone, who was heir of his father's blessings, while the rest were separated from the 
family; and of the twins who sprang from him, the younger having won his father's favour and received his 
prayers, became heir, and the eider served him. For it is the greatest boon to a bad man not to be master of 
himself.[5] 

And this arrangement was prophetical and typical. And that all things belong to the wise. Scripture clearly 
indicates when it is said, "Because God hath had mercy on me, I have all things. "[6] For it teaches that we 
are to desire one thing, by which are all things, and what is promised is assigned to the worthy. Accordingly, 
the good man who has become heir of the kingdom, it registers also as fellow-citizen, through divine 
wisdom, with the righteous of the olden time, who under the law and before the law lived according to law, 
whose deeds have become laws to us; and again, teaching that the wise man is king, introduces people of 
a different race, saying to him, "Thou art a king before God among us;"[7] those who were governed 
obeying the good man of their own accord, from admiration of his virtue. 

Now Plato the philosopher, defining the end of happiness, says that it is likeness to God as far as possible; 
whether concurring with the precept of the law (for great natures that are free of passions somehow hit the 
mark respecting the truth, as the Pythagorean Philo says in relating the history of Moses), or whether 
instructed by certain oracles of the time, thirsting as he always was for instruction. For the law says, "Walk 
after the Lord your God, and keep my commandments. "[8] For the law calls assimilation following; and such 
a following to the utmost of its power assimilates. "Be," says the Lord, "merciful and pitiful, as your heavenly 
Father is pitiful. "[9] Thence also the Stoics have laid down the doctrine, that living agreeably to nature is the 
end, fitly altering the name of God into nature; since also nature extends to plants, to seeds, to trees, and to 
stones. It is therefore plainly said, "Bad men do not understand the law; but they who love the law fortify 
themselves with a wall."[1 0] "For the wisdom of the clever knows its ways; but the folly of the foolish is in 
error."[1 1] "For on whom will I look, but on him who is mild and gentle, and trembleth at my words?" says the 
prophecy. 

We are taught that there are three kinds of friendship: and that of these the first and the best is that which 
results from virtue, for the love that is founded on reason is firm; that the second and intermediate is by way 
of recompense, and is social, liberal, and useful for life; for the friendship which is the result of favour is 
mutual. 

And the third and last we assert to be that which is founded on intimacy; others, again, that it is that variable 
and changeable form which rests on pleasure. And Hipppodamus the Pythagorean seems to me to 
describe friendships most admirably: "That founded on knowledge of the gods, that founded on the gifts of 
men, and that on the pleasures of animals." There is the friendship of a philosopher,-that of a man and that 
of an animal. For the image of God is really the man who does good, in which also he gets good: as the pilot 
at once saves, and is saved. Wherefore, when one obtains his request, he does not say to the giver. Thou 
hast given well, but. Thou hast received well. So he receives who gives, and he gives who receives. "But 
the righteous pity and show mercy. "[1] "But the mild shall be inhabitants of the earth, and the innocent shall 
be left in it. But the transgressors shall be extirpated from it."[2] And Homer seems to me to have said 
prophetically of the faithful, "Give to thy friend." And an enemy must be aided, that he may not continue an 
enemy. For by help good feeling is compacted, and enmity dissolved. "But if there be present readiness of 
mind, according to what a man hath it is acceptable, and not according to what he hath not: for it is not that 
there be ease to others, but tribulation to you, but of equality at the present time," and so forth. [3] "He hath 
dispersed, he hath given to the poor; his righteousness endureth for ever," the Scripture says. [4] For 
conformity with the image and likeness is not meant of the body (for it were wrong for what is mortal to be 
made like what is immortal), but in mind and reason, on which fitly the Lord impresses the seal of likeness, 
both in respect of doing good and of exercising rule. For governments are directed not by corporeal 
qualities, but by judgments of the mind. For by the counsels of holy men states are managed well, and the 
household also. 

CHAP. XX.--THE TRUE GNOSTIC EXERCISES PATIENCE AND SELF-RESTRAINT. 

Endurance also itself forces its way to the divine likeness, reaping as its fruit impassibility, through patience, 
if what is related of Ananias be kept in mind; who belonged to a number, of whom Daniel the prophet, filled 
with divine faith, was one. Daniel dwelt at Babylon, as Lot at Sodom, and Abraham, who a little after became 
the friend of God, in the land of Chaldea. The king of the Babylonians let Daniel down into a pit full of wild 

beasts; the King of all, the faithful Lord, took him up unharmed. Such patience will the Gnostic, as a Gnostic, 
possess. He will bless when under trial, like the noble Job; like Jonas, when swallowed up by the whale, he 
will pray, and faith will restore him to prophesy to the Ninevites; and though shut up with lions, he will tame the 
wild beasts; though cast into the fire, he will be besprinkled with dew, but not consumed. He will give his 
testimony by night; he will testify by day; by word, by life, by conduct, he will testify. Dwelling with the Lord? he 
will continue his familiar friend, sharing the same hearth according to the Spirit; pure in the flesh, pure in 
heart, sanctified in word. "The world," it is said, "is crucified to him, and he to the world. "[6] He, bearing about 
the cross of the Saviour, will follow the Lord's footsteps, as God, having become holy of holies. 
The divine law, then, while keeping in mind all virtue, trains man especially to self-restraint, laying this as the 
foundation of the virtues; and disciplines us beforehand to the attainment of self-restraint by forbidding us to 
partake of such things as are by nature fat, as the breed of swine, which is full-fleshed. For such a use is 
assigned to epicures. It is accordingly said that one of the philosophers, giving the etymology of 
<greek>us</greek> (sow), said that it was <greek>qus</greek>, as being fit only for slaughter 
(<greek>qusin</greek>) and killing; for life was given to this animal for no other purpose than that it might 
swell in flesh. Similarly, repressing our desires, it forbade partaking of fishes which have neither fins nor 
scales; for these surpass other fishes in fleshiness and fatness. From-this it was, in my opinion, that the 
mysteries not only prohibited touching certain animals, but also withdrew certain parts of those slain in 
sacrifice, for reasons which are known to the initiated. If, then, we are to exercise control over the belly, and 
what is below the belly, it is clear that we have of old heard from the Lord that we are to check lust by the 
law. 

And this will be completely effected, if we unfeignedly condemn what is the fuel of lust: I mean pleasure. Now 
they say that the idea of it is a gentle and bland excitement, accompanied with some sensation. Enthralled 
by this, Menelaus, they say, after the capture of Troy, having rushed to put Helen to death, as having been 
the cause of such calamities, was nevertheless not able to effect it, being subdued by her beauty, which 
made him think of pleasure. Whence the tragedians, jeering, exclaimed insultingly against him:- 

"But thou, when on her breast thou lookedst, thy sword 
Didst cast away, and with a kiss the traitress. 
Ever-beauteous wretch, [7] thou didst embrace." 

And again:- 

Was the sword then by beauty blunted?" 

And I agree with Antisthenes when he says, "Could I catch Aphrodite, I would shoot her; for she has 
destroyed many of our beautiful and good women." And he says that "Love[1] is a vice of nature, and the 
wretches who fall under its power call the disease a deity." For in these words it is shown that stupid people 
are overcome from ignorance of pleasure, to which we ought to give no admittance, even though it be 
called a god, that is, though it be given by God for the necessity of procreation. And Xenophon, expressly 
calling pleasure a vice, says: "Wretch, what good dost thou know, or what honourable aim hast thou? which 
does not even wait for the appetite for sweet things, eating before being hungry, drinking before being 
thirsty; and that thou mayest eat pleasantly, seeking out fine cooks; and that thou mayest drink pleasantly, 
procuring costly wines; and in summer runnest about seeking snow; and that thou mayest sleep pleasantly, 
not only providest soft beds, but also supports[2] to the couches." Whence, as Aristo said, "against the 
whole tetrachord of pleasure, pain, fear, and lust, there is need of much exercise and struggle." 

"For it is these, it is these that go through our bowels. 
And throw into disorder men's hearts." 

"For the minds of those even who are deemed grave, pleasure makes waxen," according to Plato; since 
"each pleasure and pain nails to the body the soul" of the man, that does not sever and crucify himself from 
the passions. "He that loses his life," says the Lord, "shall save it;" either giving it up by exposing it to 
danger for the Lord's sake, as He did for us, or loosing it from fellowship with its habitual life. For if you would 
loose, and withdraw, and separate (for this is what the cross means) your soul from the delight and pleasure 
that is in this life, you will possess it, found and resting in the looked-for hope. And this would be the exercise 
of death, if we would be content with those desires which are measured according to nature alone, which do 
not pass the limit of those which are in accordance with nature-by going to excess, or going against 
nature-in which the possibility of sinning arises. "We must therefore put on the panoply of God, that we may 
be able to stand against the wiles of the devil; since the weapons of our war fire are not carnal, but mighty 
through God to the pulling down of strongholds, casting down reasonings, and every lofty thing which 

exalteth itself against tiie l<nowledge of God, and bringing every tiiougiit into captivity unto tiie obedience of 
Clirist,"[3] says tiie divine apostle. There is need of a man who shall use in a praiseworthy and 
discriminating manner the things from which passions take their rise, as riches and poverty, honour and 
dishonour, health and sickness, life and death, toil and pleasure. For, in order that we may treat things, that 
are different, indifferently, there is need of a great difference in us, as having been previously afflicted with 
much feebleness, and in the distortion of a bad training and nurture ignorantly indulged ourselves. The 
simple word, then, of our philosophy declares the passions to be impressions on the soul that is soft and 
yielding, and, as it were, the signatures of the spiritual powers with whom we have to straggle. For it is the 
business, in my opinion, of the malificent powers to endeavour to produce somewhat of their own 
constitution in everything, so as to overcome and make their own those who have renounced them. And it 
follows, as might be expected, that some are worsted; but in the case of those who engage in the contest 
with more athletic energy, the powers mentioned above, after carrying on the conflict in all forms, and 
advancing even as far as the crown wading in gore, decline the battle, and admire the victors. 
For of objects that are moved, some are moved by impulse and appearance, as animals; and some by 
transposition, as inanimate objects. And of things without life, plants, they say, are moved by transposition in 
order to growth, if we will concede to them that plants are without life. To stones, then, belongs a permanent 
state. Plants have a nature; and the irrational animals possess impulse and perception, and likewise the 
two characteristics already specified. [4] But the reasoning faculty, being peculiar to the human soul, ought 
not to be impelled similarly with the irrational animals, but ought to discriminate appearances, and not to be 
carried away by them. The powers, then, of which we have spoken hold out beautiful sights, and honours, 
and adulteries, and pleasures, and such like alluring phantasies before facile spirits; as those who drive 
away cattle hold, out branches to them. Then, having beguiled those incapable of distinguishing the true 
from the false pleasure, and the fading and meretricious from the holy beauty, they lead them into slavery. 
And each deceit, by pressing constantly on the spirit, impresses its image on it; and the soul unwittingly 
carries about the image of the passion, which takes its rise from the bait and our consent. 
The adherents of Basilides are in the habit of calling the passions appendages: saying that these are in 
essence certain spirits attached to the rational soul, through some original perturbation and confusion; and 
that, again, other bastard and heterogeneous natures of spirits grow on to them, like that of the wolf, the ape, 
the lion, the goat, whose properties showing themselves around the soul, they say, assimilate the lusts of 
the soul to the likeness of the animals. For they imitate the actions of those whose properties they bear. And 
not only are they associated with the impulses and perceptions of the irrational animals, but they affect[1] 
the motions and the beauties of plants, on account of their bearing also the properties of plants attached to 
them. They have also the properties of a particular state, as the hardness of steel. But against this dogma 
we shall argue subsequently, when we treat of the soul. At present this only needs to be pointed out, that 
man, according to Basilides, preserves the appearance of a wooden horse, according to the poetic myth, 
embracing as he does in one body a host of such different spirits. Accordingly, Basilides' son himself, 
Isidorus, in his book. About the Soul attached to us, while agreeing in the dogma, as if condemning himself, 
writes in these words: "For if I persuade any one that the soul is undivided, and that the passions of the 
wicked are occasioned by the violence of the appendages, the worthless among men will have no slight 
pretence for saying,' I was compelled, I was carried away, I did it against my will, I acted unwillingly;' though 
he himself led the desire of evil things, and did not fight against the assaults of the appendages. But we 
must, by acquiring superiority in the rational part, show ourselves masters of the inferior creation in us." For 
he too lays down the hypothesis of two souls in us, like the Pythagoreans, at whom we shall glance 
afterwards. 

Valentinus too, in a letter to certain people, writes in these very words respecting the appendages: "There is 
one good, by whose presence[2] is the manifestation, which is by the Son, and by Him alone can the heart 
become pure, by the expulsion of every evil spirit from the heart: for the multitude of spirits dwelling in it do 
not suffer it to be pure; but each of them performs his own deeds, insulting it oft with unseemly lusts. And the 
heart seems to be treated somewhat like a caravanserai. For the latter has holes and ruts made in it, and is 
often filled with dung; men living filthily in it, and taking no care for the place as belonging to others. So fares 
it with the heart as long as there is no thought taken for it, being unclean, and the abode of many demons. 
But when the only good Father visits it, it is sanctified, and gleams with light. And he who possesses such a 
heart is so blessed, that "he shall see God. "[3] 

What, then, let them tell us, is the cause of such a soul not being cared for from the beginning? Either that it is 
not worthy (and somehow a care for it comes to it as from repentance), or it is a saved nature, as he would 
have it; and this, of necessity, from the beginning, being cared for by reason of its affinity, afforded no 
entrance to the impure spirits, unless by being forced and found feeble. For were he to grant that on 
repentance it preferred what was better, he will say this unwillingly, being what the truth we hold teaches; 
namely, that salvation is from a change due to obedience, but not from nature. For as the exhalations which 
arise from the earth, and from marshes, gather into mists and cloudy masses; so the vapours of fleshly lusts 

bring on the soul an evil condition, scattering about the idols of pleasure before the soul. Accordingly they 
spread darkness over the light of intelligence, the spirit attracting the exhalations that arise from lust, and 
thickening the masses of the passions by persistency in pleasures. Gold is not taken from the earth in the 
lump, but is purified by smelting; then, when made pure, it is called gold, the earth being purified. For "Ask, 
and it shall be given you, "[4] it is said to those who are able of themselves to choose what is best. And how 
we say that the powers of the devil, and the unclean spirits, sow into the sinner's soul, requires no more 
words from me, on adducing as a witness the apostolic Barnabas (and he was one of the seventy? and a 
fellow-worker of Paul), who speaks in these words: "Before we believed in God, the dwelling-place of our 
heart was unstable, truly a temple built with hands. For it was full of idolatry, and was a house of demons, 
through doing what was opposed to God. "[6] 

He says, then, that sinners exercise activities appropriate to demons; but he does not say that the spirits 
themselves dwell in the soul of the unbeliever. Wherefore he also adds, "See that the temple of the Lord be 
gloriously built. Learn, having received remission of sins; and having set our hope on the Name, let us 
become new, created again from the beginning." For what he says is not that demons are driven out of us, 
but that the sins which like them we commit before believing are remitted. Rightly thus he puts in opposition 
what follows: "Wherefore God truly dwells in our home. He dwells in us. How? The word of His faith, the 
calling of His promise, the wisdom of His statutes, the commandments of His communication, [dwell in us]." 
"I know that I have come upon a heresy; and its chief was wont to say that he fought with pleasure by 
pleasure, this worthy Gnostic advancing on pleasure in reigned combat, for he said he was a Gnostic; since 
he said it was no great thing for a man that had not tried pleasure to abstain from it, but for one who had 
mixed in it not to be overcome [was something]; and that therefore by means of it he trained himself in it. The 
wretched man knew not that he was deceiving himself by the artfulness of voluptuousness. To this opinion, 
then, manifestly Aristippus the Cyrenian adhered-that of the sophist who boasted ofthe truth. Accordingly, 
when reproached for continually cohabiting with the Corinthian courtezan, he said, "I possess Lais, and am 
not possessed by her." 

Such also are those (who say that they follow Nicolaus, quoting an adage ofthe man, which they pervert, [1] 
"that the flesh must be abused." But the worthy man showed that it was necessary to check pleasures and 
lusts, and by such training to waste away the impulses and propensities ofthe flesh. But they, abandoning 
themselves to pleasure like goats, as if insulting the body, lead a life of self-indulgence; not knowing that the 
body is wasted, being by nature subject to dissolution; while their soul is buffed in the mire of vice; following 
as they do the teaching of pleasure itself, not ofthe apostolic man. For in what do they differ from 
Sardanapalus, whose life is shown in the epigram:- 

"I have what I ate-what I enjoyed wantonly; 
And the pleasures I felt in love. But those 
Many objects of happiness are left. 
For I too am dust, who ruled great Minus." 

For the feeling of pleasure is not at all a necessity, but the accompaniment of certain natural needs-hunger, 
thirst, cold, marriage. If, then, it were possible to drink without it, or take food, or beget children, no other need 
of it could be shown. For pleasure is neither a function, nor a state, nor any part of us; but has been 
introduced into life as an auxiliary, as they say salt was to season food. But when it casts off restraint and 
rules the house, it generates first concupiscence, which is an irrational propension and impulse towards that 
which gratifies it; and it induced Epicurus to lay down pleasure as the aim ofthe philosopher. Accordingly he 
deifies a sound condition of body, and the certain hope respecting it. For what else is luxury than the 
voluptuous gluttony and the superfluous abundance of those who are abandoned to self-indulgence? 
Diogenes writes significantly in a tragedy:- 

"Who to the pleasures of effeminate 
And filthy luxury attached in heart. 
Wish not to undergo the slightest toil." 

And what follows, expressed indeed in foul language, but in a manner worthy of the voluptuaries. 
Wherefore the divine law appears to me necessarily to menace with fear, that, by caution and attention, the 
philosopher may acquire and retain absence of anxiety, continuing without fall and without sin in all things. 
For peace and freedom are not otherwise won, than by ceaseless and unyielding struggles with our lusts. 
For these stout and Olympic antagonists are keener than wasps, so to speak; and Pleasure especially, not 
by day only, but by night, is in dreams with witchcraft ensnaringly plotting and biting. How, then, can the 
Greeks any more be right in running down the law, when they themselves teach that Pleasure is the slave of 
fear? Socrates accordingly bids "people guard against enticements to eat when they are not hungry, and to 

drink when not thirsty, and the glances and l<isses of the fair, as fitted to inject a deadlier poison than that of 
scorpions and spiders." And Antisthenes chose rather "to be demented than delighted." And the Theban 
Crates says:- 

"Master these, exulting in the disposition of the soul. 
Vanquished neither by gold nor by languishing love. 
Nor are they any longer attendants to the wanton." 

And at length infers:- 

"Those, unenslaved and unbended by servile Pleasure, 
Love the immortal kingdom and freedom." 

He writes expressly, in other words, "that the stop[2] to the unbridled propensity to amorousness is hunger 

or a halter." 

And the comic poets attest, while they depreciate the teaching of Zeno the Stoic, to be to the following 

effect:- 

"For he philosophizes a vain philosophy: 
He teaches to want food, and gets pupils 
One loaf, and for seasoning a dry fig, and to drink water." 

All these, then, are not ashamed clearly to confess the advantage which accrues from caution. And the 
wisdom which is trite and not contrary to reason, trusting not in mere words and oracular utterances, but in 
invulnerable armour of defence and energetic mysteries, and devoting itself to divine commands, and 
exercise, and practice, receives a divine power according to its inspiration from the Word. 

Already, then, the aegis of the poetic Jove is described as 

"Dreadful, crowned all around by Terror, 
And on it Strife and Prowess, and chilling Rout; 
On it, too, the Gorgon's head, dread monster. 
Terrible, dire, the sign of AEgis-bearing Jove."[1] 

But to those, who are able rightly to understand salvation, I know not what will appear dearer than the gravity 
of the Law, and Reverence, which is its daughter. For when one is said to pitch too high, as also the Lord 
says, with reference to certain; so that some of those whose desires are towards Him may not sing out of 
pitch and tune, I do not understand it as pitching too high in reality, but only as spoken with reference to such 
as will not take up the divine yoke. For to those, who are unstrung and feeble, what is medium seems too 
high; and to those, who are unrighteous, what befalls them seems severe justice. For those, who, on account 
of the favour they entertain for sins, are prone to pardon, suppose truth to be harshness, and severity to be 
savageness, and him who does not sin with them, and is not dragged with them, to be pitiless. Tragedy 
writes therefore well of Pluto:- 

"And to what sort of a deity wilt thou come, [2] dost thou ask. 
Who knows neither clemency nor favour. 
But loves bare justice alone." 

For although you are not yet able to do the things enjoined by the Law, yet, considering that the noblest 
examples are set before us in it, we are able to nourish and increase the love of liberty; and so we shall 
profit more eagerly as far as we can, inviting some things, imitating some things, and fearing others. For thus 
the righteous of the olden time, who lived according to the law, "were not from a storied oak, or from a rock;" 
because they wish to philosophize truly, took and devoted themselves entirely to God, and were classified 
under faith. Zeno said well of the Indians, that he would rather have seen one Indian roasted, than have 
learned the whole of the arguments about bearing pain. But we have exhibited before our eyes every day 
abundant sources of martyrs that are burnt, impaled, beheaded. All these the fear inspired by the 
law,-leading as a paedagogue to Christ, trained so as to manifest their piety by their blood. "God stood in 
the congregation of the gods; He judgeth in the midst of the gods. "[3] Who are they? Those that are superior 
to Pleasure, who rise above the passions, who know what they do-the Gnostics, who are greater than the 
world. "I said. Ye are Gods; and all sons of the Highest." To whom speaks the Lord? To those who reject as 

far as possible all that is of man. And the apostle says, "For ye are not any longer in the flesh, but in the 
Spirit. "[5] And again he says, "Though in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh. "[6] "For flesh and blood 
cannot inherit the kingdom of God, neither doth corruption inherit incorruption."[7] "Lo, ye shall die like men," 
the Spirit has said, confuting us. 

We must then exercise ourselves in taking care about those things which fall under the power of the 
passions, fleeing like those who are truly philosophers such articles of food as excite lust, and dissolute 
licentiousness in chambering and luxury; and the sensations that tend to luxury, which are a solid reward to 
others, must no longer be so to us. For God's greatest gift is self-restraint. For He Himself has said, "I will 
neyer leave thee, nor forsake thee, "[8] as having judged thee worthy according to the true election. Thus, 
then, while we attempt piously to advance, we shall have put on us the mild yoke of the Lord from faith to 
faith, one charioteer driving each of us onward to salvation, that the meet fruit of beatitude may be won. 
"Exercise is" according to Hippocrates of Cos, "not only the health of the body, but of the soul-fearlessness 
of labours-a ravenous appetite for food." 

CHAP. XXI. -OPINIONS OF VARIOUS PHILOSOPHERS ON THE CHIEF GOOD. 

Epicurus, in placing happiness in not being hungry, or thirsty, or cold, uttered that godlike word, saying 
impiously that he would tight in these points even with Father Jove; teaching, as if it were the case of pigs 
that live in filth and not that of rational philosophers, that happiness was victory. For of those that are ruled by 
pleasure are the Cyrenaics and Epicurus; for these expressly said that to live pleasantly was the chief end, 
and that pleasure was the only perfect good. Epicurus also says that the removal of pain is pleasure; and 
says that that is to be preferred, which first attracts from itself to itself, being, that is, wholly in motion. 
Dinomachus and Callipho said that the chief end was for one to do what he could for the attainment and 
enjoyment of pleasure; and Hieronymus the Peripatetic said the great end was to live unmolested, and that 
the only final good was happiness; and Diodorus likewise, who belonged to the same sect, pronounces the 
end to be to live undisturbed and well. Epicurus indeed, and the Cyrenaics, say that pleasure is the first duty; 
for it is for the sake of pleasure, they say, that virtue was introduced, and produced pleasure. According to 
the followers of Calliphon, virtue was introduced for the sake of pleasure, but that subsequently, on seeing 
its own beauty, it made itself equally prized with the first principle, that is, pleasure. 
But the Aristotelians lay it down, that to live in accordance with virtue is the end, but that neither happiness 
nor the end is reached by every one who has virtue. For the wise man, vexed and involved in involuntary 
mischances, and wishing gladly on these accounts to flee from life, is neither fortunate nor happy. For virtue 
needs time; for that is not acquired in one day which exists [only] in the perfect man since, as they say, a 
child is never happy. But human life is a perfect time, and therefore happiness is completed by the three 
kinds of good things. Neither, then, the poor, nor the mean nor even the diseased, nor the slave, can be one 
of them. 

Again, on the other hand, Zeno the Stoic thinks the end to be living according to virtue; and, Cleanthes, living 
agreeably to nature in the fight exercise of reason, which he held to consist of the selection of things 
according to nature. And Antipatrus, his friend, supposes the end to consist in choosing continually and 
unswervingly the things which are according to nature, and rejecting those contrary to nature. Archedamus, 
on the other hand, explained the end to be such, that in selecting the greatest and chief things according to 
nature, it was impossible to overstep it. In addition to these, Panictius pronounced the end to be, to live 
according to the means given to us by nature. And finally, Posidonius said that it was to live engaged in 
contemplating the truth and order of the universe, and forming himself as he best can, in nothing influenced 
by the irrational part of his soul. And some of the later Stoics defined the great end to consist in living 
agreeably to the constitution of man. Why should I mention Aristo? He said that the end was indifference; but 
what is indifferent simply abandons the indifferent. Shall I bring forward the opinions of Herillus? Herillus 
states the end to be to live according to science. For some think that the more recent disciples of the 
Academy define the end to be, the steady abstraction of the mind to its own impressions. Further, Lycus the 
Peripatetic used to say that the final end was the true joy of the soul; as Leucimus, that it was the joy it had in 
what was good. Critolaus, also a Peripatetic, said that it was the perfection of a life flowing rightly according 
to nature, referring to the perfection accomplished by the three kinds according to tradition. 
We must, however, not rest satisfied with these, but endeavour as we best can to adduce the doctrines laid 
down on the point by the naturalist; for they say that Anaxagoras of Clazomenae affirmed contemplation and 
the freedom, flowing from it to be the end of life; Heraclitus the Ephesian, complacency. The Pontic 
Heraclides relates, that Pythagoras taught that the knowledge of the perfection of the numbers[1] I was 
happiness of the soul. The Abderites also teach the existence of an end. Democritus, in his work On the 
Chief End, said it was cheerfulness, which he also called well-being, and often exclaims, "For delight and its 
absence are the boundary of those who have reached full age;" Hecataeus, that it was sufficiency to one's 
self; Apollodotus of Cyzicum, that it was delectation as Nausiphanes, that it was undauntedness,[2] for he 

said that it was tiiis tiiat was called by Democritus imperturbability. In addition to these still, Diotimus 
declared the end to be perfection of what is good, which he said was termed well-being. Again, Antisthenes, 
that it was humility. And those called Annicereans, of the Cyrenaic succession, laid down no definite end for 
the whole of life; but said that to each action belonged, as its proper end, the pleasure accruing from the 
action. These Cyrenaics reject Epicurus' definition of pleasure, that is the removal of pain, calling that the 
condition of a dead man; because we rejoice not only on account of pleasures, but companionships and 
distinctions; while Epicurns thinks that all joy of the soul arises from previous sensations of the flesh. 
Metrodorus, in his book On the Source of Happiness in Ourselves being greater than that which arises from 
Objects, says: What else is the good of the soul but the sound state of the flesh, and the sure hope of its 
continuance? 

CHAP. XXII. -PLATO'S OPINION, THAT THE CHIEF GOOD CONSISTS IN ASSIMILATION TO 
GOD, AND ITS AGREEMENT WITH SCRIPTURE. 

Further, Plato the philosopher says that the end is twofold: that which is communicable, and exists first in the 
ideal forms themselves, which he also calls "the good;" and that which partakes of it, and receives its 
likeness from it, as is the case in the men who appropriate virtue and true philosophy. Wherefore also 
Cleanthes, in the second book. On Pleasure, says that Socrates everywhere teaches that the just man and 
the happy are one and the same, and execrated the first man who separated the just from the useful, as 
having done an impious thing. For those are in truth impious who separate the useful from that which is tight 
according to the law. Plato himself says that happiness(<greek>eudai</greek>-<greek>monia</greek>) is 
to possess rightly the daemon, and that the ruling faculty of the soul is called the daemon; and he terms 
happiness (<greek>eudaimonia</greek>) the most perfect and complete good. Sometimes he calls it a 
consistent and harmonious life, sometimes the highest perfection in accordance with virtue; and this he 
places in the knowledge of the Good, and in likeness to God, demonstrating likeness to be justice and 
holiness with wisdom. For is it not thus that some of our writers have understood that man straightway on his 
creation received what is "according to the image," but that what is according "to the likeness" he will 
receive afterwards on his perfection? Now Plato, teaching that the virtuous man shall have this likeness 
accompanied with humility, explains the following: "He that humbleth himself shall be exalted. "[1] He says, 
accordingly, in The Laws: "God indeed, as the ancient saying has it, occupying the beginning, the middle, 
and the end of all things, goes straight through while He goes round the circumference. And He is always 
attended by Justice, the avenger of those who revolt from the divine law." You see how he connects fear 
with the divine law. He adds, therefore: "To which he, who would be happy, cleaving, will follow lowly and 
beautified." Then, connecting what follows these words, and admonishing by fear, he adds: "What conduct, 
then, is dear and conformable to God? That which is characterized by one word of old date: Like will be 
dear to like, as to what is in proportion; but things out of proportion are neither dear to one another, nor to 
those which are in proportion. And that therefore he that would be dear to God, must, to the best of his power, 
become such as He is And in virtue of the same reason, our self-controlling man is dear to God. But he that 
has no self-control is unlike and diverse." In saying that it was an ancient dogma, he indicates the teaching 
which had come to him from the law. And having in the Theaoetus admitted that evils make the circuit of 
mortal nature and of this spot, he adds: "Wherefore we must try to flee hence as soon as possible. For flight 
is likeness to God as far as possible. And likeness is to become holy and just with wisdom." Speusippus, 
the nephew of Plato, says that happiness is a perfect state in those who conduct themselves in accordance 
with nature, or the state of the good: for which condition all men have a desire, but the good only attained to 
quietude; consequently the virtues are the authors of happiness. And Xenocrates the Chalcedonian defines 
happiness to be the possession of virtue, strictly so called, and of the power subservient to it. Then he 
clearly says, that the seat in which it resides is the soul; that by which it is effected, the virtues; and that of 
these as parts are formed praiseworthy actions, good habits and dispositions, and motions, and relations; 
and that corporeal and external objects are not without these. For Polemo, the disciple of Xenocrates, 
seems of the opinion that happiness is sufficiency of all good things, or of the most and greatest. He lays 
down the doctrine, then, that happiness never exists without virtue; and that virtue, apart from corporeal and 
external objects, is sufficient for happiness. Let these things be so. The contradictions to the opinions 
specified shall be adduced in due time. But on us it is incumbent to reach the unaccomplished end, obeying 
the commands-that is, God-and living according to them, irreproachably and intelligently, through 
knowledge of the divine will; and assimilation as far as possible in accordance with right reason is the end, 
and restoration to perfect adoption by the Son, which ever glorifies the Father by the great High Priest who 
has deigned to call us brethren and fellow-heirs. And the apostle, succinctly describing the end, writes in the 
Epistle to the Romans: "But now, being made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye have your fruit 
unto holiness, and the end everlasting life. "[2] And viewing the hope as twofold-that which is expected, and 
that which has been received -he now teaches the end to be the restitution of the hope. "For patience," he 

says, "worketh experience, and experience iiope: and iiope mal<etli not asiiamed; because tiie love of 
God is siied abroad in our iiearts by tiie Holy Spirit that is given to us. "[3] On account of which love and the 
restoration to hope, he says, in another place, "which rest is laid up for us. "[4] You will find in Ezekiel the like, 
as follows: "The soul that sinneth, it shall die. And the man who shall be righteous, and shall do judgment 
and justice, who has not eaten on the mountains, nor lifted his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, and 
hath not defiled his neighbour's wife, and hath not approached to a woman in the time of her uncleanness 
(for he does not wish the seed of man to be dishonoured), and will not injure a man; will restore the debtor's 
pledge, and will not take usury; will turn away his hand from wrong; will do true judgment between a man and 
his neighbour; will walk in my ordinances, and keep my commandments, so as to do the truth; he is 
righteous, he shall surely live, saith Adonai the Lord. "[5] Isaiah too, in exhorting him that hath not believed to 
gravity of life, and the Gnostic to attention, proving that man's virtue and God's are not the same, speaks 
thus: "Seek the Lord, and on finding Him call on Him. And when He shall draw near to you, let the wicked 
forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his ways; and let him return to the Lord, and he shall obtain 

mercy," down to "and your thoughts from my thoughts. We," then, according to the noble apostle, "wait for 

the hope of righteousness by faith. For in Christ neither circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, 
but faith which worketh by love. "[2] And we desire that every one of you show the same diligence to the full 
assurance of hope," down to "made an high priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedek."[3] Similarly with 
Paul "the All-virtuous Wisdom" says, "He, that heareth me shall dwell trusting in hope. "[4] For the restoration 
of hope is called by the same term "hope." To the expression "will dwell" it has most beautifully added" 
trusting," showing that such an one has obtained rest, having received the hope for which he hoped. 
Wherefore also it is added, "and shall be quiet, without fear of any evil." And openly and expressly the 
apostle, in the first Epistle to the Corinthians says, "Be ye followers of me, as also I am of Christ," s in order 
that that may take place. If ye are of me, and I am of Christ, then ye are imitators of Christ, and Christ of God. 
Assimilation to God, then, so that as far as possible a man becomes righteous and holy with wisdom he 
lays down as the aim of faith, and the end to be that restitution of the promise which is effected by faith. From 
these doctrines gush the fountains, which we specified above, of those who have dogmatized about "the 
end." But of these enough. 

CHAP. XXIII. -ON MARRIAGE. 

Since pleasure and lust seem to fall under marriage, it must also be treated of. Marriage is the first 

conjunction of man and woman for the procreation of legitimate children. [6] Accordingly Menanderthe 

comic poet says:- 

"Forthe begetting of legitimate children, 

I give thee my daughter." 

We ask if we ought to marry; which is one of the points, which are said to be relative. For some must marry, 
and a man must be in some condition, and he must marry some one in some condition. For every one is not 
to marry, nor always. But there is a time in which it is suitable, and a person for whom it is suitable, and an 
age up to which it is suitable. Neither ought every one to take a wife, nor is it every woman one is to take, nor 
always, nor in every way, nor inconsiderately. But only he who is in certain circumstances, and such an one 
and at such time as is requisite, and for the sake of children, and one who is in every respect similar, and 
who does not by force or compulsion love the husband who loves her. Hence Abraham, regarding his wife 
as a sister, says, "She is my sister by my father, but not by my mother; and she became my wife, "[7] 
teaching us that children of the same mothers ought not to enter into matrimony. Let us briefly follow the 
history. Plato ranks marriage among outward good things, providing for the perpetuity of our race, and 
handing down as a torch a certain perpetuity to children's children. Democritus repudiates marriage and the 
procreation of children, on account of the many annoyances thence arising, and abstractions from more 
necessary things. Epicurus agrees, and those who place good in pleasure, and in the absence of trouble 
and pain. According to the opinion of the Stoics, marriage and the rearing of children are a thing indifferent; 
and according to the Peripatetics, a good. In a word, these, following out their dogmas in words, became 
enslaved to pleasures; some using concubines, some mistresses, and the most youths. And that wise 
quaternion in the garden with a mistress, honoured pleasure by their acts. Those, then, will not escape the 
curse of yoking an ass with an ox, who, judging certain things not to suit them, command others to do them, 
or the reverse. This Scripture has briefly showed, when it says, "What thou hatest, thou shalt not do to 
another."[8] 

But they who approve of marriage say. Nature has adapted us for marriage, as is evident from the structure 
of our bodies, which are male and female. And they constantly proclaim that command, "Increase and 
replenish. "[9] And though this is the case, yet it seems to them shameful that man, created by God, should 
be more licentious than the irrational creatures, which do not mix with many licentiously, but with one of the 

same species, such as pigeons and ringdoves, [10] and creatures lil<e tiiem. Furtiiermore, tiiey say, "Tiie 
ciiildless man fails in tiie perfection wiiicii is according to nature, not iiaving substituted iiis proper 
successor in iiis place. For he is perfect that has produced from himself his like, or rather, when he sees that 
he has produced the same; that is, when that which is begotten attains to the same nature with him who 
begat." Therefore we must by all means marry, both for our country's sake, for the succession of children, 
and as far as we are concerned, the perfection of the world; since the poets also pity a marriage half-perfect 
and childless, but pronounce the fruitful one happy. But it is the diseases of the body that principally show 
marriage to be necessary. For a wife's care and the assiduity of her constancy appear to exceed the 
endurance of all other relations and friends, as much as to excel them in sympathy; and most of all, she 
takes kindly to patient watching. And in truth, according to Scripture, she is a needful help.[1] The comic poet 
then, Menander, while running down marriage, and yet alleging on the other side its advantages, replies to 
one who had said:- 

"I am averse to the thing. 
For you take it awkwardly." 

Then, he adds:- 

"You see the hardships and the things which annoy you in it. 
But you do not look on the advantages." 

And so forth. 

Now marriage is a help in the case of those advanced in years, by furnishing a spouse to take care of one, 

and by rearing children of her to nourish one's old age. 

"For to a man after death his children bring renown. 

Just as corks bear the net. 

Saving the fishing-line from the deep. "[2] 

according to the tragic poet Sophocles. 

Legislators, moreover, do not allow those who are unmarried to discharge the highest magisterial offices. 
For instance, the legislator of the Spartans imposed a fine not on bachelorhood only, but on monogamy? 
and late marriage, and single life. And the renowned Plato orders the man who has not married to pay a 
wife's maintenance into the public treasury, and to give to the magistrates a suitable sum of money as 
expenses. For if they shall not beget children, not having married, they produce, as far as in them lies, a 
scarcity of men, and dissolve states and the world that is composed of them, impiously doing away with 
divine generation. It is also unmanly and weak to shun living with a wife and children. For of that of which the 
loss is an evil, the possession is by all means a good; and this is the case with the rest of things. But the loss 
of children is, they say, among the chiefest evils: the possession of children is consequently a good thing; 
and if it be so, so also is marriage. It is said:- 

"Without a father there never could be a child. 

And without a mother conception of a child could not be. 

Marriage makes a father, as a husband a mother."[4] 

Accordingly Homer makes a thing to be earnestly prayed for:- 

"A husband and a house;" 

yet not simply, but along with good agreement. For the marriage of other people is an agreement for 
indulgence; but that of philosophers leads to that agreement which is in accordance with reason, bidding 
wives adorn themselves not in outward appearance, but in character; and enjoining husbands not to treat 
their wedded wives as mistresses, making corporeal wantonness their aim; but to take advantage of 
marriage for help in the whole of life, and for the best self-restraint. 

Far more excellent, in my opinion, than the seeds of wheat and barley that are sown at appropriate 
seasons, is man that is sown, for whom all things grow; and those seeds temperate husbandmen ever sow. 
Every foul and polluting practice must therefore be purged away from marriage; that the intercourse of the 
irrational animals may not be cast in our teeth, as more accordant with nature than human conjunction in 
procreation. Some of these, it must be granted, desist at the time in which they are directed, leaving creation 
to the working of Providence. 

By the tragedians, Polyxena, though being murdered, is described nevertheless as having, when dying, 
tal<en great care to fall decently, - 

"Concealing what ought to be hid from the eyes of men." 

Marriage to her was a calamity. To be subjected, then, to the passions, and to yield to them, is the extremest 
slavery; as to keep them in subjection is the only liberty. The divine Scripture accordingly says, that those 
who have transgressed the commandments are sold to strangers, that is, to sins alien to nature, till they 
return and repent. Marriage, then, as a sacred image, must be kept pure from those things which defile it.[5] 
We are to rise from our slumbers with the Lord, and retire to sleep with thanksgiving and prayer,- 

"Both when you sleep, and when the holy light comes," 

confessing the Lord in our whole life; possessing piety in the soul, and extending self-control to the body. 
For it is pleasing to God to lead decorum from the tongue to our actions. Filthy speech is the way to 
effrontery; and the end of both is filthy conduct. 

Now that the Scripture counsels marriage, and allows no release from the union, is expressly contained in 
the law, "Thou shalt not put away thy wife, except for the cause of fornication;" and it regards as fornication, 
the marriage of those separated while the other is alive. Not to deck and adorn herself beyond what is 
becoming, renders a wife free of calumnious suspicion, while she devotes herself assiduously to prayers 
and supplications; avoiding frequent departures from the house, and shutting herself up as far as possible 
from the view of all not related to her, and deeming housekeeping of more consequence than impertinent 
trifling. "He that taketh a woman that has been put away," it is said, "committeth adultery; and if one puts 
away his wife, he makes her an adulteress, "[1] that is, compels her to commit adultery. And not only is he 
who puts her away guilty of this, but he who takes her, by giving to the woman the opportunity of sinning; for 
did he not take her, she would return to her husband. What, then, is the law?[2] In order to check the 
impetuosity of the passions, it commands the adulteress to be put to death, on being convicted of this; and if 
of priestly family, to be committed to the flames. [3] And the adulterer also is stoned to death, but not in the 
same place, that not even their death may be in common. And the law is not at variance with the Gospel, but 
agrees with it. How should it be otherwise, one Lord being the author of both? She who has committed 
fornication liveth in sin, and is dead to the commandments; but she who has repented, being as it were born 
again by the change in her life, has a regeneration of life; the old harlot being dead, and she who has been 
regenerated by repentance having come back again to life. The Spirit testifies to what has been said by 
Ezekiel, declaring, "I desire not the death of the sinner, but that he should turn. "[4] Now they are stoned to 
death; as through hardness of heart dead to the law which they believed not. But in the case of a priestess 
the punishment is increased, because "to whom much is given, from him shall more be required. "[5] 
Let us conclude this second book of the Stromata at this point, on account of the length and number of the 
chapters. 

chapter of this book must also be kept in view if we would do full justice to the true position of Clement, who 
recognises nothing in heathen philosophy as true wisdom, save as it flows from God, in Moses, and through 
the Hebrew Church. That Greek philosophy, so viewed, did lead to Christ, and that this great principle is 
recognised in the apostolic teachings, seems to me indisputable. This illustrates what has been noted 
above in Elucidation I. 

III. (See p. 359.) 

Clement notes that the false Gnostics rejected the Epistles to Timothy, [2] chiefly because of 1 Tim. vi. 20. 
Beausobre (Histoire du Manicheisme, tom. ii. p. v.) doubts as to Basilides, whether he is open to this 
charge; but Jerome accuses him expressly of rejecting the pastoral epistles, and that to the Hebrews. For 
this, and Meander's qualifying comment, see Kaye, p. 263. Clement is far from charging Basilides, 
personally, with an immoral life, or from lending his sanction to impurity; but a study of the Gnostic sects, with 
whom our Alexandrian doctor was forced to contend, will show that they were introducing, under the 
pretence of Christianity, such abominations as made their defeat and absolute overthrow a matter of life and 
death for the Church. To let such teachers be confounded with Christians, was to neutralize the very purpose 
for which the Church existed. Now, it was in the deadly grapple with such loathsome errorists, that the idea of 
"Catholic orthodoxy" became so precious to the primitive faithful. They were forced to make even the 
heathen comprehend the existence of that word -wide confederation of churches already explained, [3] and 
to exhibit their Scriptural creed and purity of discipline, in the strongest contrast with these pestilent "armies 
of the aliens," who were neither Gnostics nor Christians indeed, much less Catholic or Orthodox teachers 
and believers. 

Now, if in dealing with counterfeits Clement was obliged to meet them on their own grounds, and defeat them 
on a plan, at once intelligible to the heathen, and enabling all believers to "fight the good fight of faith" 
successfully, we must concede that he knew better than we can, what was suited to the Alexandrian schools, 
their intellect, and their false mysticism. His works were a great safeguard to those who came after him; 
though they led to the false system of exposition by which Origen so greatly impaired his services to the 
Church, and perhaps to other evils, which, in the issue, shook the great patriarchate of Alexandria to its 
foundations. It is curious to trace the influence of Clement, through Tertullian and St. Augustine, upon the 
systems of the schoolmen, and again, through them, on the Teutonic reformers. The mysticism of Fenelon 
as well, may be traced, more than is generally credited, to the old Alexandrian school, which was itself the 
product of some of the most subtle elements of our nature, sanctified, but not wholly controlled, by the 
wisdom that is from above. Compare the interminable controversies of the period, in the writings of Fenelon 
and Bossuet; and, for a succinct history, see L'Histoire de I'eglise de France, par I'Abbe Guettee, tom. xi. p. 
156 et seqq. 

BOOK III. [1] 

CAPUT I.--BASILIDIS SENTENTIAM DE CONTINENTIA ET NUPTUS REFUTAT. 

AC Valentiniani quidem, qui desuperex divinis emissionibus deduxere conjugationes, acceptum habent 
matrimonium: Basilidis autem sectatores, "Cum interrogassent, inquiunt, apostoli, nun sit melius uxorem non 
ducere, dicunt respondisse Dominum: 'Non omnes capiunt verbum lioc, Bunt enim eunuclii alii a nativitate, 
alii vero a necessitate. '"[2] Hoc dictum autem sic interpretantur: "Quidam ex quo nati sunt, naturaliter 
feminam aversantur, qui quidem hoc naturali utentes temperamento, rede faciunt, si uxorem non ducant. Hi, 
inquiunt, eunuchi sunt ex nativitate. Qui autem sunt a necessitate, ii sunt theatrici exercitatores, qui, gloriae 
studio retracti, se continent Quinetiam qui casu aliquo excisi sunt, eunuchi facti sunt per necessitatem. Qui 
itaque eunuchi fiunt per necessitatem, non fiunt eunuchi secundum logon, seu rationem. Qui autem regni 
sempiterni gratia seipsos castrarunt, id ad declinandas, inquiunt, conjugii molestias fecerunt, quod 
procurandae rei familiaris onus ac sollicitudinem timerent Et illud: 'Melius est nubere quam uri, '[3J dicentem 
Apostolum aiunt velle: Ne animam tuam in ignem injicias, noctu et interdiu resistens, ettimens ne a 
continentia excidas. Nam cum in resistendo occupata fuerit anima, a spe est divisa "-Patienter igitur 
sustine, " inquit his verbis Isidoms in Moralibus, "contentiosam mulierem, ne a Dei gratia avellaris; et cum 
ignem in semine excreveris, cum bona ores conscientia. Quando autem, inquit, tua gratiarum actio delapsa 
fuerit in petitionem, et deinceps' steteris, ut tamen labi ac timbare non desinas, due uxorem. Sin est aliquis 
Juvenis, vel pauper, vel infirmus, et non ei libel logo, seu rationi, convenienter uxorem ducere, is a fratre ne 
discedat; dicat: Ingressus sum in sancta, nihil possum pati. Quod si eum suspicio aliqua subeat, dicat: 
Frater, impone mihi manure, ne peccem; et confestim turn in mente, turn in corpore opem experietur Velit 
modo quod bonum est perficere, et assequetur. Nonnunquam autem ore tonus dicimus: Nolumus peccare; 
animus autem noster propendet in pectatum. Qui est ejusmodi, propier meturn, quodvult, non facit, ne ei 
constituatur supplicium. At hominum generi quaedam necessaria sunt ac naturalia duntaxat. Quod 
indumentis egeat, necessarium simul est et naturale: est autem venerea voluptas naturalis, sed non 
necessaria. " Has voces adduxi ad reprehendendos Basilidianos, qui non recte vivunt, ut qui vel peccandi 
potestatem habeant propier perfectionera, vel omnino quidera natura salvi futuri sint, etsi nunc peccent, 
quod naturae dignitate sunt electi. Neque veto primi dogmaturn architect! eorumdem perpetrandorum 
potestatem illis faciunt Ne ergo Christi nomen suspicientes, et iis, qui sunt in gentibus intemperantissimi, 
incontinentius viventes, nomini maledictum inurant. "Qui enim sunt ejusmodi, pseudapostoli, operarii 
dolosi," usque ad illud: "Quorum finis erit secundum opera eorum."[4JEstergo continentia, corporis 
despicientia secundum confessionem in Deum; non solum enim in rebus venereis, sed etiam in aliis, quae 
anima perperam concupiscit, non contenta necessariis, versatur continentia. Est autem et in lingua, et in 
acquirendo, et in utendo, et in concupiscendo continentia. Non docet autem ea solummodo esse 
temperantes, siquidem praebet nobis temperantiam, ut quae sit divina potestas et gratia. Dicendum est 
ergo, quidnam nostris videatur de eo, quod est propositum. Nos quidem castitatem, et eos, quibus hoc a 
Deo datum est, beatos decimus: monogamiam autem, etquae consistit in uno solum matrimonio, 
honestatem admira tour; dicerites tamen oportere aliorum misereri, et "alterum alterius onera portare,"[1] ne 
"quis, cure" recte "stare videatur,"[2] ipse quoque "cadat." De secundis autum nuptiis: "Si uraris," inquit 
Apostolus, "jungere matrimonio. "[3] 

CAPUT ll.-CARPOCRATIS ET EPIPHANIS SENTEN-TIAM DE FEMINARUM 
COMMUNITATE REFUTAT. 

Qui autem a Carpocrate descendunt et Epiphane, consent oportere uxores esse communes; a quibus 
contra nomen Christi maximum emanavit probruin. Hie autem Epiphanes, cujus etiam scripta feruntur, filius 
erat Carpocratis, et maths A\exandriae nomine, ex patre quidera Alexandrinus, ex matre vero 
Cephalleneus. Vixit autem solum septemdecim annos, et Same, quae est urbs Cephalleniae, ut deus est 
honore affectus. Quo in loco templum ex ingentibus lapidibus, altaria, delubra, museum, aedificatum est et 
consecratum; et cure est nova luna, convenientes Cephallenei, diem natalem, quo in decs relatus est 
Epiphanes, sacrificant, libantque, et convivantur, et hymnos canunt A patre autem didicit et orbem 
disciplinarum et Platonis philosophiam. Fuit autem princeps monadicae[4] cognitionis. A quo etiam profluxit 
haeresis eorum, qui nunc sunt, Carpocratianorum. Is ergo dicitin libro Dejustitia, "Justitiam Dei esse 

quamdam cure aequalitate communionem. Aequale quidera certe caelum undequaque extensum totam 
terrain cingit. Et nox ex aequo stellas omnes ostendit; et diei auctorem et lucis patrem, solem, Deus ex alto 
aequalem effudit omnibus, qui possunt videre (illi autem omnes communiter respiciunt), quoniam non 
discernit divitem vel pauperem vel populi principem, insipientes et sapientes, femmas et masculos, liberos, 
sen/OS. Sed neque secus facit in brutis. Cure autem omnibus animantibus aequo ipsum communem 
effuderit. bonis et malls justitiam suam confirmat, cure nemo possit plus habere, neque auferre a proximo, ut 
ipse illius lucem habeat duplicatam. Sol facit omnibus animantibus communia exorm nutrimenta, communi 
Justitia ex aequo data omnibus: et ad ea, quae sunt hujusmodi, similiter se habet genus boum, ut bores; et 
suum, at sues, et ovium, ut oves; etreliqua omnia. Justitia enim in lis apparel esse communitas. Deinde per 
communitatem omnia similiter secundum sua genera seminantur, et commune nutrimentum editurhumi 
pascentibus jumentis omnibus, et omnibus ex aequo; ut quod nulla liege circumscriptum sit, sed ejus, qui 
donat, jubentis suppeditatione, convenienter justeque adsit omnibus. Sed neque generationi posita est lex, 
esset enim jamdiu abolita: ex aequo autem seminant etgenerant, habentia innatam a justitia 
communionera: ex aequo communiter omnibus oculum ad videndum, creator et pater omnium, sua justitia 
legera ferens, praebuit, non discernens feminam a masculor non id quod est rationis particeps, ab experte 
rationis, el, ut semel dicam, nullum a nullo; sed aequalitate et communitate visum similiter dividens, uno 
jussu omnibus est largitus. Leges autem, inquit, hominum, cum ignorationem castigare non possent, contra 
leges facere docuerunt: legum enim proprietas dissecuit divinae legis communionem et arrodit; non 
intelligens dictum Apostoli dicentis: 'Per legem peccatum cognovi. ' Et meum et tuum dicit subiisse per 
leges, ut quae non amplius communiter fruantur (sunt enim communia), neque terra, neque possessionibus, 
sed neque matrimonio. Fecit enim rites communiter omnibus, quae neque passerem, neque furem 
abnegant; et frumentum similiter, et alios fructus. Violata autem communio et aequalitas, genuit furem 
pecorum etfructuum. Cum ergo Deus communiter omnia fecisset homini, et feminam cure masculo 
communiter conjunxisset, et omnia similiter animantia conglutinasset, pronuntiavit justitiam, communionem 
cum aequalilate. Qui autem sic nati sunt, communionera, quae eorum conciliat generationem, 
abnegaverunt. Et dicit, si unam ducens habeat, cure omnium possint esse participes, sicut reliqua recit 
animantia. " Haec cum his verbis dixisset, subjungit rursus his verbis: "Intensam enim et vehementiorem 
ingeneravit masculis cupiditatem ad generum perpetuitatem, quam nee lex, nee mos, nee aliquid aliud 
potest abolere: est enim Dei decretum. " Et quomodo amplius hie in nostra examinetur oratione, cum legem 
et Evangelium per haec aperte destruat? Ilia enim dicit: "Non moeehaberis. "[5] Hoe autem dicit: "Quicunque 
respieit ad concupiscentiam, jam moeehatus est. "[6] lllud enim: "Non eoncupisees, "[7] quod a lege dicitur, 
ostendit unum esse Deum, qui praedicatur per legem et prophetas et Evangelium. Dicit enim: "Non 
eoncupisees uxorem proximi tui. " Proximus autem non est Judaeus Judaeo: frater enim est et eumdem 
habet Spiritum; restat ergo, ut propinquum dicat eum qui est alterius gentis. Quomodo autem non 
propinquus, qui aptus est esse Spiritus particeps? Non solum enim Hebraeorum, sed etiam gentium pater 
est Abraham. Si autem quae est adulterata, etqui in eam fornieatus est, capite punitur:[8] clarum est utique 
praaeceptum, quod dicit: "Non eoncupisees uxorem propinqui tui, " 1oqui de gentibus: ut cure quis 
secundum legera et ab uxore proximi eta sorore abstinuefit, aperte audiat a Domino: "Ego autem dico, non 
eoncupisees. " Additio autem hujus particuae, "ego, " majorem praecepti vim ostendit. Quod autem cure 
Deo bellum gerat Carpocrates, et Epiphanes etiam in eo, qui vulgo jaetatur, libro De justilia, pater ex eo 
quod subjungit his verbis: "Mine ut qui ridiculum dixerit, legislatoris hoc verbum audiendum est: 'Non 
eoncupisees:' usque ad id, quod magis ridicule dicit: ' Res proximi tui. ' Ipse enim, qui dedit cupiditatem, ut 
quae contineret generationem, jubet eam auferre, cum a nullo earn auferat animali. lllud autem: 'Uxorein 
proximi mi, ' quo communionera cogit ad proprietatem, dixit adhue magis ridicule. " Et haec quidera dogmata 
constituunt egregii Carpocratiani. Hos dicunt et aliquos alios similium malorum aemulatores, ad coenas 
convenientes (neque enim dixerim "agapen" eorum congressionem)[1J viros simul et mulieres, postquam 
cibis venerem excitantibus se expleverint, lumine amoto, quod eorum fornicatoriam banc justitiam pudore 
afficiebat, aversa lucema, coire quomodo velint, et cure quibus velint: meditates autem in ejusmodi 
"agape" communionem, interdiujam, a quibus velint mulieribus exigere Carpoerateae (divinae enim nefas 
est discere) legis obedientiam. Has leges, ut sentio, ferre opportuit Carpocratem canum et suum et 
hircorum libidinibus. Mihi autem videtur, Platonem quoque mate intellexisse, in Republica dicentem, 
oportere esse communes omnium uxores: ut qui diceret eas quidem, quae nondum nupserant, esse 
communes eorum, qui essent petituri, quemadmodum theatram quoque est commune spectatorum; esse 
autem unamquamque uniuscujusque qui praeoccupasset, et non amplius communem esse earn quae 
nupsisset Xanthus autem in lis, quae scribuntur Magica: "Coeunt autem, " inquit, "magi cum matribus et 
filiabus: et fas esse aiunt coire cure sororibus, et communes esse uxores, non vi et clam, sed utrisque 
consentientibus, cure velit alter ducere uxorem alterius. " De his et similibus haeresibus existimo Judam 
prophetice dixisse in epistola: "Similiter quidera hi quoque somniantes" (non enim vigilantes ad veritatem 
se applicant), usque ad lllud: "Et os eorum loquitur superba. "[2] 

CAPUT lll.-QUATENUS PLATO ALIIQUE E VETERIBUS PRAEIVERINT MARCIONITIS 
ALIISQUE HAERETICIS, QUI A NUPTIIS IDEO ABSTINENT QUIA CREATURAM MALAWI 
EXISTIMANT ET NASCI HOMINES IN POENAM OPINANTUR. 

Jam veto si et ipse Plato et Pytliagorei, sicut etiam postea Marcionitae, malam existimarunt esse 
generationem, longe abfuit, ut communes ipse poneret uxores. Sed l\/larcionitae[3] quidem dicunt malam 
esse naturam, ex mala materia, etajusto factam opifice ac Creatore. Qua quidera ratione nolentes implore 
mundum, qui factus est a Creatore, volunt abstinere a nuptiis, resistentes suo Creator!, et contendentes ad 
bonum, qui vocavit: sed non ad eum, qui, ut dicunt, Deus est diversis moribus praeditus. Undo cum nihil hie 
velint relinquere proprium, non sunt ex destinato animi proposito continentes, sed propter odium conceptum 
adversum eum, qui creavit, nolentes lis uti, quae ab ipso sunt creata. Sed hi quidem, qui propter impium, 
quod cum Deo gerunt, bellum, emoti sunt ab lis cogitationibus, quae sunt secundum naturam, Dei 
longanimitatem contemnentes et benignitatem, etsi nolunt uxorem ducere, cibis tamen utuntur creatis, et 
aerem respirant Creatoris, ut quiet ejus sint opera, et in lis, quae sunt ejus, permaneant, et inauditam ac 
novam quamdam, ut aiunt, annuntiatam audiunt cognitionem, etiamsi hoc quoque nomine mundi Domino 
deberent agere gratias, quod hie acceperint Evangelium. Sed adversus eos quidera, cure de principiis 
tractabimus, accuratissime disseremus. Philosophi autem, quorum mentionera fecimus, a quibus cure 
malam esse generationem irapie didicissent Marcionitae, tanquam suo dogmate gloriantur, non eam volunt 
esse natura malam, sed anima, quae veritatem divulgavit. Artimam enim, quam esse divinam fatentur, in 
hunc mundum deducunt, tanquam in locum supplicii. Oportet autem animas in corpus immissas expiari ex 
eorum sententia. Non convenit autem plius hoc dogma Marcionistis, sed iis, qui consent in corpora intrudi, 
et iis alligari, et quasi ex vase in vas aliud transfundi animas. Adversus quos fuerit aliud dicendi tempus, 
quando de anima tractabimus. Videtur itaque Heraclitus maledictis insequi generationem: "Quoniam 
autem, " inquit, "nati volunt vivere, et mortes habere, vel potius quiescere; filios quoque relinquunt, ut mortes 
fiant." Clarum est autem cum eo conyenire Empedoclem quoque dicentem:- 

Deflevi et luxi, insolitum cernens miser orbem. 

Et amplius:- 

Mortua ham ex vivis fecit, species commutans. 

Et rursus:- 

Hei mihi! quam infelix horninure genus atque misellum Litibus ex quantis prognati et planctibus estis? 

Dicit autem Sibylla quoque:- 

Mortales homines, caro qui tantum, et nihil estis; 

Similiter atque poem, qui scribit:- 

Haud homine infelix tellus mage quidquam atit alma. 

Quin etiam Theognis malam ostendit esse generationera, dicens hoc modo:- 
Optima non nasci res est mortalibus aegris. 

Nee nitidi soils luce micante frui, 
Extempio aut natum portas invadere Ditis. 

His autem consequenria scribit quoque Euripides, poem tragicus:- 

Nam nos decebat convenire publico, et 
Deftere natum, quod tot ingreditur mala: 
Ast mortuum, cuiquejam quies data est, 
Efferre laetis gratulationibus. 

Et rursus similia sic dicit:- 

Quis novit, an vivere quidera siet mori, 

Siet mori autem vivere? 

Idem quod hi, videtur Herodotus quoque inducere dicentem Solonera: "0 Croese, quivis homo nihil est aliud 
quam calamitas. " Jam veto ejus de Cleobide et Bitone tabula plane nihil aliud vult, quam vituperare 
generationera, laudare autem morterm. 

Et qualis folii, est heminum generatia talis, ait Homerus. Plato autem in Cratylo, Orpheo tribuit eum 
sermonem, quo anima puniri in corpore dicitur: "Nempe corpus hoc animae <greek>shma</greek>," 
monumenturn, "quidam esse tradunt: quasi ipsa praesenti in tempore sit sepulta; atque etiam quia anima 
per corpus <greek>shmainei</greek>, " significat, "quaecunclue significare potest: iedo 
<greek>shma</greek> jure vocari. Videatur mihi praeterea Orpheus nomen hoc ob id potissimum 
imposuisse, quod anima in corpore hoc delictorum luat poenas." Operae pretium est autem meminisse 
etiam eorum, quae dicit Philolaus. Sic enim dicit hie Pythagoreus: "Testantur autem veteres quoque 
theologi et rates, adiuenda supplicia animam conjunctam esse corpori, et in eo tanquam in monumento 
esse sepultam. " Quin etiam Pindarus de Us, quae sunt in Eleusine, mysterus loquens, infert: "Beatus, qui 
cum ilia sub terra videtit communia, novit quidem vitae finem, novit autem datum Jovis imperium. " Et Plato 
similiter in Paedonene non veretur hoc modo scribere: "Porto autem hi, qui nobis haec constituerunt 
mysteria, non aliquid aliud, " usque ad: "Et cure diis habitatlone. " Quid veto, cum dieit: "Quandiu corpus 
habuefimus, et anima nostra cum ejusmodi malo admista fuerit, illud, quod desideramus, nunquam satis 
assequemur?" annon significat generationem esse causam maximorum malorum? Jam vero in Phedone 
quoque testatur: "Evenit enim, ut qui recte philosophantur, non animadvertantur ab aliis in nullam rem aliam 
suum studium conferre, quam ut emoriantur, et sint mortui. " Et runus: "Ergo hie quoque philosophi anima 
corpus maxime vilipendit, et ab eo fugit, ipsa autem secum seorsim esse quaerit " Nunquid autem consentit 
cum divino Apostolo, qui dicit: "Infelix ego homo, quis me liberabit a corpore mortis hujus?"[1] nisi forte 
eorum consensionem, qui trahuntur in vitium, "corpus morris" dicit tropice. Atque coitum quoque, qui est 
principium generationis, vel ante Marcionem vietur Plato aversari in prime De republiea: ubi eum laudasset 
seneetutem, subjungit: "Velim scias, quod quo magis me deficiunt alise," nempe corporis, "voluptates, eo 
magis eonfabulandi eupiditas, et voluptas, quam ex ea re capio, augetur." rei veneree injecta esset menrio: 
"Bona verba quaeso, " inquit: "ego vero lubenter isthinc, tanquam ad insane aliquo et agresti domino, 
effugi?' Rursus in Phadone, vituperans generationem, dieit: "Quae ergo de his in arcanis dicitur, haec est 
oratio, quod nos homines sum us in custodia allqua." Et rursus: "Qui autem pie prae caeteris vixisse 
inveniuntur, hi sunt, qui ex his terrenis 1oeis, tanquam e careere, soluti atque liberati, ad puram in altioribus 
loeis habitationem transcendunt." Sed tamen quamvis ita se habeat, recte a Deo mundum administrari 
existimat; unde dicit: "Non oportet autem seipsum solvere, nee effugere." Et ut paucis dicam, non dedit 
Marcioni occasionem, utmalam existimaret materiam, cum ipse pie de mundo haec dixerit: "Ab eo enim, 
qui ipsum construxit, habet omnia bona: a priori autem deformirate incommoda et injusta omnia, quae intra 
coelum nascuntur, mundus ipse sustinet, et animantibus inserit." Adhuc autem subjungit manifestius: "Cujus 
quidem defectus est coporea temperatura, priscae naturge comes; ham quiddam valde deforme erat, et 
ordinis expert, priusquam praesenti ornatu decoraretur. " Nihilominus autem in Legibus quoque defiet 
humanum genus, sic dicens: "Dii autem hominum genus laboribus naturae pressum miserati, remissiones 
ipsis statuerunt laborum, solemnium videlicit festorum vicissitudines. " Et in Epinamide persequitur etiam 
causas, cur sint horninure miserti, et sic dicit: "Ab initio ipsum esse genitum, est grave cuilibet animanti: 
primum quidem, quod eorum constitutionis sint participes, quae in utero gestantur; deinde ipsum nasci, et 
praeterea nutriri et erudiri, per irmumerabiles labores universa fiunt, ut omnes dicimus. " Quid vero? annon 
Heraclitus generationera quoque dicit esse mortem? Pythagoras autem similiter atque Socrates in Gargia, 
cum dicit: "Mors est, quaeunque experrecti videmus: quaecunque autem dormientes, somnus." Sed de his 
quidem satis. Quando autem tractabimus de principiis, tune ethas repugnantias, quas et innuunt philosophi, 
et suis dogmatibus decernunt Marcionistae, considerabimus. Caeterum satis dilucide ostensas esse 
existimo, externorum alienorumque dogmaturn occasiones Marcionem ingrate et indocte accepisse a 
Platone. Nobis autem procedar sermo de continentia. Dicebamus autem Graecos adversus liberorum 
generationem multa dixisse, incommoda, quae comitari eam solent, respicientes: quae cum impie 
excepissent Marcionitae, impie fuisse ingratos in Creatorem. Dicit enim tragcedia:- 

Non nascier praestat homines, quam nastier 
Dein filios acerbis cum coloribus 
Enitor, ast enixa, si stolidi sclent, 
Afflictor, intuendo quod servo males, 
Bonosque perdo. Si bones servo, tamen 

Mihi miscellum cor timore liquitur. 

Quid hie boni ergo est? unicam annon sufTicit 

Effundere animam, nisi crucieris amplius? 

Et adliuc similiter:- 

Vetus Stat milii persuasio, 

Plantare filios nunquam liominem oportuit, 

Dum cernit ad quot gignimus natos mala. 

In his autem, quae deinceps sequuntur, malorum quoque causam evidenter reducit ad principia, sic 
dicens:- 

0/ miser natus, malisque obnoxius 
Editus, homo, es, vitae tuaeque miserham 
Hinc inchoasti: coepit aether omnibus 
Spiramen unde alens tradere mortalibus; 
Mortalis aegre ne feras mortal ia. 

Rursus autem his similia tradit:- 

Mortalium omnium beatus non fuit 
Quisquam, molestia et nemo carens fuit. 

Et deinde rursus:- 

Heu! quanta, quotque hominibus eveniunt mala, 
Quam vana, quorum terminus nullus datur. 

Et adhuc similiter- 

Nemo beatus semper est mortalium. 

Mac itaque ratione dicunt etiam Pythagoreos abstinere a rebus venereis. Mihi autem contra videntur uxores 
quidem ducere, ut liberos suscipiant, velle autem a venerea voluptate se continere post susceptos liberos. 
Proinde mystice uti fabis prohibent, non quod sit legumen flatum excitens, et concoctu difficile, et somnia 
efficiat turbulenta; neque quod hominis capiti sit sireills ut vult ille versiculus:- 

Idem est nam que fabam atque caput corrode re paths; 

sed potius quodfabae, si comedantur, stehles officiant mulieres. Theophrastus quidem certe in quinto libro 
De causis plantarum, fabarum siliquas, si ponantur ad radices arborum quae nuper sunt plantatae, refert 
plantas exsiccare. Quinetiam gallinae domesticae, quae eas assidue comedunt, efficiuntur stehles. 

CAPUT IV.--QUIBUS PRAETEXTIBUS UTANTUR HAERETICI AD OMNIS GENERIS 
LICENTIAM ET LIBIDINEM EXERCENDAM. 

Ex Us autem, qui ab haeresi ducuntur, Marciohis quidem Pontic! fecimus mentionem, qui propter certamen, 
quod adversus Creatorem suscepit, mundanarum rerum usum recusat. El autem continentiae causa est, si 
modo est ea dicenda continentia, ipse Creator, cui se adversah existimans gigas iste cum Deo pugnans, 
est invitus continens, dum in creationem et Dei opus invehitur Quod si usurpent vocem Domini, qui dicit 
Philippo: "Sine mortuos sepelire mortuos sues, tu autem sequere me:"(1) at illud considerent, quod similem 
cam is formationem fert quoque Philippus, non habens cadaver pollutum. Quomodo ergo cum carhem 
haberet, non habuit cadaver? Quoniam surrexit ex monumento. Domino ejus vitia morte afficiente, vixit 
autem Christo. Meminimus autem nefariae quoque ex Carpocratis sententia mulierum communionis. Cum 
autem de dicto Nicolai loqueremur, illud praetermisimus: Cum formosam, aiunt, haberet uxorem, etpost 
Sen/atohs assumptionem el fuisset ab apostolis exprobrata zelotypia, in medium adducta muliere, permisit 
cui vellet eam nubere. Aiunt enim banc actionem illi voci consentaneam, quae dicit, quod "carne abuti 
oporteat. " Proinde ejus factum et dictum absolute et inconsiderate sequentes, qui ejus haeresim 
persequuntur, impudenter effuseque fornicantur Ego autem audio Nicolaum quidem nulla unquam alia, 
quam ea, quae el nupserat, uxore usum esse; et ex illius liberis, filias quidem consenuisse virgines, filium 
autem permansisse incorruptum. Quae cum ita se habeant, vitii erat depulsio atque expurgatio, in medium 

apostolorum circumactio uxoris, cujus dicebatur laborare zelotypia: et continentia a voluptatibus, quae 
magna studio parari solent, docebat illud, "abuti came, " hoc est, exercere carnem. Neque enim, ut existimo, 
volebant, convenienter Domini praecepto, "duobus dominis sen/ire, "(2) voluptati et Deo. Dicunt itaque 
l\/lattliiam(3) quoque sic docuisse: "Cum came quidem pugnare, et ea uti, niliil ei impudicum largiendo ad 
voluptatem; augere autem animam per fidem et cognitionem. " Sunt autem, qui etiam publicam venerem 
pronuntiant mysticam communionem; et sic ipsum nomen contumelia afficiunt Sicut enim operari eum 
dicimus, tum qui malum aliquod facit, tum etiam qui bonum, idem nomen utrique tribuentes; liaud alitor 
"communio" usurpari solet; nam bona quidem est in communicatione tum peeuniae, tum nutrimenti et 
yestitus: illi autem quamlibet veneream conjunctionem impie vocaverunt "communionem." Dicunt itaque ex 
lis quemdam, cum ad hostram virginem vultu formosam accessisset, dixisse: Scriptum est: "Da omnite 
petenti:"(4) illam autem honeste admodum respondisse, ut quse non intelligeret hominis petulantiam: At tu 
matrem conveni de matrimonio. O impietatem! etiam voces Domini ementiuntur isti intemperantiae 
communicatores, fratresque libidinis, non solum probrum philosophiae, sed etiam totius vitae; qui veritatem, 
quantum in els situm est, adulterant ac corrumpunt, vel potius defodiunt; homines infelicissimi carnalem 
concubitus communionem consecrant, et banc ipsos putant ad regnum Dei perducere. Ad lupanaria ergo 
deducit haec communio, et cure els communicaverint sues et hirci, maximaque apud illos in spe fuerint 
meretrices, quae in prostibulis praesto sunt, et volentes omnes admittunt "Vos autem non sic Christum 
didicistis, siquidem ipsum audiistis, et in eo docti estis, quemadmodum est Veritas in Christo Jesu, ut 
deponatis quae sunt secundum veterem conversationem, veterem hominem, qui corrumpitur secundum 
desideria deceptionis. Renovamini autem spiritu mentis vestrae, et induatis novum hominem, qui creatus 
est secundum Deum in justitia et sanctitate veritatis, "(1) ad Dei similitudinem. "Efficimini ergo Dei imitatores, 
ut filii dilecti, et ambulate in dilectione, sicut Christus quoque dilexit nos, et tradidit seipsum pro nobis 
oblationem et hostiam Deo in odorem suavitatis. Fornicatio autem, et omnis immunditia, vel avaritia, ne 
nominetur quidem in vobis, sicut decet sanctos, et turpitude, et stultiloquium. "(2) Etenim docens Apostolus 
meditari vel ipsa voce esse castos, scribit: "Hoc enim scitote, quod omnis fornicator, " et caetera, usque ad 
illud: "Magis autem arguite."(3) Effluxit autem els dogma ex quodam apocrypho libro. Atque adeo afferam 
dictionem, quae mater eorum intemperantiae et origo est: et sive ipsi hujus libri scriptores se fateantur, en 
eorum recordiam, licet Deo eum false ascribant libidinis intemperantia ducti: sive ab aliis, eos perverse 
audientes, hoc praeclarum dogma acceperint, sic porto se habent ejus verba: "Unum erant omnia: 
postquam autem ejus unitati visum est non esse solam, exiit ab eo inspiratio, et cum ea iniit communionem, 
et fecit dilectum. Exhinc autem egressa est ab ipso inspiratio, cum qua cure communionem iniisset, fecit 
porestates, quae nee possunt videri nee audiri, " usque ad illud, "unamquamque in nomine proprio. " Si enim 
hi quoque, sicut Valentiniani, spiritales posuissent communiones, suscepisset forte aliquis eorum 
opinionem: carnalis autem libidinis communionem ad sanctam inducere prophetiam, est ejus qui desperat 
salutem. Talia etiam statuunt Prodici quoque asseclae, qui seipsos false nomine vocant Gnosticos: 
seipsos quidem dicentes esse natura filios primi Dei; ea vero nobilitate et libertate abutentes, vivunt ut 
volunt; volunt autem libidinose; se nulla re teneri arbitrati, ut "domini sabbati, " et qui sint quovis genere 
superiores, filii regales. Regi autem, inquiunt, lex scripta non est Primum quidem, quod non faciant omnia 
quae volunt: multa enim cos prohibebunt, etsi cupiant et conentur. Quinetiam quae faciunt, non faciunt ut 
reges, sed ut mastigiae: clanculum enim commitrunt adulteria, timerites ne deprehendantur, et vitantes ne 
condemntur, et metuentes ne supplicio afficiantur. Quomodo etiam res est libera, intemperantia etturpis 
sermo? "Omnis enim, qui peccat, est sen/us," inquit Apostolus. (4) Sed quomodo vitiam ex Deo instituit, qui 
seipsum praebuit dedititium cuivis concupiscentiae? cum dixerit Dominus: "Ego autem dice: Ne 
concupiscas. " Vultne autem aliquis sua sponte peccare, et decernere adulteria esse committenda, 
voluptatibusque et deliciis se explendum, et aliorum violanda matrimonia, cum aliorum etiam, qui inviti 
peccant, misereamur? Quod si in externum mundum venerint, qui in alieno non fuerint fideles, verum non 
babebunt. AfTicit autem hospes aliquis elves contumelia, et els injuriam facit; et non potius ut peregrinus, 
utens necessariis, vivit, elves non offendens? Quomodo autem, cum eadem faciant, acii, quos gentes odio 
habent, quod legibus obtemperare nolint, nempe iniqui, et incontinentes, et avari, et adulter!, dicunt se solos 
Deum nosse? Oporteret enim eos, cum in alienis adsunt, recte vivere, utrevera regiam indolem 
ostenderent. Jam vero et humanos legislatores, et divinam legera habent sibi infensam, cum inique et 
praeter leges vivere instituerint. Is certe, qui scortatorein "confodit, " a Deo plus esse ostenditur in Numeris. 
"Et si dixerimus, " inquit Joannes in epistola, "quod societatem habemus cum eo, " nempe Deo, "et in 
tenebris ambulamus, mentitour, et veritatem non facimus. Si autem in luce ambulamus, sicut et ipse est in 
luce, societatem habemus cum ipso, et sanguis Jesu filii ejus emundat nos a peccato."(5) Quomodo ergo 
sunt hi hujus mundi hominibus meliores, qui haec faciunt, et vel pessimis hujus mundi sunt similes? sunt 
enim, ut arbitror, similes natura, qui sunt factis similes. Quibus autem se esse consent nobilitate superiores, 
eos debent etiam superare moribus, ut vitent ne includantur in carcere. Revera enim, ut dixit Dominus: "Nisi 
abundavetit justitia vestra plus quam scribarum et Pharisaeorum, non intrabitis in regnum Dei. " (6) De 
abstinentia autem a cibis ostenditur a Daniele. (7) Ut semel autem dicam, de obedientia dicit psallens 

David: "In quo diriget junior viam suam?"(8) Et statim audit: "In custodiendo sermones tuos in toto corde." Et 
dicit Jeremias: "Haec autem dicit Dominus: Per vias gentium ne ambulaveritis. "(9) Hinc moti aliqui alii, 
pusilli et nullius pretii, dicunt formatum fuisse hominem a diversis potestatibus: et quae sunt quidem usque 
ad umbilicum esse artis divinioris; quae autem subter, minoris; qua de causa coitum quoque appetere. Non 
animad-vertunt autem, quod superiores quoque partes nutrimentum appetunt, et quibusdam libidinantur 
Adversantur autem Christo quoque, qui dixit Pharisaeis, eundem Deum et "internum" nostrum et "externum" 
fecisse hominem. (1) Quinetiam appetitio non est corporis, etsi fiat per corpus. Quidam alii, quos etiam 
vocamus Antitactas, hoc est "adversaries" et repugnantes, dicunt quod Deus quidera universorum noster 
est natura pater, et omnia quaecunque fecit, bona sunt; unus autem quispiam ex lis, qui ab ipso facti sunt, 
seminatis zizaniis, malorum naturam generavit: quibus etiam nos omnes implicavit, ut nos efficeret Patri 
adversaries. Quare nos etiam ipsi huic adversamur ad Patrem ulciscendum, contra secundi voluntatem 
facientes. Quoniam ergo hie dixit: "Non moechaberis." nos, inquiunt, moechamur, ut ejus mandatum 
dissolvamus. Quibus responderimus quoque, quod pseudoprophetas, eteos qui veritatem simulant, ex 
operibus cognosci accepimus: si male audiunt autem vestra opera, quomodo adhuc dicetis vos veritatem 
tenere? Aut enim nullum est malum, et non est utique dignus reprehensione is, quem vos insimulatis, ut qui 
Deo sit adversatus, neque fuit alicujus mali effector; una enim cum male arbor quoque interimitur: aut si est 
malum ac consistit, dicant nobis, quid dicunt esse ea, quae data sunt, praecepta, de justitia, de continentia, 
de tolerantia, de patientia, et iis, quae sunt hujusmodi, bona an mala? et si fuerit quidera malum 
praeceptum, quod plurima prohibetfacere turpia, adversus seipsum legem feretvitium, ut seipsum 
dissolvat, quod quidem non potest fieri; sin autem bonum, cure bonis adversentur praeceptis, se bono 
adversari, et mala facere confitentur Jam vero ipse quoque Sen/ator, cui soil consent esse parendum, 
odio here, et maledictis insequi prohibuit et, "Cum adversario," inquit, "vadens, ejus amicus conare 
discedere."(2) Aut ergo Christ! quoque negabunt suasionem, adversantes adversario: aut, si sint amid, 
contra eum certamen suscipere nolunt. Quid vero? an nescitis, viri egregii (loquor enim tanquam 
praesentibus), quod cure praeceptis, quae se recte habent, pugnantes, propriae saluti resistis? Non enim 
ea, quae sunt utiliter edicta, sed vos ipsos evertitis. Et Dominus: "Luceant" quidera, inquit, "bona vestra 
opera." (3) vos autem libidines et intemperantias vestras manifestas redditis. Et alioqui si vultis legislatoris 
praecepta dissolvere, quanam de causa, illud quidem: "Non moechaberis," et hoc: "Stuprom puero non 
inferos, " et quaecunque ad continentiam conferunt, dissolvere conamini, propter vestram intemperantiam 
non dissolvitis autem, quae ab ipso fit, hiemem, ut media adhuc hieme aestatem faciatis: neque terram 
navigabilem, mare autem pedibus pervium, facitis, ut qui historias composuerunt, barbarum Xerxem dicunt 
voluisse facere? Cur veto non omnibus praeceptis repugnatis? Nam cum Hie dicat; "Crescite et 
multiplicamini, "(4) oporteret vos, qui adversamini, nullo mode uti coitu. Et cure dixit: "Dedi vobis omnia ad 
vescendum "(5) et fruendum, vos nullo frui oportuit. Quinetiam eo dicente: "Oculum pro oculo, "(6) oportuit vos 
decertationem contraria non rependere decertatione. Et cure furem jusserit reddere "quadruplum, "(7) 
oportuit vos furl aliquid etiam adhere. Rursus veto similiter, cum praecepto: "Diliges Deum tuum ex toto 
corde tuo, "(8) repugnetis, oportuit nee universomm quidem Deum diligere. Et rursus, cum dixent: "Non 
fades sculptile neque fusile, "(9) consequens erat ut etiam sculptilia adoraretis. Quomodo ergo non impie 
facitis, qui Creator! quidem, ut dicitis, resistiris; quae sunt autem meretricibus et adulterls similia, sectamini? 
Quomodo autem non sentiris vos eum majorem facere, quem pro imbecillo habetis; si quidera id fit, quod 
hie vult; non autem illud, quod voluit bonus? contra enim ostenditur quodam mode a vobis ipsis, imbecillum 
esse, quem vestrum patrem dicitis. Recensent etiam ex quibusdam locis propheticis decerptas dictiones, 
et male consarcinatas, quae allegorice dicta sunt tanquam redo ductu et citra figuram dicta sumentes. 
Dicunt enim scriptum esse: "Deo restiterunt, et salvi facti sunt:"(10) illi autem "Deo impudenti" addunt; et hoc 
eloquium tanquam consilium praeceptum accipiunt: et hoc ad salutem conferre existimant, quod Creatori 
resistant At "impudenti" quidem "Deo," non est scriprum. Si autem sic quoque habeat, eum, qui vocatus est 
diabolus, inteligite impudentem: vel quod hominem calumniis impetat, vel quod accuset peccatores, vel 
quod sit apostata. Populus ergo, de quo hoc dictum est, cum castigaretur propter sua peocata, aegre 
ferentes et gementes, his verbis, quae dicta sunt, murmurabant, quod aliae quidem gentes cum inique se 
gerant non puniantur, ipsi autem in singulis vexentur; adeo ut Jeremias quoque dixerit: "Cur via impiorum 
prosperatur?"(1 1) quod simile est ie, quod prius allatum est ex Malachia: "Deo restiterunt, et salvi facti sunt. " 
Nam prophetae divinitus inspirati, non solum quae a Deo audierint, se loqui profitentur; sed et ipsi etiam 
Solent ea, quae vulgo jactantur a populo, exceptionis mode, edicere, et tanquam quaestiones ab 
hominibus motas referre: cujusmodi est illud dictum, cujus mentio jam facta est. Nunquid autem ad hos 
verba sua dirigens, scribit Apostolus in Epistola ad Romanes: "Et non sicut blasphemamur, et sicut dicunt 
aliqui nos dicere: Faciamus mala, ut eveniant bona, quorum justa estdamnatio?"(1) 11 sunt, qui inter 
legendum tone vocis pervertunt Scripturas ad proprias voluptates, et quorumdam accentuum et punctorum 
transpositione, quae prudenter et utiliter praecepta sunt, as suas trahunt delicias. "Qui irritatis Deum 
sermonibus vestris," inquit Malachias, "et dicitis, in quonam eum irritavimus; Dum vos dicitis: Quicunque facit 
malum, bonus est coram Domino, et ipse in els complacuit; et ubi est Deus justitiae?"(2) 

CAPUT V.--DUO GENERA HAERETICORUM NOTAT: PRIUS ILLORUM QUI OMNIA 
OMNIBUS LICERE PRO-NUNTIANT, QUOS REFUTAT. 

Ne ergo hunc locum ungue amplius fodicantes plurium absurdalum haeresium meminerimus; nee rursus 
dum in singulis adversus unamquamque dicere necesse habemus, propterea pudore afficiamur, etnimis 
prolixos hos faciamus commenratios, age in duo dividentes omnes haereses, els respondeamus.(3) Aut 
enim decent indiscrete vivere: aut modum excedentes, per inpietatem et odium profitentur continentiam. 
Prius autem tractandum est de prima parte. Quod si quodlibet vitae genus licet eligere, tum earn scilicet 
etiam licet, quae est continens: et si electus tute poterit quodlibet vitae genus sectari, manifestum est eam, 
quae temperanter et secundum virtutem agitur, longe tutissimam esse. Nam cum "domino sabbati, " etiamsi 
intemperanter vivat, nulla ratio reddenda sit, multo magis qui vitam moderate et temperate instituit, nulli erit 
rationi reddendae obnoxius. "Omnia enim licent, sed non omnia expediunt, "(4) ait Apostolus. Quod si omnia 
licent, videlicet moderatum quoque esse et temperantem. Quemadmodum ergo is est laudandus, qui 
libertate sua usus est ad vivendum ex virtute: ita multo magis qui dedit nobis liberam nostri potestatem, et 
concessit vivere ut vellemus, est venerandus et adorandus, quod non permiserit, ut nostra electio et vitatio 
cuiquam necessario sen/iret Si est autem uterque aequo securus, et qui incontinentiam, et qui continentiam 
elegerit, non esttamen ex aequo honestum et decorum. Qui enim impegitin voluptates, gratificatur corpori: 
temperans autem animam corporis dominam liberat a perturbationibus. Et si dicant nos "vocatos fuisse in 
libertatem, solummodo ne praebeamus libertatem, m occasionem carni, "(4) ex sententia Apostoli. Si autem 
cupiditati est obsequendum, et quae probrosa estet turpis vita tanquam indifferens est eligenda, ut ipsi 
dicunt; aut cupiditatibus est omnino parendum, et si hoc ita est, facienda sunt quaevis impudicissima et 
maxime nefaria, eos sequendo, qui nobis persuadent: ant sunt aliquae declinandae cupiclitates, et non est 
amplius vivendum indifferenter, neque est impudenter serviendum vilissimis et abjectissimis nostris 
partibus, ventri et pudendis, dum cupidate ducti nostro blandimur cadaveri. Nutritur enim et vivificatur 
cupiditas, dum ei voluptates ministrantur: quemadmodum rursus si impediatur et interturbetur, flaccescit. 
Quomodo autem fieri potest, ut qui victus est a voluptatibus corporis. Domino assimiletur, ant Dei habeat 
cognitionem? Omnis enim voluptatis principium est cupiditas: cupiditas autem est molestia et sollicitudo, 
quae propter egestatem aliquid appetit. Quare nihil aliud mihi videntur, qui banc vitae ratiohem suscipiunt, 
quam quod dicitur. 

Ultra ignominiam sentire dolores; ut qui malum a se accersitum, nunc et in posterum eligant. Si ergo "omnia 
licerent, " nee timendum esset ne a spe excideremus propter malas actiones, esset fortasse eis aliquis 
praetextus, cur male viverent et miserabiliter. Quoniam autem vita beata nobis ostensa est per praecepta, 
quam oportet omnes sequentes, nee aliquid eorum, quae dicta sunt, perperam intelligentes, nee eorum, 
quae convenit, aliquid, etsi sit vel minimum, contemnentes, sequi quo logos ducit; quia, si ab eo 
aberraverimus, in malum immortale incidamus necesse est; si divinam autem Scripturam secuti fuerimus, 
per quam ingrediuntur, qui erediderunt, ut Domino, quoad fieri potest, assimilentur, non est vivendum 
indifferenter, sed pro viribus mundos esse oportet a voluptatibus et cupiditatibus, curaque estgerenda 
animae, qua apud solum Deum perseverandum est. Mens enim, quae est munda et ab omni vitio libera, est 
quodammodo apta ad potestatem Dei snscipiendam, cum divina in ea assurgat imago: "Et quicunque 
habet banc spem in Domino, seipsum, " inquit, "mundum castumque facit, quatenus Hie est castus. "(6) Ut ii 
autem accipiant Dei cognitionem, qui adhuc ducuntur ab affectibus, minime potest fieri: ergo nee ut finem 
assequantur, cum nullam habeant Dei cognitionem. Et eum quidem, qui hunc finem non assequitur, 
accusare videtur Dei ignoratio; ut Deus autem ignoretur, efficit vitae institutio. Omnino enim fieri non potest, ut 
quis simul sit et scientia praeditus, et blandiri corpori non erubescat. Neque enim potest unquam convenire, 
quod voluptas sit bonum, cure eo, quod bonum sit solum pulchrum et honesturn: vel etiam cure eo, quod 
solus sit pulcher Dominus, et solus bonus Dens, et solus amabilis. "In Christo autem circumcisi estis, 
circumcisione non manu facta, in exspoliatione corporis carnis, in circumcisione Christi.(1) Si ergo cum 
Christo consurrexistis, quae sursum sunt quaerite, quae sursum sunt sapite, non quae sunt super terram. 
Mortui enim estis, et vita vestra absconsa est cum Christo in Deo;" non autem ea, quam exercent, fornicatio. 
"Mortificate ergo membra, quae sunt super terram, fornicationem, immunditiam, passionem, desiderium, 
propter quae venit Ira Dei. Deportant ergo ipsi quoque iram, indignationem, vitium, maledictum, turpem 
sermonem ex ore suo, exuentes veterem hominem cum concupiscentiis, et induentes novum, qui renovatur 
in agnitionem, ad imaginem ejus, qui creavit ipsum."(2) Vitae enim institutio aperte eos arguit, qui mandata 
novere: qualis enim sermo, tails est vita. Arbor autem cognoscitur ex fructibus, non ex floribus et foliis ac 
ramis. Cognitio ergo est ex fructu et vitae institutione, non ex sermone et flore. Non enim nudum sermonera 
dicimus esse cognitionem, sed quamdam divinam scientiam, et lucem illam, quae innata animae ex 
praeceptorum obedientia, omnia, quae per generationem oriuntur, manifesta facit, et hominem instruit, ut 
seipsum cognoscat, et qua ratione compos fieri possit, edocet. Quod enim oculus est in corpore, hoc est in 
mente cognitio. Neque dicant libertatem, qua quis voluptati sen/it, sicut ii, qui bilem dicunt dulcem. Nos enim 

didicimus libertatem, qua Dominus noster nos liberat a voluptatibus, eta cupiditatibus, et aliis 
perturbationibus solvens. "Qui dicit: Novi Dominum, et mandata ejus non seh/at, mendax est, et in eo Veritas 
non est, "(3) air Joannes. 

CAPUT VI. --SECUNDUM GENUS HAERETICORUM AGGREDITUR, ILLORUM SCILICET QUI 
EX IMPIA DE DEO OMNIUM CONDITORE SENTENTIA, CONTINENTIAM EXERCENT. 

Adversus autem alterurn genus liaereticorum, (4) qui speciose per continentiam impie se gerunt, turn in 
creaturam, turn in sanctum Opificem, qui est solus Deus omnipotens; et dicunt non esse admittendum 
matrimonium et liberorum procreationem, nee in mundum esse inducendos alios infelices futures, nee 
suppeditandum morti nutrimenturn, haec sunt opponenda: primum quidem illud Joannis: "Et nunc antichristi 
multi facti sunt, unde scimus quod novissima hora est Ex nobis exierunt, sed non erant ex nobis. Nam si 
fuissent ex nobis, permansissent utique nobiscum. "(5) Deinde sunt etiam evertendi, et dissolvenda, quae 
ab eis afferuntur, hoc mode: "Salomae interroganti, quousque vigebit mors, " non quasi vita esset mala, et 
mala creatura, "Dominus, Quoadusque, inquit, vos mulieres paritis," sed quasi naturalem docens 
consequentiam: ortum enim omnino sequitur interitus. Vult ergo lex quidem nos a deliciis omnique probro et 
dedecore educere. Et hie est ejus finis, ut nos ab injustitia adjustitiam dedueamur, honesta eligendo 
matrimonia, et liberorum proereationem, bonamque vitae institutionem. Dominus autem "Non venit ad 
solvendam legem, sed ad implendam:"(6) ad implendam autem, non ut eui aliquid deesset, sed quod legis 
prophetiae per ejus adventum eompletae fuerint Nam reeta vitae institutio, lis etiam, qui juste vixerunt ante 
legem, per Logon praedieabatur Vulgus ergo hominum, quod non novit eontinentiam, eorpore vitam degit, 
sed non spiritu: sine spiritu autem corpus nihil aliud est quam terra et cinis. lam adulterium judicat Dominus 
ex cogitatione. Quid enim? annon licet etiam continenter uti matrimonio, et non conari dissolvere, quod 
"conjunxit Deus?"(7) Talia enim decent conjugii divisores, propter quod nomen probris ac maledictis 
appetitur inter gentes. Sceleratum autem dicentes isti esse coitum, qui ipsi quoque suam essentiam ex 
coitu accepere, quomodo non fuerint scelerati? Eorum autem, qui sunt sanctificati, sanctum quoque, ut puto, 
semen est. Ac nobis quidera debet esse sanctificatus, non solum spiritus, sed et mores, et vita, et corpus. 
Nam quaham ratione dicit Paulus apostolus esse "sanctificatam mulierem a viro," aut "virum a muliere?"(8) 
Quid est autem, quod Dominus quoque dixit lis, qui interrogabant de divortio: "An liceat uxorem dimittere, 
cum Moyses id permiserit?" "Ad duritiam cordis vestri, inquit, Moyses haec scripsit. Vos autem non legistis, 
quod protoplasto Deus dixit: Eritis duo in carne una? Quare qui dimittit uxorem, praeterquam fornicationis 
causa, faciteam moechari.(9) Sed post res urrectionem, inquit, nee uxorem ducunt, nee hubnut'"(10) Etenim 
de ventre eteibis dictum est: "Escae ventri, et venter escis; Deus antem et ilium et has destruet;"(11) hos 
impetens, qui instar caprorum et hireorum sibi vivendum esse consent, ne secure ac sine terrore 
comessent et coirent. Si res urrectionem itaque receperint, ut ipsi dienut, et ideo matrimonium infirmant et 
abrogant; nee comedant, nee bibant: "destrui" enim "ventrem eteibos," dicit Apostolus in resurreetione. 
Quomodo ergo esuriunt, et sitiunt, et camis patiuntur affectiones, et alia, quae non patietur, qui per Christum 
accepit perfectam, quae speratur, res urrectionem ? Quin etiam ii, qui colunt idola, a cibis et venere 
abstinent "Non est" autem, inquit, "regnum Dei cibus est potus. "(1) Certe magis quoque curae est, qui 
angelos colunt et daemones, simul a vino et animatis et rebus abstinere venereis. Quemadmodum autem 
humilitas est mansuetudo, non autem afflictio corporis: ita etiam continentia est animae virtus, quae non est 
in manifesto, sed in occulto. Sunt autem etiam, qui matrimonium aperte dicunt fornicationem, et decernunt id 
traditum esse a diabolo. Dicunt autem gloriosi isti jactatores se imitari Dominum, qui neque uxorem duxit, 
neque in mundo aliquid possedit; se magis quam alii Evangelium intellexisse gloriantes. Eis autem dicit 
Scriptura: "Deus superbis resistit, humilibus autem datgratiam."(2) Deinde nesciunt causam cur Dominas 
uxorem non duxerit. Primum quidem, propriam sponsam habuit Ecclesiam: deinde vero, nee homo erat 
communis, ut opus haberet etiam adjutore aliquo secundum carnem; neque erat el necesse procreare 
filios, qui manet in aeternum, et natus est solus Dei Filius. Hie ipse autem Dominus dicit: "Quod Deus 
conjunxit, homo ne separet "(3) Et rursus: "Sicut autem erat in diebus Noe, erant nubentes, et nuptui dantes, 
aedifieantes, et plantantes; et sicut erat in diebus Lot, ita erit adventus Filii hominis. "(4) Et quod hoc non dicit 
adgenies, ostendit, cum subjungit: "Num cum venerit Filius hominis, inveniet fidem in terra?"(5) Et rursus: 
"Vae praegnantibus et lactantibus in illis diebus."(6) Quanquam haec quoque dicuntur allegorice. Propterea 
nee "tempera" praefiniit, "quge Pater posuit in sua potestate,"(7) ut permaneret mundus per generationes. 
Illud autem: "Non omnes capiunt verbum hoe: sunt enim eunuchi, qui sic nati sunt; et sunt eunuchi, qui 
castrati sunt ab hominibus; et sunt eunuchi, qui seipsos castrarunt propter regnum coelorum. Qui potest 
capere, capiat;" (8) nesciunt quod, postquam de divortio esset locutus, cum quidam rogassent: "Si sic sit 
causa uxoris, non expedit homini uxorem ducere," tunc dixit Dominus: "Non omnes capiunt vetbum hoc, sed 
quibus datum est. "(9) Hoc enim qui rogabant, volebant ex eo scire, an uxore damnata et ejecta propter 
fornicationem, concedar aliam ducere. Aiunt autem athletas quoque non paucos abstinere a venere, 
propter exercitationem corporis continentes: quemadmodum Crotoniatem Astylum, et Crisonem 

Himeraeum. Quinetiam Amoebeus citharoedus, cum recenter matrimonio junctus esset, a sponsa abstinuit: 
et Cyrenaeus Aristoteles amantem Laidem solus despexit. Cum meretrici itaque jurasset, se eam esse in 
patriam abducturum, si sibi adversus decertantes advesarios in aliquibus opem tulisset, postquam id 
perfecisset, lepide a se dictum Jusjurandum exsequens, cum curasset imaginem ejus quam simillimam 
depingi, eam Cyrenae statuit, ut scribit Ister in libro De proprietate certaminum. Quare nee castitas est 
bonum, nisi fiat propter delectionem Dei. Jam de iis, qui matrimonium abliorrent, dicit beatus Paulus: "In 
novissimis diebus deficient quidam a fide, attendentes spiritibus erroris, et doctrinis daemoniorum, 
prohibentium nubere, abstinere a cibis. "(10) Et rursus dicit: "Nemo vos seducat in voluntaria humilitatis 
religione, et parcimonia corporis. "(11) Idem autem ilia quoque scribit: "Alligatus es uxori? ne quaeras 
solutionem. Solutus es ab uxore? ne quaeras uxorem."(12) Et rursus: "Unusquisque autem suam uxorem 
habeat, ne tenter vos Satanas."(13) Quid veto? non etiam justi veteres creaturam cum gratiarum actione 
participabant? Aliqui autem etiam liberos susceperunt, continenter versati in matrimonio. Et Eliae quidem 
corvi alimentum afferebant, panes et carnes. Quinetiam Samuel propheta armum, quem ex iis, quae 
comedisset, reliquerat, allatum, dedit edenalum Sauli. Hi autem, qui se cos dicunt vitae institutis excellere, 
cum illorum actionibus ne poterunt quidem conferri. "Qui" itaque "non comedit, comedentem ne spernat. Qui 
autem comedit, eum qui non comedit non judicet: Deus enim ipsum accepit"(14) Quin etiam Dominus de 
seipso dicens: "Venit, " inquit, "Joannes, nee comedens, nee bibens, et dicunt: daemonium habet; venit 
Filius hominis comedarts et bibens, et dicunt: Ecce homo vorax et vini potor, amicus publicanorum, et 
peccator."(15) An etiam reprobant apostolos? Petrus enim et Philippus(16) filios procrearunt: Philippus 
autem filias quoque suas viris locavit. Et Paulus quidem certe non veretur in quadam epistola suam 
appellare "conjugem, " quam non circumferebat, quod non magno el esset opus ministerio. Dicit itaque in 
quadam epistola: "Non habemus potestatem sororem uxorem circumducendi, sicut et reliqui apostoli?"(17) 
Sed hi quidem, ut erat consentaneum, ministerio, quod divelli non poterat, praedicationi scilicet, 
attendentes, non ut uxores, sed ut sorores circumducebant mulieres, quae una ministraturae essent apud 
mulieres quae domes custodiebant: per quas etiam in gynaeceum, absque ulla reprehensione malave 
suspicione, ingredi posset doctrina Domini. Seimus enim quaecunque de feminis diaconis in altera ad 
Timotheum praestantissimus(l) docet Paulus. Atqui hie ipse exclamavit: "Non est regnum Dei esca et 
potus." neque vero abstinentia a vino etcarnibus; "sed justitia, etpax, etgaudium in Spiritu saneto."(2) Quis 
eorum, ovilla pelle indutus, zona pellieea accinctus, circuit ut Elias? Quis cilicium induit, caetera nudus, et 
discalceatus, utisaias? vel subligaculum tantum habet lineum, ut Jeremias? Joannis autem vitae institutum 
gnosticum quis imitabitur? Sed sic quoque viventes, gratias Creator! agebant beati prophetic. Carpocratis 
autem justitia, et eorum, qui aequo atque ipse impudicam prosequuntur communionem, hoc modo 
dissolvitur; simul enim ac dixerit: "Te petenti des;" subjungit: "Et eum, qui velit mutuo accipere, ne 
averseris;"(3) banc docens communionem, non autem illam incestam et impudicam. Quomodo autem fuerit 
is qui petit et accipit, et is qui mutuatur, si nullus sit qui habeat etdet mutuo? Quid vero? quando dicit 
Dominus: "Esurivi, et me pavistis; sitii, et potum mihi dedistis; hospes cram, etme collegistis; nudus, et me 
vestiistis;"(4) deinde subjungit: "Quatenus fecistis uni horum minimorum, mihi fecistis. "(5) Nunquid easdem 
quoque tulit leges in Veteri Testamento? "Qui dat mendico, foeneratur Deo."(6) Et: "Ne abstinueris a 
benefaciendo egeno,"(7) inquit Et rursus: "Eleemosynae et fides ne te deficiant,"(5) inquit. "Paupertas" 
autem "virum humiliat, ditant autem manus virorum. "(9) Subjungit autem: "Qui pecuniam suam non dedit ad 
usuram, fit acceptus." Et: "Pretium redemptionis anima, propriae judicantur divitiae."(10) Annon aperte 
indicat, quod sicut mundus componitur ex contrariis, nempe ex calido et frigido, humido et sicco, ita etiam ex 
lis qui dant, et ex iis qui accipiunt? Et rursus cum dixit: "Si vis perfectus esse, vende quae habes, et da 
pauperibus, " refellit eum qui gloriabatur quod "omnia a juventute praecepta servaverat;" non enim 
impleverat illud: "Diliges proximum tuum sicut teipsum." (11) tunc autem cum a Domino perTiceretur, 
docebatur communicare et impertiri per charitatem. Honeste ergo non prohibuit esse divitem, sed esse 
divitem injuste et inexplebiliter. "Possessio (enim,) quae cure iniquitate acceleratur, minor redditur. "(12) 
"Sunt (enim,) qui seminantes multiplicant, et qui colligentes minus habent."(13) De quibus scripture est: 
"Dispersit, dedit pauperibus, justitia ejus manet in saeculum n saeculi. "(14) Qui enim "seminal et plura 
colligit," is est, qui per terrenam ettemporalem communicationem ac distributionem, coelestia acquiritet 
aeterna. Est autem alius, qui nemini impertit, let incassum "thesauros in terra colligit, ubi aerugo et tinea 
destruunt."(13) De quo scriptum est: "Qui colligit mercedes, colligit in saccum perforatum. "(16) Hujus 
"agrum" Dominus in Evangelic dicet "fuisse fertilem:"(17) deinde cum vellet fructus reponere, et esset 
"majora horrea aedificaturus," sibi dixisse per prosopopoeiam: "Habes bona multa reposita tibiin multos 
annos, ede, bibe, laetare." "Stulte ergo, inquit, hacnocte animam tuam ate repetunt; quae ergo parasti, 
cujus erunt?" 

CAPUT VII. -QUA IN RE CHRISTIANORUM CONTINENTIA EAM QUAM SIBI VINDICANT 
PHILOSOPHI ANTECELLAT. 

Humana ergo continentia,(18) ea, inquam, quae est ex sententia philosophorum Graecorum, profitetur 
pugnare cum cupiditate, et in factis ei non inservire; quae est autem ex nostra sententia continentia, non 
concupiscere; non ut quis concupiscens se fortiter gerat, sed ut etiam a concupiscendo se contineat. Non 
potest autem ea alitor comparari continentia, nisi gratia Dei. Et ideo dixit: "Petite, et dabitur vobis. "(19) Hanc 
gratiam Moyses quoque accepit, qui indigo corpore erat indutus, ut quadraginta diebus neque esuriret, 
neque sitiret. Quemadmodum autem melius est sanum esse, quam aegrotantem disserere de sanitate: ita 
lucem esse, quam loqui de luce; et quae est ex veritate continentia, ea quae docetur a philosophis. Non 
enim ubi est lux, illic tenebrae: ubi autem sola insidet cupiditas, etiamsi quiescat a corporea operatione, at 
memoria cure eo, quod non est praesens, congreditur. Generatim autem nobis procedar oratio de 
matrimonio, nutrimento, et aliis, ut nihil faciam us ex cupiditate, velimus autem ea sola, quae sunt necessaria. 
Non sumus enim filii cupiditatis, sed voluntatis; et eum, qui uxorem duxit propter liberorum procreationem, 
exercere oportet continentiam, ut ne suam quidem concupiscat uxorem, quam debet diligere, honesta et 
moderata voluntate operam dans liberis. Non enim "carnis curam gerere ad concupiscentias" didicimus; 
"honeste autem tanquam in die, " Christo, et Dominica lucida vitae institutione, "ambulantes, non in 
comessationibus et ebrietatibus, non in cubilibus et impudicitiis, non in litibus et contentionibus. "(1) 
Verumenimvero non oportet considerare continentiam in uno solum genere, nempe in rebus venereis, sed 
etiam in quibuscunque aliis, qua: luxuriosa concupiscit anima, non contenta necessariis, sed sollicita de 
deliciis. Continentia est pecuniam despicere; voluptatem, possessionem, spectaculum magno et excelso 
animo contemnere; os continere, ratione qua: sunt mala vincere. Jam vero angeli quoque quidam, cum 
fuissent incontinentes, victi cupiditate, hue e coelo deciderunt. Valentinus autem in Epistola ad 
Agathopodem: "Cum omnia, inquit, sustinuisset, erat continens, divinitatem sibi comparavit Jesus; edebat et 
bibebat peculiari modo, non reddens cibos; tanta ei inerat vis continentiae, ut etiam nutrimentum in eo non 
interierit, quoniam ipse non habuit interitum." Nos ergo propter dilectionem in Dominum, et propter ipsum 
honestum, amplectimur continentiam, templum Spiritus sanctificantes. Honestum enim est, "propter regnum 
coelorum seipsum castrare"(1) ab omni cupidirate, et "emundare conscientiam a mortuis operibus, ad 
sen/iendum Deo viventi. "(3) Qui autem propter odium adversus carnem susceptum a conjugali 
conjunctione, et eorum qui conveniunt ciborum participatione, liberari desiderant, indocti sunt et impii, et 
absque ratione continentes, sicut aliae genres plurimae. Brachmanes quidem certe neque animatum 
comedunt, neque vinum bibunt; sed aliqui quidera ex lis quotidie sicut nos cibum capiunt; nonnulli autem ex 
lis tertio quoque die, ut ait Alexander Polyhistor in Indicis; mortem autem contemnunt, et vivere nihili faciunt; 
credunt enim esse regenerationem: aliqui autem colunt Herculem et Pana. Qui autem ex Indis vocantur 
<greek>Semnai</greek>, hoc est, venerandi, nudi totam vitam transigunt: ii veritatem exercent, et futura 
praedicunt, et colunt quamdam pyramidera, sub qua existimant alicujus del ossa reposita. Neque vero 
Gymnosophistae, nee qui dicuntur <greek>Semnai</greek>, utuntur mulieribus, hoc enim praeter naturam et 
iniquum esse existimant; qua de causa seipsos castos conservant. Virgines autem sunt etiam mulieres, 
qua: dicuntur <greek>Semnai</greek>, hoc est, venerandoe. Videntur autem observare coelestia, et per 
eorum significationem quaedam futura praedicere. 

CAPUT VIII.--LOCA S. SCRIPTURAE AB HAERETICES IN VITUPERIUM MATRIMONII 
ADDUCTA EXPLICAT; ET PRIMO VERBA APOSTOLI ROM. VI. 14, AB HAERETICORUM 
PERVERSA INTERPRETATIONE VINDICAT.(4) 

Quoniam autem qui introducunt indifferentiam, paucas quasdam Scripturas detorquentes, titillanti suae 
voluptati eas suffragari existimant; rum praecipue illam quoque: "Peccatum enim vestri non dominabitur; 
non estis enim sub lege, sed sub gratia;"(5) et aliquas alias hujusmodi, quarum post haec non est rationi 
consentaneum ut faciam mentionem (non enim nayera instruo piraticam), age paucis eorum argumentum 
perfringamus. Ipse enim egregius Apostolus in verbis, quae praedictae dictioni subjungit, intentati criminis 
afferet solutionem: "Quid ergo? peccabimus, quia non sumus sub lege, sed sub gratia? Absit."(6) Adeo 
divine et prophetice e vestigio dissolvit artem voluptatis sophisticam. Non intelligunt ergo, utvidetur, quod 
"omnes nos oportet manifestari ante tribunal Christi, ut referat unusquisque per corpus ea quae fecit, sire 
bonum, sive malum:"(7) ut quae per corpus fecit aliquis, recipiat. "Quare si quis est in Christo, nova creatura 
est," nee amplius peccatis dedita: "Vetera praeterierunt," vitam antiquam exuimus: "Ecce enim nova facta 
sunt, "(8) castitas ex fornicatione, et continentia ex incontinentia, justitia ex injustitia. "Quae est enim 
participatio Justitiae et injustitiae? aut quae luci cure tenebris societas? quae est autem conventio Christo 
cum Belial? quae pars est fideli cum infideli? quae est autem consensio tempio Dei cum idolis?(9) Has 
ergo habentes promissiones, mundemus nos ipsos ab omni inquinamento carnis et spiritus, perficientes 
sanctitatem in timore Dei. "(10) 

CAPUT IX. -DICTUM CHRISTI AD SALOMEN EXPONIT, QUOD TANQUAM IN VITUPERIUM 
NUPTIARUM PROLATUM HAERETICI ALLEGABANT. 

Qui autem Dei creaturae resistunt per speciosam illam continentiam, ilia quoque dicunt, quae ad Salomen 
dicta sunt, quorum prius meminimus: liabentur autem, ut existimo, in Evangelio secundum AEgyptios.(1 1) 
Aiunt enim ipsum dixisse Sen/atorem: "Veni ad dissolvendum opera feminae;" feminae quidem, cupiditatis; 
opera autem generationem et interitum. Quid ergo dixerint? Desiit liaec administratio? Non dixerint: manet 
enim mundus in eadem ceconomia. Sed non falsum dixit Dominus; revera enim opera dissolvit cupiditatis, 
avaritiam, contentionem, gloriae cupiditatem, mulierum insanum amorem, paedicatum, ingluviem, luxum et 
profusionem, et quae sunt liis similia. IHorum autem ortus, est animae interitus: siquidem "delictis mortui" 
efficimur.(12) Ea veto femina est intemperantia. Ortum autem et interitum creaturarum propter ipsorum 
naturas fieri necesse est, usque ad perfectam distinctionem et restitutionem electionis, per quam, quae 
etiam sunt mundo permistae et confusae substantiae, proprietati suae restituuntur. Unde merito cum de 
consummatione Logos locutus fuerat, ait Salome: "Quousque morientur liomines?" IHominem autem vocat 
Scriptura dupliciter: et eum, qui apparet, et animam; et eum rursus, qui sen/atur, et eum qui non. l\/lors autem 
animae dicitur peccatum. Quare caute et considerate respondet Dominus: "Quoadusque pepererint 
mulieres, " lioc est quandiu operabuntur cupiditates. "Et ideo quemadmodum per unum liominem peccatum 
ingressum est in mundum, per peccatum quoque mors ad omnes liomines pervasit, quatenus omnes 
peccaverunt; et regnavit mors ab Adam usque ad Moysen, "(1) inquit Apostolus: naturali autem divinae 
ceconomiae necessitate mors sequitur generationem: et corporis et animae conjunctionem consequitur 
eorum dissolutio. Si est autem propter doctrinam et agnitionem generatio, restitutionis causa erit dissolutio. 
Quomodo autem existimatur mulier causa morris, propterea quod pariat: ita etiam dicetur dux vitae propter 
eamdem causam. Proinde qua, prior inchoavit transgressionem. Vita est appellata,(2) propter causam 
successionis: et eorum, qui generantur, et qui peccant, tam justorum quam injustorum, mater est, 
unoquoque nostrum, seipsum justificante, vel contra inobedientem constituente. Unde non ego quidem 
arbitror Apostolum abhorrere vitam, quae est in came, cum dicit: "Sed in omni fiducia, ut semper, nunc 
quoque Christus magnificabitur in corpore meo, sire per vitam, sire permortera. Mihi enim vivere Christus et 
mori lucrum. Si autem vivere in carne, et hoc quoque mihi fructus operis, quid eligam nescio, et coarctor ex 
duobus, cupiens resolvi, et esse cum Christo: multo enim melius: manere autem in carne, estmagis 
necessarium propter vos. "(3) Per haec enim, ut puto, aperte ostendit, exitus quidem e corpore 
perfectionem, esse in Dei dilectionem: ejus autem praesentiae in carne, ex grato animo profectam 
tolerantiam, propter eos, qui salute indigent. Quid vero? non etiam ea, quae deinceps sequuntur, ex ils, 
quae dicta sunt ad Salomen, subjungunt ii, qui quidvis potius quam quae est ex veritate, evangelicam 
regulam suntsecuti? Cum ea enim dixisset: "Recte ergo feci, quae non peperi." scilicet, quod generatio non 
esset ut oportet assumpta; excipit Dominus, dicens: "Omni herba vescere, ea autem, quae habet 
amaritudinem, ne yescaris. " Per haec enim significat, esse in nostra potestate, et non esse necessarium ex 
prohibitione praecepti, vel continentiam, vel etiam matrimonium; et quod matrimonium creation! aliquid affert 
auxilii, praeterea explicans. Ne quis ergo eum deliquisse existlimet, qui secundum Logon matrimonium 
inierit, nisi existimet amaram esse filiorum educationem: contra tamen, permultis videtur esse 
molestissimum liberis carere. Neque amara cuiquam videatur liberorum procreatio, eo quod negotiis 
implicates a divinis abstrahat. Est enim, qui vitam solitariam facile ferre non valens, expetit matrimonium: 
quandoquidem res grata, qua quis temperanter fruitur, et innoxia: et unusquisque nostrum eatenus sui 
dominus est, ut eligat, an velit liberos procreate. Intelligo autem, quod aliqui quidem, qui praetextu 
matrimonii difficultatum ab eo abstinuerunt, non convenienter sanctae cognition! ad inhumanitatem et odium 
hominum defluxerunt; et petit apud ipsos charitas; alii autem matrimonio ligati, etiuxui ac voluptatibus dediti, 
lege quodammodo eos comitante, fuerunt, ut ait Prophet, a, "assimilati jumentis. "(4) 

CAPUT X. --VERBA CHRIST! MATT. XVIII. 20, MYSTICE EXP0NIT.(5) 

Quinam sunt autem illi "duo et tres, qui congregantur in nomine Domini, in" quorum "medio" est Dominus?(6) 
annon virum et mulierem etfilium tres dicit, quoniam mulier cum viro per Deum conjungitur? Quod si 
accinctus quis esse velit et expeditus, non volens procreate liberos, propter eam, quae est in procreandis 
liberis, molestiam etoccupationem, "maneat," inquit Apostolus, absque uxore "utego."(1) Quiam veto 
effatum Domini exponunt, ac si dixisset, cure pluribus quidera esse Creatorem ac praesidem generationis 
Deum; cum uno autem, nempe electo, Sen/atorem, qui alterius, boni scilicet, Dei Filius sit. Hoc autem non 
Ira habet: sed est quidem etiam cure Us, qui honeste ac moderate in matrimonio versati sunt, et liberos 
susceperunt, Deus per Filium: est autem etiam cure eo, qui secundum Logon, seu rationem, fuit continens, 
idem Dens. Fuerint autem alitor quoque tres quidera, Ira, cupiditas, et ratio: caro antera at anima et spiritus, 
alia ratione. Forte antera et vocationem et electionem secundam, et tertium genus, quod in prime honore 
collocatur, innuit trias prius dicta: cum quibus est, quae omnia considerat, Dei potestas, absque divisione 
cadens in divisionem. Qui ergo animae naturalibus, ita ut oportet, utitur operationibus, desiderat quidem ea, 
quae sunt convenientia, odio autem habet ea, quae laedunt, sicutjubent mandata: "Benedices" enim, inquit. 

"benedicenti, et maledices male dicenti. " Quando autem his, ira scilicet et cupidirate, superior factus, et 
creaturae amore vere affectus propter eum, qui est Deus et effector omnium, gnostice vitam instituerit, et 
Salvatori similis evadens, facilem temperantiae habitum acquisiverit, et cognitionem, fidem, ac dilectionem 
conjunxerit, simplici hac in parte judicio utens, et vere spiritalis factus, nee earum quae ex ira et cupiditate 
procedunt, cogitationum omnino capax, ad Domini imaginem ab ipso artifice efficitur homo perfectus, is 
sane dignusjam est, qui frater a Domino nominetur, is simul est amicus et filius. Sic ergo "duo et tres" in 
eodem "congregantur, " nempe in homine gnosrico. Poterit etiam multorum quoque concordia ex tribus 
aestimata, cum quibus est Dominus, significare unam Ecclesiam, unum hominem, genus unum. Annon cum 
uno quidem Judaeo erat Dominus, cum legera tulit: at prophetans, et Jeremiam mittens Babylonem, 
quinetiam cos qui erant ex gentibus vocans perprophetiam, congregavit duos populos: fortius autem est 
unus, qui ex duobus "creatur in riorum hominem, quo inambulat et inhabitat" in ipsa Ecclesia? Et lex simul et 
prophetae, una cum Evangelic, in nomine Christi congregantur in unam cognitionem. Qui ergo propter 
odium uxorem non ducunt, vel propter concupiscentiam carne indifferenter abutuntur, non sunt in numero 
illorum qui servantur, cum quibus est Dominus. 

CAPUTXI.-LEGIS ET CHRISTI MANDATUM DE NON CONCUPISCENDO EXP0NIT.(1) 

His sic ostensis, age Scripturas, quae adversantur sophistis haereticis, jam adducamus, et regulam 
continentiae secundum logon seu rationem observandam declaremus. Qui vero intelligit, quae Scriptura 
cuique haeresi contraria sit, cam tempestive adhibendo refutabit eos, qui dogmata mandatis contraria 
fingunt. Atque utab alto rem repetamus, lex quidem, sicutprius diximus, illud, "Non concupisces uxorem 
proximi tui,"(2) prius exclamavit ante conjunctam Domini in Novo Testamento vocem, quae dicitex sua 
ipsius persona: "Audivistis legem praecipientem: Non moechaberis. Ego autem dico: Non 
concupisces. "(3) Quod enim vellet lex viros uti moderate uxoribus, et propter solam liberorum 
susceptionem, ex eo clarum est, quod prohibet quidem eum, qui non habet uxorem, statim cum" captiva" 
habere consuetudinem.(4) Quod si semel desideraverit, ei, cum tonsa fuerit capillos, permittere ut luge at 
triginta diebus. Si autem ne sic quidem emarcescat cupiditas, tunc liberis operam dare, cum quae 
dominatur impulsio, probata sit praefinito tempore consentanea rationi appetitio. Undo nullum ex veteribus 
ex Scripturn ostenderis, qui cum praegnante rem habuerit: sed postquam gestavit uterum, et postquam 
editum fetum a lacte depulit, rursus a viris cognitas fuisse uxores. Jam hunc scopum et institutum invenies 
servantera Moysis patrem, cure triennium post Aaronem editum intermisisset, genuisse Moysem. Et rursus 
Levitica tribus, sen/ans banc naturae legem a Deo traditam, aliis numero minor ingressa est in terram 
promissam. Non enim facile multiplicatur genus, cum viii quidera seminant, legitime juncti matrimonio; 
exspectant autem non solum uteri gestationem, sed etiam a lacte depulsionem. Undo merito Moyses, 
quoque Judaeos paulatim proveheris ad continentiam, cure "tribus diebus"(5) deinceps consequentibus a 
venerea voluptate abstinuissent, jussit audire verba Dei. "Nos ergo Dei templa sum us, sicut dixit propheta: 
Inhabitabo in eis, et inambulabo, et ero eorum Deus, et ipsi erunt meus populus, " si ex praeceptis vitam 
instituamus, sive singuli nostrum, sire tota simul Ecclesia. "Quare egredimini e medio ipsorum, et 
separamini, dicit Dominus, et immundum ne tangatis; et ego vos suscipiam, et ero vobis in patrem, et vos 
eritis mihi in filios et filias, dicit Dominus omnipotens. "(6) Non ab lis, qui uxores duxerunt, ut aiunt, sed a 
gentibus, quae adhuc vivebant in fornicatione, praeterea autem a prius quoque dictis haeresibus, ut 
immundis etimpiis, prophetice nos jubet separari. Undo etiam Panlus quoque verba dirigens ad eos, qu 
ierantiis, qui dicti sunt, similes: "Has ergo promissiones habete, inquit, dilecti: mundemus corda nostra ab 
omni inquinamento carnis et spiritus, perficientes sanctitatem in timore Dei. (7) Zelo enim vos zelo Dei; 
despondi enim vos uni viro, virginem castam exhibere Christo."(8) Et Ecclesia quidem alii nonjungitur 
matrimonio, cum sponsum hubeat: sed unusquisque nostrum habet potestatem ducendi, quamcunque velit, 
legitimam uxorem, in prim is, inquam, nuptiis. "Vereor autem, ne sicut serpens seduxit Evam in astutia, 
corrumpantur sensus vestri a simplicitate, quae in Christo est, "(9) pie admodum et doctoris instar dixit 
Apostolus. Quocirca admirabilis quoque Petrus: "Charissimi, inquit, obsecro vos tanquam advernas et 
peregrines, abstinete vos a carnalibus desideriis, quae militant adversus animam, conversationem 
vestram inter gentes habentes benam: quoniam sic est voluntas Dei, ut bene facientes obmutescere 
faciatis imprudentium hominum ignorantiam; quasi liberi, et non quasi velamen habentes malitiae 
libertatem, sed ut sen/i Dei. "(10) Similiter etiam scribit Paulus in Epistola ad Romanes: "Qui mortui sumus 
peccate, quomodo adhuc riveruns in ipso? Quoniam veins homo nosier simul est crucifixus, ut destruatur 
corpus peccati,"(1) usque ad illud: "Neque exhibete membra vestra, arma injustitiae peccato."(2) Atque 
adeo cure in hunc locum devenerim, videor mihi non esse praetermissurus, quirt notem, quod eumdem 
Deum per legem et prophetas et Evangelium praedicet Apostolus. Illud enim: "Non concupisces," quod 
scriptum est in Evangelic, legi attribuit in Epistola ad Romanes, sciens esse unum eum, qui praedicavit per 
legem et prophetas, Patrem, et qui per ipsum est annuntiatus. Dicit enim: "Quid dicemus? Lex estne 
peccatum? Absit. Sed peccatum non cognovi, nisi per legem. Concupiscentiam enim non cognovissem, 

nisi lex diceret: Non concupisces. "(3) Quod si ii, qui sunt diversae sententiae, repugnantes, existiment 
Paulum verba sua dirigentem adversus Creatorem, dixisse ea, quae deinceps sequuntur: "Novi enim, quod 
non liabitatin me, lioc est, in came mea, bonum; "(4) legantae, quae prius dicta sunt; etea, quae 
consequuntur. Prius enim dixit: "Sed inliabitarts in me peccatum;" propter quod consentaneum erat dicere 
illud: "Non liabitat in came mea bonum. "(5) Consequenter subjunxit: "Si autem quod nolo, hoc ego facio, 
non utique ego id operor, sed quod inhabitat in me peccatum:" quod "repugnans, " inquit, "legi" Dei et 
"mentis meae, captivat me in lege peccati, quae est in membris meis. Miser ego homo, quis me liberabit de 
corpore morris hujus?"(6) Et rursus (nunquam enim quovis modo juvando defatigatur) non veretur veluti 
concludere: "Lex enim spiritus liberavit me a lege peccati et morris:" quoniam "per Filium Dens 
condemnavit peccatum in carne, utjustificatio legis impleatur in nobis, qui non secundum carnem 
ambulamus, seal secundum spiritum."(7) Praeter haec adhuc declarans ea, qum prius dicta sunt, exclamat: 
"Corpus quidem mortunto propter peccatum:" significans id non esse templum, sed sepulcum animae. 
Quando enim sanctificatum fuerit Deo, "Spiritus ejus, " infert, "qui suscitavit Jesum a mortuis, habitat in vobis: 
qui vivificabit etiam mortalia vestra corpora, per ejus Spiritum, qui habitat in vobis. "(8) Rursus itaque 
voluptaxios increpans, ilia adjicit: "Prudentia enim carnis, mors; quoniam qui ex came vivunt, ea, quae sunt 
carnis, cogitant; et prudentia carnis est cum Deo gerere inimicitias; legi enim Dei non subjicitur. Qui autem 
sunt in carne, " non ut quidam decemunt, "Deo placere non possunt, " sed ut prius diximus. Deinde ut eos 
distinguat, dicit Ecclesiae: "Vos autem non estis in carne sed in spiritu, si quidem spiritus Dei habitat in 
vobis. Si quis autem spiritum Christi non habet, is non est ejus. Si autem Christus in vobis, corpus quidem 
est mortuum per peccatum, spiritus autem vivus perjustitiam. Debitores itaque sum us, fratres, non carni, ut 
secundum carnem vivamus. Si enim secundum camera vivitis, estis morituri: si veto spiritu facta carnis 
mortificaveritis, vivetis. Quicunque enim spiritu Dei aguntur, ii sunt filii Dei. " Et adversus nobilitatem et 
adversus libertatem, qum exsecrabiliter ab lis, qui sunt diversae sententiae, introducitur, qui de libidine 
gloriantur, subjungit dicens: "Non enim accepistis spiritum servitutis rursus in timorein, sed accepistis 
spiritum adoptionis filiorum, in quo clamamus, Abba Pater;"(9) hoc est, ad hoc accepimus, ut cognoscamus 
eum, quem oramus, qui est vere Pater, qui rerum omnium solus est Pater, qui ad salutem erudit et castigat 
at pater, ettimorem minatur. 

CAPUT XII. --VERBA APOSTOLI I COR. VII. 5, 39, 40, ALIAQUE S. SCRIPTURE LOCA EODEM 
SPECTANTIA EXPLICAT. 

Quod autem "ex consensu ad tempus orationi vacat" conjugium, doctrina est continentiae. Adjecit enim illud 
quidem, "ex consensu, " ne quis dissolveret matrimonium; "ad tempus autem, "(10) ne, dum ex necessitate 
exercet continentiam is, qui uxorem duxerit, labatur in peccatum, et dum suo conjugio parcit, alienum 
concupiscat. Qua ratione eum, qui se indecore getere existimat, quod virginem alat, recte cam dicit esse 
nuptum damrum. Verum unusquisque, tam is qui castitatem, delegit, quam is qui propter liberorum 
procreationem seipsum conjunxit matrimonio, in suo proposito firmiter debet perseverare, nee in deterius 
deflectere. Si enim vitae suae instimtum augere ac intendere porefit, majorem sibi apud Deum acquirit 
dignitatem, propter puram et ex ratione profectam continentiam. Si autem eam, quam elegit, regulam 
superaverit, in majorem deinde ad spem gloriam recidet. Habet enim sicut castitas, Ira etiam matrimonium 
propria munera et ministeria, quae ad Dominum pertinent, filiorum, inquam, curam gerere et uxoris. Quod 
enim honeste causatur is, qui est in matrimonio perfectus, est conjugii necessitudo, ut qui omnium curam ac 
providentiam in domo communi ostenderit. Ac proinde "episcopos, " inquit, oportet constitui, qui ex domo 
propria toti quoque Ecclesiae praeesse sint meditati. "Unusquisque" ergo, "in quo vocatus est "(11) opere 
ministerium peragat, ut liber in Christo fiat, et debitam ministerio suo mercedem accipiat Et rursus de lege 
disserens, utens allegoria: "Nam quae sub viro est mulier," inquit, "viventiviro alligata est lege, "(1) etquae 
sequuntur Et rursus: "Mullet est alligata, quandiu vivit vir ejus; sin autem mortuus fuerit, libera est ut nubat, 
modo in Domino. Beata est autem si sic permanserit, mea quidem sententia. "(2) Sed in priore quidem 
particula, "mortificati estis," inquit, "legi," non matrimonio, "ut efficiamini vos alteri, qui excitatus est ex 
mortuis, "(3) sponsa et Ecclesia; quam castam esse oportet, et ab lis quae strut intus, cogitationibus, quae 
sunt contrariae veritati; et ab lis, qui tentant extrinsecus, hoc est ab lis, qui sectantur haereses, et persuadent 
vobis fornicari ab uno viro, nempe omnipotenti Deo: "Ne sicut setpens decepit Evam, "(4) quae "vita" dicitur, 
nos quoque inducti callidis haeresium illecebris, transgrediamur mandata. Secunda autem particula statuit 
monogamiam: non enim, ut quidam existimarunt, mulieris cum viro alligationem, carnis cum corruptela 
connexionem, significari putandum est; impiorum enim hominum, qui matrimonii inventionem diabolo aperte 
tribuunt, opinionera reprehendit, unde in periculum venit legislator ne incessatur maledictis. Tatianum 
arbitror Syrum talia audere dogmata tradere.(5) His verbis quidem certe scribit in libro De perfectione 
secundum Servatorem: Consensum quidem conjungit orationi: communio autem corruptelae, interitus solvit 
interpellationem. Admodum certe circumspecte arcet per concessionem. Nam cum rursus permisit "simul 
convernire propter Satanam et intemperantiam, "(6) pronuntiavit eum, qui est obtemperaturus, "sen/iturum 

duobus dominis:"(7) per consensure quidem, Deo; per dissensionem autem, intemperantiae et fornicationi 
et diabolo. Haec autem dicit, Apostolum exponens. Sophistice autem eludit veritatem, per verum, falsum 
confirmans: intemperantiam enim et fornicationem, diabolica vitia et affectiones nos quoque confitemur; 
intercedit autem moderati matrimonii consensio, quae tum ad precationem continenter deducit, tum ad 
procreandos liberos cum lionestate conciliat "Cognitio" quidem certe a Scriptura dictum est tempus 
liberorum procreationis, cum dixit: "Cognovit autem Adam Evam uxorem suam; et concepit, et peperit fitium, 
et nominavit nomen ejus Setli: Suscitavit enim milii Deus aliud semen pro Abel. "(8) Vides, quemnam 
maledictis incessant, qui lionestam ac moderatam incessunt seminationem, et diabolo attribuunt 
generationem. Non enim simpliciter Deum dixit, qui articuli praemissione, nempe <greek>n</greek> 
<greek>Qeos</greek> dicens, significavit eum, qui est omnipotens. Quod ab Apostolo autem subjungitur: 
"Et rursus simul convenite propter Satanam, "(9) in eum finera dicitur, ut occasionem tollat ad alias 
declinandi cupiditates. Non enim penitus repellit naturae appetitiones, qui fit ad tempus, consensus: per 
quem rursus inducit Apostolus conjugationera matrimonii, non ad intemperantiam et fornicationem et opus 
diaboli, sed ne subjugetur intemperantiae, fornicationi, et diabolo. Distinguit autem veterem quoque 
hominem et novum Tatianus, sed non utdicimus, "Veterem" quidem "virum," legem; "novum" autem, 
Evangelium. Assentimur ei nos quoque, sed non eo modo, quo vult Hie, dissolvens legem ut alterius Dei: 
sed idem vir et Dominus, dum Vetera renovat, non amplius concedit polygamiam (nam banc quidem 
expetebat Deus, quando oportebat homines augeri et multiplicari), sed monogamiam introducit prompter 
liberorum procreationem et domus curam, ad quam data est mulier adjutrix: et si cui Apostolus propter 
intemperantiam et ustionem, veniam secundi concedit matrimonii; nam hie quoque non peccat quidem ex 
Testamento (non est enim a lege prohibitus), non implet autem summam illam vitae perfectionem, quae 
agitur ex Evangelic. Gloriam autem sibi acquirit coelestem, qui apud se manserit, earn, quae est morte 
dissoluta, impollutam sen/ans conjunctionem, et grato ac lubente animo paret ceconomiae, per quam 
effectum est, ut divelli non possit a Domini ministerio. Sed nee eum, qui ex conjugali surgit cubili, similiter ut 
olim, tingi nunc quoque jubet divina per Dominum providentia: non enim necessario a liberorum abducit 
procreatione, qui credentes per unum baptismum ad consuetudinem omni ex parte perfectam abluit, 
Dominus, qui etiam multa Moysis baptismata per unum comprehendit baptismum. Proinde lex, utper 
carnalem generationem nostram praediceret regenerationera, genitali seminis facultati baptismum olim 
adhibuit, non vero quod ab hominis generatione abhorreret. Quod enim apparet homo generatus, hoc valet 
seminis dejectio. Non sunt ergo multi coitus genitales, sed matricis susceptio fatetur generationem, cum in 
naturae officina semen formaturin fetum. Quomodo autem vetus quidera est solum matrimonium etiegis 
inventum, alienum autem est, quod est ex Domino, matrimonium, cum idem Deus servetura nobis? "Non" 
enim "quod Deus conjunxit, homo" jure "dissolverit;"(10) multo autem magis quae jussit Pater, servabit 
quoque Filius. Si autem idem simul est et legislator et evangelista, nunquam ipse secum pugnat. Vivit enim 
lex, cum sit spiritalis, et gnostice intelligatur: nos autem "mortui" sumus "legi per corpus Christi, ut 
gigneremur alteri, qui resurrrexit ex mortuis, " qui praedictus fuit a lege, "ut Deo fructificaremus. "(1) Quare "lex 
quidera est sancta, et mandatum sanctum, etjusturn, et bonum. "(2) Mortui ergo sumus legi, hoc est, 
peccato, quod a lege significatur, quod ostendit, non autem generat lex, per jussionem eorum quae sunt 
facienda, et prohibitionera eorum quae non facienda; reprehendens subjectum peccatum, "ut appareat 
peccatum." Si autem peccatum est matrimonium, quod secundum legera initur, nescio quomodo quis dicet 
se Deum nosse, dicens Deijussum esse peccatum. Quod si "lex saneta" est, sanctum est matrimonium. 
Mysterium ergo hoc ad Christum et Ecclesiam ducit Apostolus: quemadmodum "quod ex carne generatur, 
caro est; ita quod ex spiritu, spiritus, "(3) non solum in pariendo, sed etiam in discendo. Jam "sancti sunt 
filii, "(4) Deo gratae oblectationes verborum Dominicorum, quae desponderunt animam. Sunt ergo separata 
fornicatio et matrimonium, quoniam a Deo longe abest diabolus. "Et vos ergo mortui estis legi per corpus 
Christi, ut vos gigneremini alteri, qui surrexit a mortuis. "(5) Simul autem proximo exauditur, si fueritis 
obedientes quamdoquidem etiam ex veritate legis eidem Domino obedimus, qui praecipit eminus. 
Nunquid autem de ejusmodi hominibus merito aperte "dicit Spiritus, quod in posterioribus temporibus 
deficient quidam a fide, attendentes spiritibus erroris, et doctrinis daemoniorum, in hypocrisi falsiloquorum, 
cauteriatam habentium conscientiam, et prohibentium nubere, abstinere a cibis quos Deus creavit ad 
participationem cum gratiarum actione fidelibus, et qui agnoverunt veritatem, quod omnis creatura Dei bona 
est, et nihil est rejiciendum quod sumitur cure gratiarum actione. Sanctificatur enim per verburn Dei et 
orationem? "(6) Omnino igiturnon est prohibendum jungi matrimonio, neque carnibus vesci, autvinum 
bibere. Scriptum est enim: "Bonum est carnero non coinedere, nee vinum bibere, si quis comedat per 
offendiculum. "(7) Et: "Bonum est manere sicut ego. "(8) Sed et qui utitur, "cum gratiarum actione, "(9) et qui 
rursus non utitur, ipse quoque "cure gratiarum actione," et cure moderata ac temperanti vivat perceptione, 
logo seu rationi convenienter. Et, ut in summa dicam, omnes Apostoli epistolae, quae moderationem 
decent et continentiam, cum et de matrimonio, et de liberorum procreatione, et de domus administratione 
innumerabilia praecepta contineant, nusquam honesrum moderatumque matrimonium prohibuerunt aut 
abrogarunt: sed legis cum Evangelic sen/antes convenientiam, utrumque admittunt: et eum, qui deo 

agendo gratias, moderate utitur matrimonio; eteum, qui, ut vult Dominus, vivitin castitate, quemadmodum 
"vocatus est unusquisque" inoffense et perfecte eligens. "Et erat tetra Jacob laudam supra omnem 
terram,"(10) inquit propheta, ipse vas spiritus gloria afficiens. Insectatur autem aliquis generationera, in earn 
dicens interitum cadere, eamque perire: et detorquet aliquis ad filiorum procreationem illud dictum 
Sen/atoris: "Non oportere in terra thesauros recondere, ubi tinea et aerugo demolitur; "(1 1) nee erubescit his 
addere ea, quae dicit propheta: "Omnes vos sicut vestimentum veterascetis, et tinea vos exedet."(12) Sed 
neque nos contradicimus Scripturae, neque in nostra corpora cadere interitum, eaque esse fluxa, negamus. 
Fortasse autem lis, quos ibi alloquitur propheta, ut peccatoribus, pnedicit interitum. Sen/ator autem de 
liberorum procreatione nil dixit, sed ad impertiendum ac communicandum cos hortatur, qui solum opibus 
abundare, egentibus autem nolebant opem ferre. Quamobrem dicit: "Operamini non cibum, qui petit; sed 
eum, qui manet in vitam aetenam. "(13) Similiter autem afferunt etiam illud dictum de resurrectione 
mortuorum: "Fill illius saeculi nee nubunt, nee nubuntur "(14) Sed banc interrogationera et cos qui interrogant, 
si quis consideraverit, inveniet Dominum non reprobare matrimonium, sed remedium afferre exspectationi 
carnalis cupiditatis in resurrectione. Illud autem, "filiis hujus saeculi, "(15) non dixit ad distinctionera alicujus 
alius saeculi, sed perinde ac si dieeret: Qui in hoe nati sunt saeculo, cum per generationera sint filii, et 
gighunt et gignuntur; quoniam non absque generatione banc quis vitam praetergreditur: sed haec 
generario, quae similem suscipit interitum, non amplius competit ei qui ab hae vita est separatus. "Unus est 
ergo Pater noster, qui est in eoelis: "(16) sed is ipse quoque Pater est omnium per creationera. "Ne 
vocaveritis ergo, inquit, vobis patrein super terrain. "(17) Quasi dieeret: Ne existimetis eum, qui earnali vos 
sevit satu, auctorem et eausam vestrae essential, sed adjuvantem eausam generationis, vel ministrum 
potius. Sic ergo nos rursus converses vult effici ut pueros, eum, qui vere Pater est, agnoscentes, 
regenerates per aquam, cure haec sit alia satio in creatione. At, inquit, "Qui est caelebs, curat quae sunt 
Domini; qui autem duxit uxorem, quomodo plaeebit uxori." Quid vero? annon licet etiam els, qui secundum 
Deum placent uxori, Deo gratias agere? Annon permittitur etiam el, qui uxorem duxit, una cam eonjugio 
etiam esse sollicitum de iis quae sunt Domini? Sed quemadmodum "quae non nupsit, sollicita est de lis, 
quae sunt Domini, ut sit sancta corpore et spiritu:"(1) ita etiam quae nupsit, et de iis, quae sunt mariti, et de 
iis, quae sunt Domini, est in Domino sollicita, ut sit sancta et corpore et spiritu. Ambae enim sant sanctae in 
Domino: haec quidem ut uxor, ilia vero ut virgo. Ad eos autem pudore afficiendos et reprimendos, qui sunt 
proclives ad secundas nuptias, apte Apostolus alto quodam tono eloquitur; inquit enim: "Ecce, omne 
peccatum est extra corpus; qui autem fornicatur, in proprium corpus peccat. "(2) Si quis autem matrimonium 
audet dicere fornicationem, rursus, legem et Dominum insectans, maledictis impetit. Quemadmodum enim 
avaritia et plura habendi cupiditas dicitur fornicatio, ut quae adversetur sufTicientiae: et ut idololatria est ab 
uno in multos Dei distributio, ita fornicatio estab uno matrimonio ad plura prolapsio. Tribus enim modis, ut 
diximus, fornicatio et adulterium sumifur apud Apostolum. De his dicit propheta: "Peccatis vestris venundati 
estis. " Et rursus: "Pollutus es in terra aliena:"(3) conjunctionera sceleratam existimans, quae cum alieno 
corpore facta est, et non cure eo, quod datur in eonjugio, ad liberorum procreationem. Unde etiam 
Apostolus: "Vole, inquit, juniores nubere, filios proereare, domui praeesse, nullam dare occasionem 
adversario maledieti gratia. Jam enim quaedam diverterunt post Satanam."(4) Quin et unius quoque uxoris 
virum utique admittit; seu sit presbyter, seu diaconus, seu laicus, utens matrimonio citra reprehensionem: 
"Servabitur autem per filiorum procreationem. "(5) Et rursus Sen/atot dicens Judaeos "generationem 
pravam et adulteram, " doeet eos legem non cognovisse, ut lex vult: "sed seniorum traditionem, et hominum 
praeeepta sequentes, " adulterate legem, perinde ac si non esset data vir et dominus eorum virginitatis. 
Fortasse autem eos quoque innuit esse alienis mancipatos cupiditatibus, propter quas assidue quoque 
sen/ientes peccatis, vendebantur alienigenis. Nam apud Judaeos non erant admissae communes 
mulieres: verum prohibitum erat adulterinm. Qui autem dicit: "Uxorem duxi, non possum venire,"(6) ad 
divinam coenam, est quidera exemplum ab eos arguendos, qui propter voluptates abscedunt a divino 
mandate: alioquin nee quijusti fuere ante adventum, nee qui post adventum uxores duxerunt, sen/abuntur, 
etiamsi sint apostoli. Quod si illud attulerint, quod propheta quoque dicit: "Inveteravi inter omnes inimieos 
meos,"(7) per inimieos peecata intelligant Unum quoddam autem est peccatum, non matrimonium, sed 
fornicatio: alioqui generationem quoque dicunt peccatum, et creatorera generationis. 

CAPUT XIII. -JUL!! CASSIAN'I HAERETIC1 VERBIS RE--SPONDET; ITEM LOCO QUEM EX 
EVANGELIC APO--CRYPHO IDEM ADDUXERAT. 

Talibus argumentis utitur quoque Julius Cassianus,(8) qui fixit princeps sectae Docetarum. In opere ceete 
De continentia, vel De castitate, his verbis dicit: "Nee dicat aliquis, quod quoniam talia habemus membra, ut 
alitor figurata sit femina, alitor veto masculus: ilia quidera ad suscipiendum, hie veto ad seminandum, 
coneessam esse a Deo consuetudinem. Si enim a Deo, ad quem tendimus, esset haec eonstitutio, non 
beatos dixisset esse eunuehos; neque propheta dixisset, eos 'non esse arborem infrugiferam;(9) 
transferens ab arbore ad hominem, qui sua sponte et ex institute se castrat tall cogitatione. " Et pro impia 

opinione adhuc decertans, subjungit: "Quomodo autem nonjure quis reprehenderit Servatorem, si nos 
transform avit, et ab errore liberavit, eta conjunctione membrorum, et additamentorum, et pudendomm?" in 
lioc eadem decernens cure Tatiano: liic autem prodiit ex scliola Valentini. Propterea dicit Cassianus: "Cure 
interrogaret Salome, quando cognoscentur, ea, de quibus interrogabat, ait Dominus: Quando pudoris 
indumentum conculcaveritis, et quando duo facta fuerint unum, et masculum cure femina, nee masculum nee 
femineum. " Primum quidera, in nobis traditis quatuor Evangeliis non liabemus lioc dictum, sed in eo, quod 
est secundum AEgyptios. Deinde milii videtur ignorare, iram quidera, masculam appetitionem; feminam 
vero, significare cupiditatem: quorum operationera poenitentia et pudor consequuntur. Cure quis ergo 
neque irae neque cupiditati obsequens, quae quidera et consuetudine et mala educatione auctae, 
obumbrant et contegunt rationem, sed quae ex lis proficiscitur exuens caliginem, et pudore affectus ex 
poenitentia, spiritum animam unierit in obedientia Logi seu rationis; tunc, ut ait Paulus, "non inest in nobis 
nee masculus, nee femina. " Recedens enim anima ab ea figura, qua discernitur masculus et femina, 
traducitur ad unionem, cum ea nutrum sit. Existimat autem hie vir praeclarus plus, quam par sit, Platoniee, 
animain, cure sit ab initio divina, eupidirate effeminatam, hue venire ad generationem et interitum. 

CAPUT XIV. -2 COR. XI. 3, ET EPH. IV. 24, EXPONIT. 

Jam veto vel invitum cogit Paulam generationem ex deeeptione deducere, cure dicit: "Vereor autem, ne 
sicut serpens Evam decepit, corrupt! sint sensus vestri a simplicitate, quae est in Christo. "[1] Seal certum 
est, Dominum quoque "venisse" ad ea, "quae aberraverant"[2] Aberraverunt autem, non ab alto repetita 
origine in eam, quae hie est, generationem (est enim generatio creatura Omnipotentis, qui nunquam ex 
melioribus ad deteriora deduxerit animam); sed ad eos, qui sensibus seu cogitationibus aberraverant, ad 
nos, inquam, venit Sen/ator: qui quidem ex nostra in praeceptis inobedientia corrupti sunt, dum nimis avide 
voluptatem persequeremur; cum utique protoplastus noster ternpus praevenisset, et ante debitum tempus 
matrimonii gratiam appetiisset et aberrasset: quoniam "quicunque aspicit mulierem ad concupiscendum 
eam, jam moechatus est eam"[3] ut qui voluntatis tempus non exspectaverit. Is ipse ergo erat Dominus, qui 
tunc quoque damnabat cupiditatem, quae praevenit matrimonium. Cum ergo dicit Apostolus: "Induite novum 
hominem, qui secundum Deum creatur,"[4] nobis dicit, qui ab Omnipotentis voluntate efficti sumus, sicut 
sum us efficti. "Veterem" autem dixit, non rescipiens ad generationem et regenerationem, sed ad vitam 
inobedientiae et obedient! regeneraae. "Pelliceas" autem "tunicas "[5] existimat Cassianus esse corpora: 
in quo postea et eum, et qui idem cum eo sentiunt, aberrasse ostendemus, cure de ortu hominis, lis 
consequenter, quae prius dicenda sunt, aggrediemur expositionem. "Quoniam, inquit, qui a terrenis 
reguntur, et generant, et generantur: Nostra autem conversatio est in coelo, ex qua etiam Salvatorem 
exspectamus."[6] Recte ergo nos hae quoque dicta esse scimus, quoniam ut hospites et advencta essae 
peregrinantes debemus vitam instituere; qui uxorem habent, utnon habentes; qui possident, ut non 
possidentes; qui liberos procreant, ut mortales gignentes, ut relicturi possessiones, ut etiam sine uxore 
victuri, si opus sit; non cum immodico actione, et animo excelso. 

CAPUT XV.--I COR. VII. I; LUC. XIV. 26; ISA. LVI. 2, 3, EXPLICAT. 

Et rursus cure dicit: "Bonum est homini uxorem non tangere, sed propter fornicationes unusquisque suam 
uxorem habeat;"[7] id veluti exponens, rursus dicit: "Ne vos tentet Satanas. "[8] Non enim iis, qui continenter 
utuntur matrimonio propter solam liberorum procreationem, dicit, "propter intemperantiam;" sed iis, qui finem 
liberorum procreationis cupiunt transilire: ne, cure nimium annuerit noster adversarius, excitet appetitionem 
ad alienas voluptates. Fortasse autem quoniam iis, qui juste vivunt, resistit propter aemulationem, et 
adversus eos contendit, volens eos ad sues ordines traducere, per laboriosam continentiam els vult 
praebere occasionera. Merito ergo dicit: "Melius est matrimonio jungi quam uri,"[9] ut "vir reddat debiturn 
uxori, et uxor viro, et ne frustrentur invicem"[10] hoc divino ad generationera dato auxilio. "Qui autem, 
inquiunt, non oderitpatrem, vel matrem, vel uxorem, velfilios, non potest meus esse discipulus."[11] Non 
jubet odisse proprium genus: "Honora" enim, inquit, "patrein et matrein, uttibi bene sit" [12] sed ne 
abducaris, inquit, per appetitiones a ratione alienas, sed neque civilibus moribus conformis fias. Domus 
enim constat ex genere, civitates autem ex domibus; quemadmodum Paulus quoque eos, qui occupantur in 
matrimonio, "mundo dixit placere."[13] Rursus dicit Dominus: "Qui uxorem duxit, ne expellat; et qui non duxit, 
ne ducat; "[14] qui ex proposito castitatis professus est uxorem non ducere maneat caelebs. Utrisque ergo 
idem Dominus per prophetam Isaiam convenientes dat promissiones sic dicens: "Ne dicat eunuchus: Sum 
lignum aridum," haec enim dicit Dominus eunuchis: "Si custodieritis sabbata mea, et feceritis quaecunque 
pruodaecipio, dabo vobis locum meliorem filiis et filiabus."[15] Non sola enim justificat castitas, sed nee 
sabbatum eunuchi, nisi feeerit mandata. Infert autem iis, qui uxorem duxerunt, et dicit: "Electi mei non 
laborabunt in vanum, neque procreabunt filios in exsecrationem, quia semen est benedictum a 
Domino. "[16] El enim, qui secundum Logon filios procreavit et educavit, et erudivit in Domino, sicut etiam el, 

qui genuit per veram catechesim et institutionem, merces quaedam est proposita, sicutetiam electa semini. 
Alii autem "exsecrationem " accipiunt esse ipsam liberorum procreationem, et non intelligunt adversus illos 
ipsos ea dicere Scripturam. Qui enim sunt revera electi Domini, non dogmata decernunt, nee filios 
progignunt, qui sunt ad exsecrationem, et haereses. Eunuchus ergo, non qui per vim excisas habet partes, 
sed nee qui caelebs est, dictus est, sed qui non gignit veritatem. Lignum hie prius erat aridum; si autem 
Logo obedierit, et sabbata eustodieri, per abstinentiam a peeeatis, et feeerit mandata erit honorabilior iis, 
qui absque reeta vitae institutione solo sermone erudiuntur "Filioli, modieure adhue sum vobiscum, "[1] 
inquit Magister Quare Paulus quoque seribens ad Galatas, dieit: "Filioli mei, quos iterum parturio, donee 
formetur in vobis Christus. "[2] Rursus ad Corinthios seribens: "Si enim deeies mille paedagogos, " inquit, 
"habeatis in Christo, sed non multos patres. In Christo enim per Evangelium ego vosgenui."[3] Propterea 
"non ingrediatur eunuehus in Eeelesiam Dei, "[4] qui est sterilis, et non fert fruetum, nee vitro institutione, nee 
sermone. Sed "qui se" quidem "eastrarunt" ab omni peeeato "propter regnum eoelorum,"[5] ii sunt beati, qui 
a mundo jejunant. 

CAPUT XVI. -JER. XX. 14; JOB XIV. 3; PS. L. 5; I COR. IX. 27, EXPONIT. 

"Exseeranda" autem "dies in qua natus sum, et ut non sit optanda, "[6] inquit Jeremias: non absolute 
exseerandam dieens generationem, sed populi peeeata aegre ferens et inobedientiam. Subjungit itaque: 
"Cur enim natus sum ut viderem labores et dolores, et in perpetuo probro fuerunt dies mei?"[7] Quin etiam 
omnes, qui praedieabant veritatem, propter eorum, qui audiebant, inobedientiam, quaerebantur ad 
poenam, et veniebant in perieulum. "Cur enim non fuit uterus maths meae sepulerum, ne viderem 
affiietionem Jacob et laborera generis Israel? "[8] ait Esdras propheta. "Nullus est a sorde mundus, " air 
Job, "nee si sit quidera una dies vita ejus. "[9J Dicant ergo nobis, ubi fornieatus est infans natus? vel 
quomodo sub Adae cecidit exsecrationem, qui nihil est operatus? Restat ergo eis, ut videtur, eonsequenter, 
ut dicant malam esse generationem, non solum corporis, sed etiam animae, per quam exsistit corpus. Et 
quando dixit David: "In peeeatis coneeptus sum, et in iniquitatibus coneepit me mater mea:"[10J dieit 
prophetiee quidem matrem Evam; sed Eva quidem fuit "mater viventium;" et si is "in peeeatis fuit 
coneeptus," at non ipse in peeeato, neque vero ipse peeeatum. Utrum vero quieunque etiam a peeeato ad 
fidem eonvertitur, a peeeandi eonsuetudine tanquam a "matre" eonverti dieatur ad "vitam, " feret mihi 
testimonium unus ex duodeeim prophetis, qui dixit: "Si dedero primogenita pro impietate fruetum yeniris mei, 
pro peeeatis animae meae. "[1 1] Non aeeusat eum, qui dixit: "Creseite et multiplieamini:"[12] sed primes 
post generationera motus, quorum tempore Deum non eognoseimus, dieit "impietates." Siquis autem ea 
ratione dieit malam generationem, idem eam dieat bonam, quatenus in ipso veritatem eognoseimus. 
"Abluamini juste, et ne peeeetis. Ignorationem enim Dei quidam habent, "[13] videlicet qui peccant 
"Quoniam nobis est colluetatio non adversus camem et sanguinere, sed adversus spiritalia."[14] Potentes 
autem sunt ad tentandum "prineipes tenebrarum hujus mundi, " et ideo datur venia. Et ideo Paulus quoque: 
"Corpus meum, " inquit, "eastigo, et in servitutem redigo; quoniam qui eertat, omnia continet, " hoc est, in 
omnibus continet, non ab omnibus abstinens, sed continenter utens iis, quae utenda judieavit, "illi quidera ut 
corruptibilem coronam accipiant; nos autem ut ineorruptibilem,"[15J in lucta vineentes, non autem sine 
pulvere coronam aceipientes. Jam nonnulli quoque praeferunt viduam virgini, ut qua, quam experta est, 
voluptatem magno animo eontempserit. 

CAPUT XVII. -QUI NUPTIAS ET GENERATIONEM MALAS ASSERUNT, II ET DEI 
CREATIONEM ET IPSAM EVANGELII DISPENSATIONEM VITUPERANT. 

Sin autem malum est generatio, in male blasphemi dicant fuisse Dominum qui fuit partieeps generationis, in 
male Virginera quae genuit. Hei mihi! quot et quanta mala! Dei voluntatera maledietis ineessunt, et 
mystehum creationis, dum invehuntur in generationera. Et hine "Doeesin" fingit Cassianus; hinc etiam 
Mareioni, et Valentino quoque est corpus animale; quoniam homo, inquiunt, operam dans veneh, 
"assimilatus est jumentis."[16] Atqui profeeto, eum libidine vere insaniens, aliena inire voluerit, tunc revera, 
qui talis est, efferatur: "Equi in feminas furentes facti sunt, unusquisque hinniebat ad uxorem proximi sui. "[17] 
Quod si dieat serpentera, a brutis animantibus accepta eonsilii sui ratione, Adamo persuasisse ut eum Eva 
coire eonsentiret, tanquam alioqui, ut quidam existimant, protoplast! hae natura usuh non fuissent: rursus 
vituperatur ereatio, ut quae rationis expertium animantium natura homines feeerit imbecilliores, quorum 
exempla eonsecuti sunt, qui a Deo primi format! fuere. Sin autem natura quidem eos sicutbruta deduxit ad 
filiorum procreationem; moti autem sunt citius quam oportuit, fraude indueti, cura adhue essent juvenes; 
Justum quidera est Dei judicium in eos qui non exspectarunt ejus voluntatera: saneta est autem generatio, 
per quam mundus eonsistit, per quam essentiae, per quara nature, per quam angeli, per quam potestates, 
per quam animal, per quam praeeepta, per quam lex, per quam Evangelium, per quam Dei cognitio. "Et 
omnis earo fenum, et omnis gloria ejus quasi flos feni; et fenum quidem exsieeatur, flos autem decidit, sed 

verbum Domini manet, "[1] quod unxit artimam et uniit spiritui. Quomodo autem, qure est in Ecclesia 
nostra, [2] oeconomia ad finem perduci potuisset absque corpore, cum etiam ipse, qui est caput Ecclesire, 
in came quidem informis et specie carens vitam transiit, ut doceret nos respicere ad naturam divinae 
causespicere ad naturam divinnsiit,ae informem et incorpoream? "Arbor enim vitae," inquit propliem, "est in 
bono desiderio, "[3] docens bona et munda desideria, quae sunt in Domino vivente. Jam vero volunt viri 
cure uxore in matrimonio consuetudinem, quae dicta est "cognitio, " esse peccatum: eam quippe indicari ex 
esu "ligni boni et mali, "[4] per significationem liujus vocabuli "cognovit, "[5] quae mandati tmnsgressionem 
notat. Si autem lioc im est, veritatis quoque cognitio, est esus ligni vitre. Potest ergo lionestum ac 
moderatum matrimonium illius quoque ligni esse particeps. Nobis autem prius dictum est, quod licet bene 
et male uti matrimonio; et hoc est lignum "cognitionis, " si non transgrediamur leges matrimonii. Quid vero? 
annon Servator noster, sicut animam, ita etiam corpus cumvit ab affectionibus? Neque vero si esset caro 
inimica animae, inimicam per sanitatis restitutionem advenus ipsam muniisset. "Hoc autem dico, fratres, 
quod caro et sangnis regnum Dei non possunt possidere, neque corruptio possidet incorruptionem. "[6] 
Peccatun enim, cure sit "corruptio, " non potest babere societatem cure incorruptione, " quae estjustitia. 
"Adeo stuiti, " inquit, "estis? cure spiritu coeperitis, nunc came consummamini. "[7] 

CAPUT XVIII. -DUAS EXTREMAS OPINIONES ESSE VITANDAS: PRIMAM ILLORUM QUI 
CREATORIS ODIO A NUPTIIS ABSTINENT; ALTERAM ILLORUM QUI HINC OCCASIONEM 
ARRIPIUNT NEFARIIS LIBIDINIBUS INDULGENDI, 

Justitiam ergo et salutis harmoniam, quae est veneranda firmaque, alii quidem, ut ostendimus, nimium 
intenderunt, blaspheme ac maledice cure quavis impietate suscipientes continentiam; cure pie liceret 
castitatem, qu secundum sanam regulam instituitur, eligere; gratias quidem agendo propter datam ipsis 
gratiam, non habendo antem odio creatumm, neque eos aspernando, quijuncti sunt matrimonio; est enim 
creatus mundus, cream est etiam castitas;ambo autem agant gratias in iis, in quibus sunt collocati, si modo 
ea quoque norunt, in quibus sunt collocati. Alii autem effrenati se petulanter et insolenter gesserunt, revem 
"effect! equi in feminas insanientes, et ad proximorum suorum uxores hinnientes; "[8] ut quiet ipsi contineri 
non possint, et proximis suis persuadeant ut dent operam voluptati; infeliciter illas audientes Scriptums:" 
Quae tibi obtigit, partem pone nobiscum, crumenam autem unam possideamus communem, et unum fiat 
nobis marsupium. "[9J Propter eos idem propheta dicit, nobis consulens: "Ne ambulaveris in via cum ipsis, 
declixia pedem tuum a semitis eorum. Non enim injuste tenduntur retia pennatis. Ipsi enim, cure sint 
sanguinum participes, thesauros malorum sibi recondunt;"[10] hoc est, sibi affectantes immunditiam, et 
proximos similia docentes, bellatores, percussores caudis suis, [11] ait propheta, quas quidem Graeci 
<greek>kerkous</greek> appellant. Fuerint autem ii, quos significat prophetia, libidinosi intemperantes, qui 
sunt caudis suis pugnaces, tenebrarum "irreque filii, "[12] erode polluti, manus sibi afferentes, et homicidae 
propinquorum. "Expurgate ergo vetus fermentum, ut sitis novo conspersio,"[13] nobis exclam at Apostolus. 
Et rursus, propter quosdam ejusmodi homines indignans, praecipit, "Ne conversari quidem, si quis frater 
nominetur vel fornicator, vel avarus, vel idololatra, vel maledicus, vel ebriosus, vel raptor; cum eo, qui est 
talis, ne una quidem comedere. Ego enim per legem legi mortuus sum, " inquit; "ut Deo vivare, cum Christo 
sum crucifixus; vivo autem non amplius ego, " ut vivebam per cupiditates; "vivit autem in me Christus, " caste 
et beate per obedientiam praeceptorum. Quare tune quidem in came vivebam camaliter: "quod autem 
nunc vivo in carne, in fide vivo Filii Dei. "[14]-ln viam gentium ne abieritis, et ne ingrediamini in urbem 
Samaritanorum, "[15] a contraria vitae institutione nos dehortans dicit Dominus; quoniam "Iniquorum virorum 
mala est conversatio; et hae sunt vitae omnium, qui ea, quae sunt iniqua, efficiunt "[16]-"Vae homini illi, " 
inquit Dominus; "bonum esset el, si non natus esset, quam ut unum ex electis meis scandalizaret.[17] Melius 
esset, ut ei mola circumponeretur, et in marl demergeretur, quam ut unum ex meis perverteret.[18] Nomen 
enim Dei blasphematur propter ipsos. "[19] Undo praeclare Apostolus: "Scripsi, " inquit, "vobis in epistola, 
non conversari cure fornicatoribus, "[20] usque ad illud: "Corpus autem non fornication!, sed Domino, et 
Dominus corpori."[1] Et quod matrimonium non dicat fomicationem, ostenditeo, quod subiungit: "An 
nescitis, quod qui adhaeret meretrici, unum est corpus? "[2] An meretricem quis dicet virginem, priusquam 
nubat? "Et ne fraudetis, " inquit, "vos invicem, nisi ex consensu ad tempus:"[3] per dictionem, "fraudetis, " 
ostendens matrimonii debitum esse liberorum procreationem: quod quidem in iis, quae praecedunt, 
ostendit, dicens: "Mulieri vir debitum reddat; similiter autem mulier quoque viro; "[4] post quam 
exsolutionem, in domo custodienda, etin ea quae est in Christo fide, adjutrix est. Etadhuc apertius, dicens: 
"lis, qui suntjuncti matrimonio, praecipio, inquit, non ego, sed Dominus, uxorem a viro non sepamri; sin 
autem separata fuerit, maneat innupta, vel viro reconcilietur; et virum uxorem non dimittere. Reliquis autem 
dico ego, non Dominus: Si quis frater, "[5] usque ad illud: "Nunc autem sancta est. "[6] Quid autem ad haec 
dicunt, qui in legem invehuntur, etin matrimonium, quasi sit solum a lege concessum, non autem etiam in 
Novo Testamento? Quid ad has leges latas possunt dicere, qui sationem abhorrent et generationem? cure 
"episcopum" quoque, "qui domui recte praesit, "[7] Ecclesiquoae ducem constituat; domum autem 

Dominicam "imius mulieris" constituat conjugium.[8] "Omnia" ergo dicit esse "munda mundis; pollutis autem 
et infidelibus nihil est mundum, sed polluta est eorum et mens, et conscientia. "[9] De ea autem voluptate, 
quae est praeter regulam: "Ne erretis, " inquit; "nee fornicatores, nee idololatrae, nee adulteri, nee molles, 
nee maseulorum eoneubitores, neque avari, neque fures, neque ebnosi, neque malediei, nee raptores, 
regnum Dei possidebunt; et nos quidem abluti sum us, "[10] qui in liis eramus; qui autem in Inane tingunt 
intemperantiam, ex temperantia in fornieationem baptizant, voluptatibus et affeetibus esse indulgendum 
deeernentes, ineontinentes ex moderatis fieri doeentes, et in spe sua membrorum suorum impudentiae 
affixi; ut a regno Dei abdieentur, non autem ut inseribantur, qui ad eos ventitant, eWeientes; sub false 
nominatae eognitionis titulo, eam, qu, effieiae ad exteriores dueit tenebras, viam ingredientes. "Quod 
reliquum est, fratres, quaeeunque vera, quratres, quam ingredientes. aeeunque honesta, quaeeunque justa, 
quatres, quam aeeunque easta, quaeeunque amabilia, ques, aeeunque bonbilia, ques, quam ingreae 
famue bonbilia, ques, quam ingredientae; si qua virtus, et si qua laus, ea eonsiderate; quae et didieistis; 
quae etiam aeeepistis et audiistis et vidistis in me, ea faeite; et Deus paeis erit vobiseum. "[1 1] Et Petrus 
similia dieit in Epistola: "Ut fides vestra et spes sit in Deum, eure animas vestras eastas effeeeritis in 
obedientia veritatis;"[12] quasi filii obedientiae, non eonfigurati prioribus desideriis, quae fuerunt in 
ignomntia; sed seeundum eum, qui voeavit vos, sanetum, et ipsi saneti sitis in omni eonversatione. Quoniam 
seriprum est: "Saneti eritis, quoniam ego sanetus sum. "[13] Verumtamen quae adversus eos, qui 
eognitionem false nomine simulant, neeessario suseepta est a nobis disputatio; nos longius, quam par sit, 
abduxit, et omtionem effeeit prolixiorem. Unde fortius quoque liber Stromateus eorum, quae sunt de vera 
philosophia, eommentariorum, hune finem habeat. 

Chap. XIII) ^^t 

BOOK IV. 

CHAP. I. -ORDER OF CONTENTS. 

It will follow, I think, that I should treat of martyrdom, and of who the perfect man is. With these points shall be 
included what follows in accordance with the demands of the points to be spoken about, and how both bond 
and free must equally philosophize, whether male or female in sex. And in the sequel, after finishing what is 
to be said on faith and inquiry, we shall set forth the department of symbols; so that, on cursorily concluding 
the discourse on ethics, we shall exhibit the advantage which has accrued to the Greeks from the barbarian 
philosophy. After which sketch, the brief explanation of the Scriptures both against the Greeks and against 
the Jews will be presented, and whatever points we were unable to embrace in the previous Miscellanies 
(through having respect necessarily to the multitude of matters), in accordance with the commencement of 
the poem, purposing to finish them in one commentary. In addition to these points, afterwards on completing 
the sketch, as far as we can in accordance with what we propose, we must give an account of the physical 
doctrines of the Greeks and of the barbarians, respecting elementary principles, as far as their opinions 
have reached us, and argue against the principal views excogitated by the philosophers. 
It will naturally fall after these, after a cursory view of theology, to discuss the opinions handed down 
respecting prophecy; so that, having demonstrated that the Scriptures which we believe are valid from their 
omnipotent authority, we shall be able to go over them consecutively, and to show thence to all the heresies 
one God and Omnipotent Lord to be truly preached by the law and the prophets, and besides by the 
blessed Gospel. Many contradictions against the heterodox await us while we attempt, in writing, to do away 
with the force of the allegations made by them, and to persuade them against their will, proving by the 
Scriptures themselves. 

On completing, then, the whole of what we propose in the commentaries, on which, if the Spirit will, we 
ministering to the urgent need, (for it is exceedingly necessary, before coming to the truth, to embrace what 
ought to be said by way of preface), shall address ourselves to the true gnostic science of nature, receiving 
initiation into the minor mysteries before the greater; so that nothing may be in the way of the truly divine 
declaration of sacred things, the subjects requiring preliminary detail and statement being cleared away, 
and sketched beforehand. The science of nature, then, or rather observation, as contained in the gnostic 
tradition according to the rule of the truth, depends on the discussion concerning cosmogony, ascending 
thence to the department of theology. Whence, then, we shall begin our account of what is handed down, 
with the creation as related by the prophets, introducing also the tenets of the heterodox, and endeavouring 
as far as we can to confute them. But it shall be written if God will, and as He inspires; and now we must 
proceed to what we proposed, and complete the discourse on ethics. 

CHAP. II. -THE MEANING OF THE NAME STROMATA OR MISCELLANIES. 

Let these notes of ours, as we have often said for the sake of those that consult them carelessly and 

unskilfully, be of varied character-and as the name itself indicates, patched together-passing constantly 

from one thing to another, and in the series of discussions hinting at one thing and demonstrating another. 

"For those who seek for gold," says Heraclitus, "dig much earth and find little gold." But those who are of the 

truly golden race, in mining for what is allied to them, will find the much in little. For the word will find one to 

understand it. The Miscellanies of notes contribute, then, to the recollection and expression of truth in the 

case of him who is able to investigate with reason. 

And you must prosecute, in addition to these, other labours and researches; since, in the case of people 

who are setting out on a road with which they are unacquainted, it is sufficient merely to point out the 

direction. After this they must walk and find out the rest for themselves. As, they say, when a certain slave 

once asked at the oracle what he should do to please his master, the Pythian priestess replied, "You will 

find if you seek." It is truly a difficult matter, then, as turns out, to find out latent good; since 

"Before virtue is placed exertion. 

And long and steep is the way to it. 

And rough at first; but when the summit is reached. 

Then is it easy, tiiougii difficult [before]." 

"For narrow," in trutii, "and strait is tiie way" of tiie Lord. And it is to tiie "violent that the kingdom of God 

belongs."' 

Whence, "Seek, and ye shall find," holding on by the truly royal road, and not deviating. As we might expect, 

then, the generative power of the seeds of the doctrines comprehended in this treatise is great in small 

space, as the "universal herbage of the field, "(2) as Scripture saith. Thus the Miscellanies of notes have 

their proper title, wonderfully like that ancient oblation culled from all sorts of things of which Sophocles 

writes :- 

"For there was a sheep's fleece, and there was a vine. 

And a libation, and grapes well stored; 

And there was mixed with it fruit of all kinds. 

And the fat of the olive, and the most curious Wax-formed work of the yellow bee." 

Just so our Stromata, according to the husbandman of the comic poet Timocles, produce "figs, olives, dried 

figs, honey, as from an all-fruitful field;" on account of which exuberance he adds:- 

"Thou speakest of a harvest-wreath not of husbandry." 

For the Athenians were wont to cry:- 

"The harvest-wreath bears figs and fat loaves. 

And honey in a cup, and olive oil to anoint you." 

We must then often, as in winnowing sieves, shake and toss up this the great mixture of seeds, in order to 

separate the wheat. 

CHAP. III. -THE TRUE EXCELLENCE OF MAN. 

The most of men have a disposition unstable and heedless, like the nature of storms. "Want of faith has 
done many good things, and faith evil things." And Epicharmus says, "Don't forget to exercise incredulity; for 
it is the sinews of the soul." Now, to disbelieve truth brings death, as to believe, life; and again, to believe the 
lie and to disbelieve the truth hutries to destruction. The same is the case with self-restraint and 
licentiousness. To restrain one's self from doing good is the work of vice; but to keep from wrong is the 
beginning of salvation. So the Sabbath, by abstinence from evils, seems to indicate self-restraint. And what, 
I ask, is it in which man differs from beasts, and the angels of God, on the other hand, are wiser than he? 
"Thou madest him a little lower than the angels. "(3) For some do not interpret this Scripture of the Lord, 
although He also bore flesh, but of the perfect man and the gnosflc, inferior in comparison with the angels in 
flme, and by reason of the vesture [of the body]. I call then wisdom nothing but science, since life differs not 
from life. For to live is common to the mortal nature, that is to man, with that to which has been vouchsafed 
immortality; as also the faculty of contemplaflon and of self-restraint, one of the two being more excellent. On 
this ground Pythagoras seems to me to have said that God alone is wise, since also the apostle writes in 
the Epistle to the Romans, "For the obedience of the faith among all naflons, being made known to the only 
wise God through Jesus Christ;"(4) and that he himself was a philosopher, on account of his friendship with 
God. Accordingly it is said, "God talked with Moses as a friend with a friend." s That, then, which is true being 
clear to God, forthwith generates truth. And the gnosflc loves the truth. "Go," it is said, "to the ant, thou 
sluggard, and be the disciple of the bee;" thus speaks Solomon. (6) For if there is one funcflon belonging to 
the peculiar nature of each creature, alike of the ox, and horse, and dog, what shall we say is the peculiar 
function of man ? He is like, it appears to me, the Centaur, a Thessalian flgment, compounded of a raflonal 
and irraflonal part, of soul and body. Well, the body flils the ground, and hastes to it; but the soul is raised to 
God: trained in the true philosophy, it speeds to its kindred above, turning away from the lusts of the body, 
and besides these, from toil and fear, although we have shown that paflence and fear belong to the good 
man. For if "by the law is the knowledge of sin, "(7) as those allege who disparage the law, and "flII the law 
sin was in the world;"(8) yet "without the law sin was dead, "(9) we oppose them. For when you take away the 
cause of fear, sin, you have taken away fear; and much more, punishment, when you have taken away that 
which gives rise to lust. "For the law is not made for the just man,"[1] says the Scripture. Well, then, says 
Heraclitus, "They would not have known the name of Justice if these things had not been." And Socrates 
says, "that the law was not made for the sake of the good." But the cavillers did not know even this, as the 
apostle says, "that he who loveth his brother worketh not evil;" for this, "Thou shalt not kill, thou shalt not 
commit adultery, thou shalt not steal; and if there be any other commandment, it is comprehended in the 
word. Thou shall love thy neighbour as thyself."[2] So also is it said, "Thou shall love the Lord thy God with 
all thy heart, and thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself."[3] And "if he that loveth his neighbour worketh no 
evil," and if "every commandment is comprehended in this, the loving our neighbour," the commandments, 
by menacing with fear, work love, not hatred. Wherefore the law is producflve of the emotion of fear. "So that 
the law is holy," and in truth "spiritual, "[4] according to the apostle. We must, then, as is flt, in investigaflng the 
nature of the body and the essence of the soul, apprehend the end of each, and not regard death as an evil. 

"For when ye were the servants of sin," says the apostle, "ye were free from righteousness. What fruit had ye 
then in those things in which ye are now ashamed? For the end of those things is death. But now, being 
made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting 
life. For the wages of sin is death: but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. "[5] The 
assertion, then, may be hazarded, that it has been shown that death is the fellowship of the soul in a state of 
sin with the body; and life the separation from sin. And many are the stakes and ditches of lust which impede 
us, and the pits of wrath and anger which must be overleaped, and all the machinations we must avoid of 
those who plot against us,-who would no longer see the knowledge of God "through a glass." 

"The half of virtue the far-seeing Zeus takes 

From man, when he reduces him to a state of slavery." 

As slaves the Scripture views those "under sin" and "sold to sin," the lovers of pleasure and of the body; 
and beasts rather than men, "those who have become like to cattle, horses, neighing after their neighbours' 
wives. "[6] The licentious is "the lustful ass," the covetous is the "savage wolf," and the deceiver is "a 
serpent." The severance, therefore, of the soul from the body, made a life-long study, produces in the 
philosopher gnostic alacrity, so that he is easily able to bear natural death, which is the dissolution of the 
chains which bind the soul to the body. "For the world is crucified to me, and I to the world," the [apostle] 
says; "and now I live, though in the flesh, as having my conversation in heaven. "[7] 

CHAP. IV. --THE PRAISES OF MARTYRDOM. 

Whence, as is reasonable, the gnostic, when Galled, obeys easily, and gives up his body to him who asks; 
and, previously divesting himself of the affections of this carcase, not insulting the tempter, but rather, in my 
opinion, training him and convincing him,- 

"From what honour and what extent of wealth fallen," 

as says Empedocles, here for the future he walks with mortals. He, in truth, bears witness to himself that he is 
faithful and loyal towards God; and to the tempter, that he in vain envied him who is faithful through love; and 
to the Lord, of the inspired persuasion in reference to His doctrine, from which he will not depart through fear 
of death; further, he confirms also the truth of preaching by his deed, showing that God to whom he hastes is 
powerful. You will wonder at his love, which he conspicuously shows with thankfulness, in being united to 
what is allied to him, and besides by his precious blood, shaming the unbelievers. He then avoids denying 
Christ through fear by reason of the command; nor does he sell his faith in the hope of the gifts prepared, but 
in love to the Lord he will most gladly depart from this life; perhaps giving thanks both to him who afforded 
the cause of his departure hence, and to him who laid the plot against him, for receiving an honourable 
reason which he himself furnished not, for showing what he is, to him by his patience, and to the Lord in love, 
by which even before his birth he was manifested to the Lord, who knew the martyr's choice. With good 
courage, then, he goes to the Lord, his friend, for whom he voluntarily gave his body, and, as his judges 
hoped, his soul, hearing from our Saviour the words of poetry, "Dear brother," by reason of the similarity of 
his life. We call martyrdom perfection, not because the man comes to the end of his life as others, but 
because he has exhibited the perfect work of love. And the ancients laud the death of those among the 
Greeks who died in war, not that they advised people to die a violent death, but because he who ends his 
life in war is released without the dread of dying, severed from the body without experiencing previous 
suffering or being enfeebled in his soul, as the people that suffer in diseases. For they depart in a state of 
effeminacy and desiring to live; and therefore they do not yield up the soul pure, but bearing with it their lusts 
like weights of lead; all but those who have been conspicuous in virtue. Some die in battle with their lusts, 
these being in no respect different from what they would have been if they had wasted away by disease. 
If the confession to God is martyrdom, each soul which has lived purely in the knowledge of God, which has 
obeyed the commandments, is a witness both by life and word, in whatever way it may be released from the 
body, -shedding faith as blood along its whole life till its departure. For instance, the Lord says in the 
Gospel, "Whosoever shall leave father, or mother, or brethren," and so forth, "for the sake of the Gospel and 
my name,"[1] he is blessed; not indicating simple martyrdom, but the gnostic martyrdom, as of the man who 
has conducted himself according to the rule of the Gospel, in love to the Lord (for the knowledge of the 
Name and the understanding of the Gospel point out the gnosis, but not the bare appellation), so as to 
leave his worldly kindred, and wealth, and every possession, in order to lead a life free from passion. 
"Mother" figuratively means Country and sustenance; "fathers" are the laws of civil polity: which must be 
contemned thankfully by the high-souled just man; for the sake of being the friend of God, and of obtaining 
the right hand in the holy place, as the Apostles have done. 

Then Heraclitus says, "Gods and men honour those slain in battle;" and Plato in the fifth book of the 
Republic writes, "Of those who die in military service, whoever dies after winning renown, shall we not say 
that he is chief of the golden race? Most assuredly." But the golden race is with the gods, who are in heaven, 
in the fixed sphere, who chiefly hold command in the providence exercised towards men. Now some of the 
heretics who have misunderstood the Lord, have at once an impious and cowardly love of life; saying that 
the true martyrdom is the knowledge of the only true God (which we also admit), and that the man is a 
self-murderer and a suicide who makes confession by death; and adducing other similar sophisms of 
cowardice. To these we shall reply at the proper time; for they differ with us in regard to first principles. Now 
we, too, say that those who have rushed on death (for there are some, not belonging to us, but sharing the 
name merely, who are in haste to give themselves up, the poor wretches dying through hatred to the 
Creator[2])-these, we say, banish themselves without being martyrs, even though they are punished 
publicly. For they do not preserve the characteristic mark of believing martyrdom, inasmuch as they have 
not known the only true God, but give themselves up to a vain death, as the Gymnosophists of the Indians to 
useless fire. 

But since these falsely named[3] calumniate the body, let them learn that the harmonious mechanism of the 
body contributes to the understanding which leads to goodness of nature. Wherefore in the third book of the 
Republic, Plato, whom they appeal to loudly as an authority that disparages generation, says, "that for the 
sake of harmony of soul, care must be taken for the body," by which, he who announces the proclamation of 
the truth, finds it possible to live, and to live well. For it is by the path of life and health that we learn gnosis. 
But is he who cannot advance to the height without being occupied with necessary things, and through them 
doing what tends to knowledge, not to choose to live well? In living, then, living well is secured. And he who 
in the body has devoted himself to a good life, is being sent on to the state of immortality. 

CHAP. V.-ON CONTEMPT FOR PAIN, POVERTY, AND OTHER EXTERNAL THINGS. 

Fit objects for admiration are the Stoics, who say that the soul is not affected by the body, either to vice by 
disease, or to virtue by health; but both these things, they say, are indifferent. And indeed Job, through 
exceeding continence, and excellence of faith, when from rich he became poor, from being held in honour 
dishonoured, from being comely unsightly, and sick from being healthy, is depicted as a good example, 
putting the Tempter to shame, blessing his Creator; bearing what came second, as the first, and most 
clearly teaching that it is possible for the gnostic to make an excellent use of all circumstances. And that 
ancient achievements are proposed as images for our correction, the apostle shows, when he says, "So 
that my bonds in Christ are become manifest in all the palace, and to all the rest; and several of the brethren 
in the Lord, waxing confident by my bonds, are much more bold to speak the word of God without 
fear,"[4]-since martyrs' testimonies are examples 'of conversion gloriously sanctified. "For what things the 
Scripture speaks were written for our instruction, that we, through patience and the consolation of the 
Scriptures, might have the hope of consolation. "[5] When pain is present, the soul appears to decline from it, 
and to deem release from present pain a precious thing. At that moment it slackens from studies, when the 
other virtues also are neglected. And yet we do not say that it is virtue itself which suffers, for virtue is not 
affected by disease. But he who is partaker of both, of virtue and the disease, is afflicted by the pressure of 
the latter; and if he who has not yet attained the habit of self-command be not a high-souled man, he is 
distraught; and the inability to endure it is found equivalent to fleeing from it. 

The same holds good also in the case of poverty. For it compels the soul to desist from necessary things, I 
mean contemplation and from pure sinlessness, forcing him, who has not wholly dedicated himself to God in 
love, to occupy himself about provisions; as, again, health and abundance of necessaries keep the soul 
free and unimpeded, and capable of making a good use of what is at hand. "For," says the apostle, "such 
shall have trouble in the flesh. But I spare you. For I would have you without anxiety, in order to decorum and 
assiduity for the Lord, without distraction. "[1] 

These things, then, are to be abstained from, not for their own sakes, but for the sake of the body; and care 
for the body is exercised for the sake of the Soul, to which it has reference. For on this account it is 
necessary for the man who lives as a gnostic to know what is suitable. Since the fact that pleasure is not a 
good thing is admitted from the fact that certain pleasures are evil, by this reason good appears evil, and 
evil good. And then, if we choose some pleasures and shun others, it is not every pleasure that is a good 
thing. 

Similarly, also, the same rule holds with pains, some of which we endure, and others we shun. But choice 
and avoidance are exercised according to knowledge; so that it is not pleasure that is the good thing, but 
knowledge by which we shall choose a pleasure at a certain time, and of a certain kind. Now the martyr 
chooses the pleasure that exists in prospect through the present pain. If pain is conceived as existing in 
thirst, and pleasure in drinking, the pain that has preceded becomes the efficient cause of pleasure. But evil 
cannot be the efficient cause of good. Neither, then, is the one thing nor the other evil. Simonides 

accordingly (as also Aristotle) writes, "that to be in good health is the best thing, and the second best thing is 
to be handsome, and the third best thing is to be rich without cheating." 
And Theognis of Megara says:- 

"You must, to escape poverty, throw 

Yourself, O Cyrnus down from 

The steep rocks into the deep sea." 

On the other hand, Antiphanes, the comic poet, says, "Plutus (Wealth), when it has taken hold of those who 
see better than others, makes them blind." Now by the poets he is proclaimed as blind from his birth:- 

"And brought him forth blind who saw not the sun." 

Says the Chalcidian Euphorion:- 

"Riches, then, and extravagant luxuries. 
Were for men the worst training for manliness." 

Wrote Euripides in Alexander:- 

"And it is said. 

Penury has attained wisdom through misfortune; 

But much wealth will capture not 

Sparta alone, but every city." 

"It is not then the only coin that mortals have, that which is white silver or golden, but virtue too," as 
Sophocles says. 

CHAP. VI. --SOME POINTS IN THE BEATITUDES. 

Our holy Saviour applied poverty and riches, and the like, both to spiritual things and objects of sense. For 
when He said, "Blessed are they that are persecuted for righteousness' sake, "[2] He clearly taught us in 
every circumstance to seek for the martyr who, if poor for righteousness' sake, witnesses that the 
righteousness which he loves is a good thing; and if he "hunger and thirst for righteousness' sake," testifies 
that righteousness is the best thing. Likewise he, that weeps and mourns for righteousness' sake, testifies to 
the best law that it is beautiful. As, then, "those that are persecuted," so also "those that hunger and thirst" for 
righteousness' sake, are called "blessed" by Him who approves of the true desire, which not even famine 
can put a stop to. And if "they hunger after righteousness itself," they are blessed. "And blessed are the 
poor," whether "in spirit" or in circumstances-that is, if for righteousness' sake. It is not the poor simply, but 
those that have wished to become poor for righteousness' sake, that He pronounces blessed-those who 
have despised the honours of this world in order to attain "the good;" likewise also those who, through 
chastity, have become comely in person and character, and those who are of noble birth, and honourable, 
having through righteousness attained to adoption, and therefore "have received power to become the 
sons of God, "[3] and "to tread on serpents and scorpions," and to rule over demons and "the host of the 
adversary. "[4] And, in fine, the Lord's disciplines draws the soul away gladly from the body, even if it wrench 
itself away in its removal. "For he that loveth his life shall lose it, and he that loseth his life shall find it,"[4] if we 
only join that which is mortal of us with the immortality of God. It is the will of God[that we should attain] the 
knowledge of God, which is the communication of immortality. He therefore, who, in accordance with the 
word of repentance, knows his life to be sinful will lose it-losing it from sin, from which it is wrenched; but 
losing it, will find it, according to the obedience which lives again to faith, but dies to sin. This, then, is what it 
is "to find one's life," "to know one's self." 

The conversion, however, which leads to divine things, the Stoics say, is affected by a change, the soul 
being changed to wisdom. And Plato: "On the soul taking a turn to what is better, and a change from a kind 
of nocturnal day." Now the philosophers also allow the good man an exit from life in accordance with 
reason, in the case of one depriving him of active exertion, so that the hope of action is no longer left him. 
And the judge who compels us to deny Him whom we love, I regard as showing who is and who is not the 
friend of God. In that case there is not left ground for even examining what one prefers-the menaces of man 
or the love of God. And abstinence from vicious acts is found, somehow, [to result in] the diminution and 
extinction of vicious propensities, their energy being destroyed by inaction. And this is the import of "Sell 
what thou hast, and give to the poor, and come, follow Me"[1]-that is, follow what is said by the Lord. Some 

say that by what "thou hast" He designated the things in the soul, of a nature not al<in to it, though how these 
are bestowed on the poor they are not able to say. For God dispenses to all according to desert. His 
distribution being righteous. Despising, therefore, the possessions which God apportions to thee in thy 
magnificence, comply with what is spoken by me; haste to the ascent of the Spirit, being not only justified by 
abstinence from what is evil, but in addition also perfected, by Christlike beneficence. [2] In this instance He 
convicted the man, who boasted that he had fulfilled the injunctions of the law, of not loving his neighbour; 
and it is by beneficence that the love which, according to the gnostic ascending scale, is Lord of the 
Sabbath, proclaims itself.[3] We must then, according to my view, have recourse to the word of salvation 
neither from fear of punishment nor promise of a gift, but on account of the good itself. Such, as do so, stand 
on the right hand of the sanctuary; but those who think that by the gift of what is perishable they shall receive 
in exchange what belongs to immortality are in the parable of the two brothers called "hirelings." And is there 
not some light thrown here on the expression "in the likeness and image," in the fact that some live 
according to the likeness of Christ, while those who stand on the left hand live according to their image? 
There are then two things proceeding from the truth, one root lying beneath both,-the choice being, 
however, not equal, or rather the difference that is in the choice not being equal. To choose by way of 
imitation differs, as appears to me, from the choice of him who chooses according to knowledge, as that 
which is set on fire differs from that which is illuminated. Israel, then, is the light of the likeness which is 
according to the Scripture. But the image is another thing. What means the parable of Lazarus, by showing 
the image of the rich and poor? And what the saying, "No man can serve two masters, God and 
Mammon?"-the Lord so terming the love of money. For instance, the covetous, who were invited, 
responded not to the invitation to the supper, not because of their possessing property, but of their 
inordinate affection to what they possessed. "The foxes," then, have holes. He called those evil and earthly 
men who are occupied about the wealth which is mined and dug from the ground, foxes. Thus also, in 
reference to Herod: "Go, tell that fox. Behold, I cast out devils, and perform cures to-day and to-morrow, and 
the third day I shall be perfected. "[4] For He applied the name "fowls of the air" to those who were distinct 
from the other birds-those really pure, those that have the power of flying to the knowledge of the heavenly 
Word. For not riches only, but also honour, and marriage, and poverty, have ten thousand cares for him who 
is unfit for them. [5] And those cares He indicated in the parable of the fourfold seed, when He said that "the 
seed of the word which fell unto the thorns" and hedges was choked by them, and could not bring forth fruit. It 
is therefore necessary to learn how to make use of every occurrence, so as by a good life, according to 
knowledge, to be trained for the state of eternal life. For it said, "I saw the wicked exalted and towering as the 
cedars of Lebanon; and I passed," says the Scripture, "and, lo, he was not; and I sought him, and his place 
was not found. Keep innocence, and look on uprightness: for there is a remnant to the man of peace. "[6] 
Such will he be who believes unfeignedly with his whole heart, and is tranquil in his whole soul. "For the 
different people honour me with their lips, but their heart is far from the Lord. "[7] "They bless with their mouth, 
but they curse in their heart."[1] "They loved Him with their mouth, and lied to Him with their tongue; but their 
heart was not right with Him, and they were not faithful to His covenant." Wherefore "let the false lips become 
speechless, and let the Lord destroy the boastful tongue: those who say. We shall magnify our tongue, and 
our lips are our own; who is Lord over us? For the affliction of the poor and the groaning of the needy now will 
I arise, saith the Lord; I will set him in safety; I will speak out in his case. "[2] For it is to the humble that Christ 
belongs, who do not exalt themselves against His flock. "Lay not up for yourselves, therefore, treasures on 
the earth, where moth and rust destroy, and thieves break through and steal, "[3] says the Lord, in reproach 
perchance of the covetous, and perchance also of those who are simply anxious and full of cares, and 
those too who indulge their bodies. For amours, and diseases, and evil thoughts "break through" the mind 
and the whole man. But our true "treasure" is where what is allied to our mind is, since it bestows the 
communicative power of righteousness, showing that we must assign to the habit of our old conversation 
what we have acquired by it, and have recourse to God, beseeching mercy. He is, in truth, "the bag that 
waxeth not old," the provisions of eternal life, "the treasure that faileth not in heaven. "[4] "For I will have 
mercy on whom I will have mercy, "[5] saith the Lord. And they say those things to those who wish to be poor 
for righteousness' sake. For they have heard in the commandment that "the broad and wide way leadeth to 
destruction, and many there are who go in by it."[6] It is not of anything else that the assertion is made, but of 
profligacy, and love of women, and love of glory, and ambition, and similar passions. For so He says, 
"Fool, this night shall thy soul be required of thee; and whose shall those things be which thou hast 
prepared?"[7] And the commandment is expressed in these very words, "Take heed, therefore, of 
covetousness. For a man's life does not consist in the abundance of those things which he possesses. For 
what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in 
exchange for his soul?"[8] "Wherefore I say. Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat; neither for your 
body, what ye shall put on. For your life is more than meat, and your body than raiment. "[9] And again, "For 
your Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things." "But seek first the kingdom of heaven, and its 
righteousness," for these are the great things, and the things which are small and appertain to this life "shall 

be added to you."[1 0] Does He not plainly then exhort us to follow the gnostic life, and enjoin us to seek the 
truth in word and deed? Therefore Christ, who trains the soul, reckons one rich, not by his gifts, but by his 
choice. It is said, therefore, that Zaccheus, or, according to some, Matthew, the chief of the publicans, on 
hearing that the Lord had deigned to come to him, said, "Lord, and if I have taken anything by false 
accusation, I restore him fourfold;" on which the Saviour said, "The Son of man, on coming to-day, has found 
that which was lost."[1 1] Again, on seeing the rich cast into the treasury according to their wealth, and the 
widow two mites. He said "that the widow had cast in more than they all," for "they had contributed of their 
abundance, but she of her destitution." And because He brought all things to bear on the discipline of the 
soul. He said, "Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. "[12] And the meek are those who have 
quelled the battle of unbelief in the soul, the battle of wrath, and lust, and the other forms that are subject to 
them. And He praises those meek by choice, not by necessity. For there are with the Lord both rewards 
and" many mansions," corresponding to men's lives. "Whosoever shall receive," says He, "a prophet in the 
name of a prophet, shall receive a prophet's reward; and whosoever shall receive a righteous man in the 
name of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward; and whoso shall receive one of the least 
of these my disciples, shall not lose his reward. "[13] And again, the differences of virtue according to merit, 
and the noble rewards. He indicated by the hours unequal in number; and in addition, by the equal reward 
given to each of the labourers-that is, salvation, which is meant by the penny-He indicated the equality of 
justice; and the difference of those called He intimated, by those who worked for unequal portions of time. 
They shall work, therefore, in accordance with the appropriate mansions of which they have been deemed 
worthy as rewards, being fellow-workers in the ineffable administration and service. [14] "Those, then," says 
Plato, "who seem called to a holy life, are those who, freed and released from those earthly localities as 
from prisons, have reached the pure dwelling-place on high." In clearer terms again he expresses the same 
thing: "Those who by philosophy have been sufficiently purged from those things, live without bodies 
entirely for all time. Although they are enveloped in certain shapes; in the case of some, of air, and others, of 
fire." He adds further: "And they reach abodes fairer than those, which it is not easy, nor is there sufficient 
time now to describe." Whence with reason, "blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted ;"[1] for 
they who have repented of their former evil life shall attain to "the calling" (<greek>klhsin</greek>), for this is 
the meaning of being comforted (<greek>paraklhqhnai</greek>). And there are two styles of penitents. [2] 
That which is more common is fear on account of what is done; but the other which is more special, the 
shame which the spirit feels in itself arising from conscience. Whether then, here or elsewhere (for no place 
is devoid of the beneficence of God), He again says, "Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy." 
And mercy is not, as some of the philosophers have imagined, pain on account of others' calamities, but 
rather something good, as the prophets say. For it is said, "I will have mercy, and not sacrifice. "[3] And He[4] 
means by the merciful, not only those who do acts of mercy, but those who wish to do them, though they be 
not able; who do as far as purpose is concerned. For sometimes we wish by the gift of money or by 
personal effort to do mercy, as to assist one in want, or help one who is sick, or stand by one who is in any 
emergency; and are not able either from poverty, or disease, or old age (for this also is natural disease), to 
carry out our purpose, in reference to the things to which we are impelled, being unable to conduct them to 
the end we wished. Those, who have entertained the wish whose purpose is equal, share in the same 
honour with those who have the ability, although others have the advantage in point of resources. [5] And 
since there are two paths of reaching the perfection of salvation, works and knowledge. He called the "pure 
in heart blessed, for they shall see God. "[6] And if we really look to the truth of the matter, knowledge is the 
purification of the leading faculty of the soul, and is a good activity. Some things accordingly are good in 
themselves, and others by participation in what is good, as we say good actions are good. But without 
things intermediate which hold the place of material, neither good nor bad actions are constituted, such I 
mean as life, and health, and other necessary things or circumstantials. Pure then as respects corporeal 
lusts, and pure in respect of holy thoughts, he means those are, who attain to the knowledge of God, when 
the chief faculty of the soul has nothing spurious to stand in the way of its power. When, therefore, he who 
partakes gnostically of this holy quality devotes himself to contemplation, communing in purity with the 
divine, he enters more nearly into the state of impassible identity, so as no longer to have science and 
possess knowledge, but to be science and knowledge. 

"Blessed, then, are the peacemakers, "[7] who have subdued and tamed the law which wars against the 
disposition of the mind, the menaces of anger, and the baits of lust, and the other passions which war 
against the reason; who, having lived in the knowledge both of good works and true reason, shall be 
reinstated in adoption. Which is dearer. It follows that the perfect peacemaking is that which keeps 
unchanged in all circumstances what is peaceful; calls Providence holy and good; and has its being in the 
knowledge of divine and human affairs, by which it deems the opposites that are in the world to be the fairest 
harmony of creation. They also are peacemakers, who teach those who war against the stratagems of sin 
to have recourse to faith and peace. And it is the sum of all virtue, in my opinion, when the Lord teaches us 
that for love to God we must gnostically despise death. "Blessed are they," says He, "who are persecuted 

for righteousness' sake, for they shall be called the sons of God;"[8] or, as some of those who transpose the 
Gospels[9] say, "Blessed are they who are persecuted by righteousness, for they shall be perfect." And, 
"Blessed are they who are persecuted for my sake; for they shall have a place where they shall not be 
persecuted." And, "Blessed are ye when men shall hate you, when they shall separate you, when they shall 
cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man's sake;"[1 0] if we do not detest our persecutors, and undergo 
punishments at their hands, not hating them under the idea that we have been put to trial more tardily than we 
looked for; but knowing this also, that every instance of trial is an occasion for testifying. 

CHAP. VII. -THE BLESSEDNESS OF THE MARTYR. 

Then he who has lied and shown himself unfaithful, and revolted to the devil's army, in what evil do we think 
him to be? He belies, therefore, the Lord, or rather he is cheated of his own hope who believes not God; and 
he believes not who does not what He has commanded. 

And what? Does not he, who denies the Lord, deny himself? For does he not rob his Master of His authority, 
who deprives himself of his relation to Him? He, then, who denies the Saviour, denies life; for "the light was 
life."[1] He does not term those men of little faith, but faithless and hypocrites, [2] who have the name 
inscribed on them, but deny that they are really believers. But the faithful is called both servant and friend. 
So that if one loves himself, he loves the Lord, and confesses to salvation that he may save his soul. 
Though you die for your neighbour out of love, and regard the Saviour as our neighbour (for God who saves 
is said to be nigh in respect to what is saved); you do so, choosing death on account of life, and suffering for 
your own sake rather than his. And is it not for this that he is called brother? he who, suffering out of love to 
God, suffered for his own salvation; while he, on the other hand, who dies for his own salvation, endures for 
love to the Lord. For he being life, in what he suffered wished to suffer that we might live by his suffering. 
"Why call ye me Lord, Lord," He says, "and do not the things which I say?"[3] For "the people that loveth with 
their lips, but have their heart far away from the Lord, "[4] is another people, and trust in another, and have 
willingly sold themselves to another; but those who perform the commandments of the Lord, in every action 
"testify," by doing what He wishes, and consistently naming the Lord's name; and "testifying" by deed to 
Him in whom they trust, that they are those "who have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts." "If we 
live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit." s "He that soweth to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; 
but he that soweth to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting. "[6] 

But to those miserable men, witness to the Lord by blood seems a most violent death, not knowing that such 
a gate of death is the beginning of the true life; and they will understand neither the honours after death, 
which belong to those who have lived holily, nor the punishments of those who have lived unrighteously and 
impurely? I do not say only from our Scriptures (for almost all the commandments indicate them); but they 
will not even hear their own discourses. For the Pythagorean Theano writes, "Life were indeed a feast to the 
wicked, who, having done evil, then die; were not the soul immortal, death would be a godsend." And Plato 
in the Phaedo, "For if death were release from everything," and so forth. We are not then to think according 
to the Telephus of Aeschylus, "that a single path leads to Hades." The ways are many, and the sins that 
lead thither. Such deeply erring ones as the unfaithful are, Aristophanes properly makes the subjects of 
comedy. "Come," he says, "ye men of obscure life, ye that are like the race of leaves, feeble, wax figures, 
shadowy tribes, evanescent, fleeting, ephemeral." And Epicharmus, "This nature of men is inflated skins." 
And the Saviour has said to us, "The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak."[8] "Because the carnal mind is 
enmity against God," explains the apostle: "for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed, can be. And 
they that are in the flesh cannot please God." And in further explanation continues, that no one may, like 
Marcion[9] regard the creature as evil. "But if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin; but the Spirit 
is life because of righteousness." And again: "For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die. For I reckon that the 
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared to the glory which shall be revealed in us. If we 
suffer with Him, that we also may be glorified together as joint-heirs of Christ. And we know that all things 
work together for good to them that love God, to them that are called according to the purpose. For whom 
He did foreknow. He also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of His Son, that He might be the 
first-born among many brethren. And whom He did predestinate, them He also called; and whom He called, 
them He also justified; and whom He justified, them He also glorified. "[10] 

You see that martyrdom for love's sake is taught. And should you wish to be a martyr for the recompense of 
advantages, you shall hear again. "For we are saved by hope: but hope that is seen is not hope: for what a 
man seeth, why doth he yet hope for? But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for 
it."[1 1] "But if we also suffer for righteousness' sake," says Peter, "blessed are we. Be not afraid of their fear, 
neither be troubled. But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts: and be ready always to give an answer to him 
that asks a reason of the hope that is in you, but with meekness and fear, having a good conscience; so that 
in reference to that for which you are spoken against, they may be ashamed who calumniate your good 
conversation in Christ. For it is better to suffer for well-doing, if the will of God, than for evil-doing." But if one 

should captiously say, And how is it possible for feeble flesh to resist the energies and spirits of the 
Powers?[1] well, let him know this, that, confiding in the Almighty and the Lord, we war against the 
principalities of darkness, and against death. "Whilst thou art yet speaking," He says, "Lo, here am I." See 
the invincible Helper who shields us. "Think it not strange, therefore, concerning the burning sent for your 
trial, as though some strange thing happened to you; But, as you are partaken in the sufferings of Christ, 
rejoice; that at the revelation of His glory ye may rejoice exultant. If ye be reproached in the name of Christ, 
happy are ye; for the Spirit of glory and of God resteth on you. "[2] As it is written, "Because for Thy sake we 
are killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter. Nay, in all these things we are more 
than conquerors, through Him that loved us. "[3] 

"What you wish to ascertain from my mind. 

You shall not ascertain, not were you to apply 

Horrid saws from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet. 

Not were you to load me with chains," 

says a woman acting manfully in the tragedy. And Antigone, contemning the proclamation of Creon, says 
boldly:- 

"It was not Zeus who uttered this proclamation." 

But it is God that makes proclamation to us, and He must be believed. "For with the heart man believeth unto 
righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. Wherefore the Scripture saith, 
"Whosoever believeth on Him shah not be put to shame. "[4] Accordingly Simonides justly writes, "It is said 
that virtue dwells among all but inaccessible rocks, but that she speedily traverses a pure place. Nor is she 
visible to the eyes of all mortals. He who is not penetrated by heart-vexing sweat will not scale the summit of 
manliness." And Pindar says:- 

"But the anxious thoughts of youths, revolving with toils. 
Will find glory: and in time their deeds 
Will in resplendent ether splendid shine." 

AEschylus, too, having grasped this thought, says:- 

"To him who toils is due. 

As product of his toil, glory from the gods." 

"For great Fates attain great destinies," according to Heraclitus:- 

"And what slave is there, who is careless of death?" 

"For God hath not given us the spirit of bondage again to fear; but of power, and love, and of a sound mind. 
Be not therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, or of me his prisoner," he writes to Timothy. [5] Such 
shall he be "who cleaves to that which is good," according to the apostle, [6] "who hates evil, having love 
unfeigned; for he that loveth another fulfilleth the law. "[7] If, then, this God, to whom we bear witness, be as He 
is, the God of hope, we acknowledge our hope, speeding on to hope, "saturated with goodness, filled with 
all knowledge."[8] 

The Indian sages say to Alexander of Macedon: "You transport men's bodies from place to place. But you 
shall not force our souls to do what we do not wish. Fire is to men the greatest torture, this we despise." 
Hence Heraclitus preferred one thing, glory, to all else; and professes "that he allows the crowd to stuff 
themselves to satiety like cattle." 

"For on account of the body are many toils. 

For it we have invented a roofed house. 

And discovered how to dig up silver, and sow the land. 

And all the rest which we know by names." 

To the multitude, then, this vain labour is desirable. But to us the apostle says, "Now we know this, that our 
old man is crucified with Him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve 
sin. "[9] Does not the apostle then plainly add the following, to show the contempt for faith in the case of the 
multitude? "For I think that God hath set forth us the apostles last, as appointed to death: we are made a 

spectacle to the world, and to angels, and to men. Up to this present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are 
naked, and are beaten, and are feeble, and labour, working with our hands. Being reviled, we bless; being 
persecuted, we endure; being defamed, we entreat; we are become as it were the offscourings of the 
world. "[10] Such also are the words of Plato in the Republic:[11] "The just man, though stretched on the rack, 
though his eyes are dug out, will be happy." The Gnostic will never then have the chief end placed in life, but 
in being always happy and blessed, and a kingly friend of God. Although visited with ignominy and exile, 
and confiscation, and above all, death, he will never be wrenched from his freedom, and signal love to God. 
"The charity which bears all things, endures all things, "[12] is assured that Divine Providence orders all 
things well. "I exhort you," therefore it is said, "Be followers of me." The first step to salvation[13] is the 
instruction accompanied with fear, in consequence of which we abstain from what is wrong; and the second 
is hope, by reason of which we desire the best things; but love, as is fitting, perfects, by training now 
according to knowledge. For the Greeks, I know not how, attributing events to unreasoning necessity, own 
that they yield to them unwillingly. Accordingly Euripides says:- 

"What I declare, receive from me, madam: 

No mortal exists who has not toil; 

He buries children, and begets others. 

And he himself dies. And thus mortals are afflicted." 

Then he adds: - 

"We must bear those things which are inevitable according to nature, and go through them: 
Not one of the things which are necessary is formidable for mortals." 

And for those who are aiming at perfection there is proposed the rational gnosis, the foundation of which is 
"the sacred Triad." "Faith, hope, love; but the greatest of these is love."[1] Truly, "all things are lawful, but all 
things are not expedient," says the apostle: "all things are lawful for me, but all things edify not."[2] And, "Let 
no one seek his own advantage, but also that of his neighbour,"[3] so as to be able at once to do and to 
teach, building and building up. For that "the earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof," is admitted; but the 
conscience of the weak is supported. "Conscience, I say, not his own, but that of the other; for why is my 
liberty judged of by another conscience? For if I by grace am partaker, why am I evil spoken of I for that for 
which I give thanks? Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. "[4] 
"For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh; for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, 
but mighty through God to the demolition of fortifications, demolishing thoughts, and every high thing which 
exalteth itself against the knowledge of Christ. "[5] Equipped with these weapons, the Gnostic says: O Lord, 
give opportunity, and receive demonstration; let this dread event pass; I contemn dangers for the love I 
bear to Thee. 

"Because alone of human things 

Virtue receives not a recompense from without. 

But has itself as the reward of its toils." 

"Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness, 
meekness, long-suffering. And above all these, love, which is the bond of perfection. And let the peace of 
God reign in your hearts, to which also ye are called in one body; and be thankful, "[6] ye who, while still in 
the body, like the just men of old, enjoy impassibility and tranquillity of soul. 

CHAP. VIII. --WOMEN AS WELL AS MEN, SLAVES AS WELL AS FREEMEN, CANDIDATES 
FOR THE MARTYR'S CROWN. 

Since, then, not only the Aesopians, and Macedonians, and the Lacedaemonians endured when subjected 
to torture, as Eratosthenes says in his work. On Things Good and Evil; but also Zeno of Elea, when 
subjected to compulsion to divulge a secret, held out against the tortures, and confessed nothing; who, 
when expiring, bit out his tongue and spat it at the tyrant, whom some term Nearchus, and some Demulus. 
Theodotus the Pythagorean acted also similarly, and Paulus the friend of Lacydes, as Timotheus of 
Pergamus says in his work on The Fortitude of Philosophers, and Achaicus in The Ethics. Posthumus also, 
the Roman, when captured by Peucetion, did not divulge a single secret; but putting his hand on the fire, 
held it to it as if to a piece of brass, without moving a muscle of his face. I omit the case of Anaxarchus, who 
exclaimed, "Pound away at the sack which holds Anaxarchus, for it is not Anaxarchus you are pounding," 
when by the tyrant's orders he was being pounded with iron pestles. Neither, then, the hope of happiness 

nor the love of God takes what befalls III, but remains free, although thrown among the wildest beasts or into 
the all-devouring fire; though racked with a tyrant's tortures. Depending as it does on the divine favour, it 
ascends aloft unenslaved, surrendering the body to those who can touch it alone. A barbarous nation, not 
cumbered with philosophy, select, it is said, annually an ambassador to the hero Zamolxis. Zamolxis was 
one of the disciples of Pythagoras. The one, then, who is judged of the most sterling worth is put to death, to 
the distress of those who have practised philosophy, but have not been selected, at being reckoned 
unworthy of a happy service. 

So the Church is full of those, as well chaste women as men, who all their life have contemplated the death 
which rouses up to Christ? For the individual whose life is framed as ours is, may philosophize without 
Learning, whether barbarian, whether Greek, whether slave-whether an old man, or a boy, or a woman. [8] 
For self-control is common to all human beings who have made choice of it. And we admit that the same 
nature exists in every race, and the same virtue. As far as respects human nature, the woman does not 
possess one nature, and the man exhibit another, but the same: so also with virtue. If, consequently, a 
self-restraint and righteousness, and whatever qualities are regarded as following them, is the virtue of the 
male, it belongs to the male alone to be virtuous, and to the woman to be licentious and unjust. But it is 
offensive even to say this. Accordingly woman is to practise self-restraint and righteousness, and every 
other virtue, as well as man, both bond and free; since it is a fit consequence that the same nature 
possesses one and the same virtue. [1] We do not say that woman's nature is the same as man's, as she is 
woman. For undoubtedly it stands to reason that some difference should exist between each of them, in 
virtue of which one is male and the other female. Pregnancy and parturition, accordingly, we say belong to 
woman, as she is woman, and not as she is a human being. But if there were no difference between man 
and woman, both would do and suffer the same things. As then there is sameness, as far as respects the 
soul, she will attain to the same virtue; but as there is difference as respects the peculiar construction of the 
body, she is destined for child-bearing and housekeeping. "For I would have you know," says the apostle, 
"that the head of every man is Christ; and the head of the woman is the man: for the man is not of the woman, 
but the woman of the man. I For neither is the woman without the man, nor the man without the woman, in the 
Lord. "[2] For as we say that the man ought to be conti-nent, and superior to pleasures; so also we reckon 
that the woman should be continent and practised in fighting against pleasures. "But I say. Walk in the Spirit, 
and ye shall not fulfil the lusts of the flesh," counsels the apostolic command; "for the flesh lusteth against the 
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh. These, then, are contrary" (not as good to evil, but as fighting 
advantageously), he adds therefore, so that ye cannot do the things that ye would. Now the works of the 
flesh are manifest, which are, fornication uncleanness, profligacy, idolatry, witchcrafts, enmities, strifes, 
jealousies, wrath, contentions, dissensions, heresies, envyings, drunkenness, revellings, and such like; of 
which I tell you before, as I have also said before, that they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom 
of God. But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, temperance, goodness, faith, 
meekness. "[3] He calls sinners, as I think, "flesh," and the righteous "spirit." Further, manliness is to be 
assumed in order to produce confidence and forbearance, so as "to him that strikes on the one cheek, to 
give to him the other; and to him that takes away the cloak, to yield to him the coat also," strongly, restraining 
anger. For we do not train our women like Amazons to manliness in war; since we wish the men even to be 
peaceable. I hear that the Sarmatian women practise war no less than the men; and the women of the 
Sacae besides, who shoot backwards, feigning flight as well as the men. I am aware, too, that the women 
near Iberia practise manly work and toil, not refraining from their tasks even though near their delivery; but 
even in the very struggle of her pains, the woman, on being delivered, taking up the infant, carries it home. 
Further, the females no less than the males manage the house, and hunt, and keep the flocks:- 

"Cressa the hound ran keenly in the stag's track." 

Women are therefore to philosophize equally with men, though the males are preferable at everything, 
unless they have become effeminate[4] To the whole human race, then, discipline and virtue are a 
necessity, if they would pursue after happiness. And how recklessly Euripides writes sometimes this and 
sometimes that! On one occasion, "For every wife is inferior to her husband, though the most excellent one 
marry her that is of fair fame." And on another:- 

"Forthe chaste is her husband's slave. 

While she that is unchaste in her folly despises her consort. 

For nothing is better and more excellent. 

Than when as husband and wife ye keep house. 

Harmonious in your sentiments." 

The ruling power is therefore the head. And if "the Lord is head of the man, and the man is head of the 

woman," the man, "being the image and glory of God, is lord of the woman. "[5] Wherefore also in the Epistle 
to the Ephesians it is written, "Subjecting ), ourselves one to another in the fear of God. Wives, submit 
yourselves to your own husbands, as to the Lord. For the husband is head of the wife, as also Christ is the 
head of the Church; and He is the Saviour of the body. Husbands, love your wives, as also Christ loved the 
Church. So also ought men to love their wives as their own bodies: he that loveth his wife loveth himself. For 
no man ever yet hated his own flesh. "[6] And in that to the Colossians it is said, "Wives, submit yourselves to 
your own husbands, as is fit in the Lord. [7] Husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter against them. 
Children, obey your parents in all things; for this is well pleasing to the Lord. Fathers, provoke not your 
children to anger, lest they be discouraged. Servants, be obedient in all things to those who are your 
masters according to the flesh; not with eye-service, as men-pleasers; but with singleness of heart, fearing 
the Lord. And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as serving the Lord and not men; knowing that of the Lord ye 
shall receive the reward of the inheritance: for ye serve the Lord Christ. For the wrongdoer shall receive the 
Wrong, which he hath done; and there is no respect of persons. Masters, render to your servants justice and 
equity; knowing that ye also have a Master in heaven, where there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision 
and uncircumcision, barbarian, Scythian, bond, free: but Christ is all, and in all."[1] And the earthly Church is 
the image of the heavenly, as we pray also "that the will of God may be done upon the earth as in 
heaven. "[2] "Putting on, therefore, bowels of mercy, gentleness, humbleness, meekness, long-suffering; 
forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if one have a quarrel against any man; as also Christ 
hath forgiven us, so also let us. And above all these things put on charity, which is the bond of perfectness. 
And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to which ye are called in one body; and be thankful. "[3] For 
there is no obstacle to adducing frequently the same Scripture in order to put Marcion[4] to the blush, if 
perchance he be persuaded and converted; by learning that the faithful ought to be grateful to God the 
Creator, who hath called us, and who preached the Gospel in the body. From these considerations the unity 
of the faith is clear, and it is shown who is the perfect man; so that though some are reluctant, and offer as 
much resistance as they can, though menaced with punishments at the hand of husband or master, both the 
domestic and the wife will philosophize. Moreover, the free, though threatened with death at a tyrant's hands, 
and brought before the tribunals, and all his substances imperilled, will by no means abandon piety; nor will 
the wife who dwells with a wicked husband, or the son if he has a bad father, or the domestic if he has a bad 
master, ever fail in holding nobly to virtue. But as it is noble for a man to die for virtue, and for liberty, and for 
himself, so also is itfor a woman. For this is not peculiar to the nature of males, but to the nature of the good. 
Accordingly, both the old man, the young, and the servant will live faithfully, and if need be die; which will be 
to be made alive by death. So we know that both children, and women, and servants have often, against 
their fathers', and masters', and husbands' will, reached the highest degree of excellence. Wherefore those 
who are determined to live piously ought none the less to exhibit alacrity, when some seem to exercise 
compulsion on them; but much more, I think, does it become them to show eagerness, and to strive with 
uncommon vigour, lest, being overcome, they abandon the best and most indispensable counsels. For it 
does not, I think, admit of comparison, whether it be better to be a follower of the Almighty than to choose the 
darkness of demons. For the things which are done by us on account of others we are to do always, 
endeavouring to have respect to those for whose sake it is proper that they be done, regarding the 
gratification rendered in their case, as what is to be our rule; but the things which are done for our own sake 
rather than that of others, are to be done with equal earnestness, whether they are like to please certain 
people or not. If some indifferent things have obtained such honour as to appear worthy of adoption, though 
against the will of some; much more is virtue to be regarded by us as worth contending for, looking the while 
to nothing but what can be rightly done, whether it seem good to others or not. Well then, Epicurus, writing to 
Menoeceus, says, "Let not him who is young delay philosophizing, and let not the old man grow weary of 
philosophizing; for no one is either not of age or past age for attending to the health of his soul. And he who 
says that the time for philosophizing is not come or is past, is like the man who says that the time for 
happiness is not come or has gone. So that young s as well as old ought to philosophize: the one, in order 
that, while growing old, he may grow young in good things out of favour accruing from what is past; and the 
other, that he may be at once young and old, from want of fear for the future." 

CHAP. IX. -CHRIST'S SAYINGS RESPECTING MARTYRDOM. 

On martyrdom the Lord hath spoken explicitly, and what is written in different places we bring together. "But I 
say unto you. Whosoever shall confess in Me before men, the Son of man also shall confess before the 
angels of God; but whosoever shall deny Me before men, him will I deny before the angels. "[6] "Whosoever 
shall be ashamed of Me or of My words in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him shall the Son of man 
also be ashamed when He cometh in the glory of His Father with His angels. Whosoever therefore shall 
confess in Me before men, him will I also confess before my Father in heaven. [1] "And when they bring you 
before synagogues, and rulers, and powers, think not: beforehand how ye shall make your defence, or what 

ye shall say. For the Holy Spirit shall teach you in the same hour what ye must say. "[2] In explanation of this 
passage, Heracleon, the most distinguished of the school of Valentinians, says expressly, "that there is a 
confession by faith and conduct, and one with the voice. The confession that is made with the voice, and 
before the authorities, is what the most reckon the only confession. Not soundly: and hypocrites also can 
confess with this confession. But neither will this utterance be found to be spoken universally; for all the 
saved have confessed with the confession made by the voice, and departed. [3] Of whom are Matthew, 
Philip, Thomas, Levi, and many others. And confession by the lip is not universal, but partial. But that which 
He specifies now is universal, that which is by deeds and actions corresponding to faith in Him. This 
confession is followed by that which is partial, that before the authorities, if necessary, and reason dictate. 
For he will confess rightly with his voice who has first confessed by his disposition. [3] And he has well used, 
with regard to those who confess, the expression 'in Me,' and applied to those who deny the expression 
'Me.' For those, though they confess Him with the voice, yet deny Him, not confessing Him in their conduct. 
But those alone confess 'in Him,' who live in the confession and conduct according to Him, in which He also 
confesses, who is contained in them and held by them. Wherefore 'He never can deny Himself.' And those 
deny Him who are not in Him. For He said not, 'Whosoever shall deny' in Me, but 'Me.' For no one who is in 
Him will ever deny Him. And the expression 'before men ' applies both to the saved and the heathen 
similarly by conduct before the one, and by voice before the other. Wherefore they never can deny Him. But 
those deny Him who are not in Him." So far Heracleon. And in other things he seems to be of the same 
sentiments with us in this section; but he has not adverted to this, that if some have not by conduct and in 
their life "confessed Christ before men," they are manifested to have believed with the heart; by confessing 
Him with the mouth at the tribunals, and not denying Him when tortured to the death. And the disposition 
being confessed, and especially not being changed by death at any time, cuts away all passions which 
were engendered by corporeal desire. For there is, so to speak, at the close of life a sudden repentance in 
action, and a true confession toward Christ, in the testimony of the voice. But if the Spirit of the Father testifies 
in us, how can we be any more hypocrites, who are said to bear testimony with the voice alone? But it will be 
given to some, if expedient, to make a defence, that by their witness and confession all may be 
benefited-those in the Church being confirmed, and those of the heathen who have devoted themselves to 
the search after salvation wondering and being led to the faith; and the rest seized with amazement. So that 
confession is by all means necessary. [4] For it is in our power. But to make a defence for our faith is not 
universally necessary. For that does not depend on us. "But he that endureth to the end shall be saved." For 
who of those who are wise would not choose to reign in God, and even to serve? So some "confess that 
they know God," according to the apostle; "but in works they deny Him, being abominable and disobedient, 
and to every good work reprobate. "[5] And these, though they confess nothing but this, will have done at the 
end one good work. Their witness, then, appears to be the cleansing away of sins with glory. For instance, 
the Shepherd[6] says: "You will escape the energy of the wild beast, if your heart become pure and 
blameless." Also the Lord Himself says: "Satan hath desired to sift you; but I have prayed. "[7] Alone, 
therefore, the Lord, for the purification of the men who plotted against Him and disbelieved Him, "drank the 
cup;" in imitation of whom the apostles, that they might be in reality Gnostics, and perfect, suffered for the 
Churches which they founded. So, then, also the Gnostics who tread in the footsteps of the apostles ought to 
be sinless, and, out of love to the Lord, to love also their brother; so that, if occasion call, enduring without 
stumbling, afflictions for the Church, "they may drink the cup." Those who witness in their life by deed, and at 
the tribunal by word, whether entertaining hope or surmising fear, are better than those who confess 
salvation by their mouth alone. But if one ascend also to love, he is a really blessed and true martyr, having 
confessed perfectly both to the commandments and to God, by the Lord; whom having loved, he 
acknowledged a brother, giving himself up wholly for God, resigning pleasantly and lovingly the man when 
asked, like a deposit. [8] 

CHAP. X. -THOSE WHO OFFERED THEMSELVES FOR MARTYRDOM REPROVED. 

When, again. He says, "When they persecute you in this city, flee ye to the other,"[1] He does not advise 
flight, as if persecution were an evil thing; nor does He enjoin them by flight to avoid death, as if in dread of it, 
but wishes us neither to be the authors nor abettors of any evil to any one, either to ourselves or the 
persecutor and murderer. For He, in a way, bids us take care of ourselves. But he who disobeys is rash and 
foolhardy. If he who kills a man of God sins against God, he also who presents himself before the 
judgment-seat becomes guilty of his death. And such is also the case with him who does not avoid 
persecution, but out of daring presents himself for capture. Such a one, as far as in him lies, becomes an 
accomplice in the crime of the persecutor. And if he also uses provocation, he is wholly guilty, challenging 
the wild beast. And similarly, if he afford any cause for conflict or punishment, or retribution or enmity, he 
gives occasion for persecution. Wherefore, then, we are enjoined not to cling to anything that belongs to this 
life; but "to him that takes our cloak to give our coat," not only that we may continue destitute of inordinate 

affection, but that we may not by retaliating mal<e our persecutors savage against ourselves, and stir them 
up to blaspheme the name. [2] 

CHAP.XI.-THE OBJECTION, WHY DO YOU SUFFER IF GOD CARES FOR YOU, 
ANSWERED. 

But, say they, if God cares for you, why are you persecuted and put to death? Has He delivered you to this? 
No, we do not suppose that the Lord wishes us to be involved in calamities, but that He foretold 
prophetically what would happen-that we should be persecuted for His name's sake, slaughtered, and 
impaled. So that it was not that He wished us to be persecuted, but He intimated beforehand what we shall 
suffer by the prediction of what would take place, training us to endurance, to which He promised the 
inheritance, although we are punished not alone, but along with many. But those, it is said, being 
malefactors, are righteously punished. Accordingly, they unwillingly bear testimony to our righteousness, we 
being unjustly punished for righteousness' sake. But the injustice of the judge does not affect the providence 
of God. For the judge must be master of his own opinion-not pulled by strings, like inanimate machines, set 
in motion only by external causes. Accordingly he is judged in respect to his judgment, as we also, in 
accordance with our choice of things desirable, and our endurance. Although we do not wrong, yet the judge 
looks on us as doing wrong, for he neither knows nor wishes to know about us, but is influenced by 
unwarranted prejudice; wherefore also he is judged. [3] Accordingly they persecute us, not from the 
supposition that we are wrong-doers, but imagining that by the very fact of our being Christians we sin 
against life in so conducting ourselves, and exhorting others to adopt the like life. 
But why are you not helped when persecuted? say they. What wrong is done us, as far as we are 
concerned, in being released by death to go to the Lord, and so undergoing a change of life, as if a change 
from one time of life to another? Did we think rightly, we should feel obliged to those who have afforded the 
means for speedy departure, if it is for love that we bear witness; and if not, we should appear to the 
multitude to be base men. Had they also known the truth, all would have bounded on to the way, and there 
would have been no choice. But our faith, being the light of the world, reproves unbelief. "Should Anytus and 
Melitus kill me, they will not hurt me in the least; for I do not think it right for the better to be hurt by the worse," 
[says Socrates]. So that each one of us may with confidence say, "The Lord is my helper; I will not fear: what 
shall man do to me?"[4] "For the souls of the righteous are in the hand of the Lord, and no plague shall touch 
them."[5] 

CHAP. XII.-BASILIDES' IDEA OF MARTYRDOM REFUTED. 

Basilides, in the twenty-third book of the Exegetics, respecting those that are punished by martyrdom, 
expresses himself in the following language: "For I say this. Whosoever fall under the afflictions mentioned, 
in consequence of unconsciously transgressing in other matters, are brought to this good end by the 
kindness of Him who brings them, but accused on other grounds; so that they may not suffer as condemned 
for what are owned to be iniquities, nor reproached as the adulterer or the murderer, but because they are 
Christians; which will console them, so that they do not appear to suffer. And if one who has not sinned at all 
incur suffering-a rare case-yet even he will not suffer aught through the machinations of power, but will suffer 
as the child which seems not to have sinned would suffer." Then further on he adds: "As, then, the child which 
has not sinned before, or committed actual sin in itself, but has that which committed sin, when subjected to 
suffering, gets good, reaping the advantage of many difficulties; so also, although a perfect man may not 
have sinned in act, while he endures afflictions, he suffers similarly with the child. Having within him the sinful 
principle, but not embracing the opportunity of committing sin, he does not sin; so that he is not to be 
reckoned as not having sinned. For as he who wishes to commit adultery is an adulterer, although he does 
not succeed in committing adultery; and he that wishes to commit murder is a murderer, although he is 
unable to kill; so also, if I see the man without sin, whom I specify, suffering, though he have done nothing 
bad, I should call him bad, on account of his wishing to sin. For I will affirm anything rather than call 
Providence evil." Then, in continuation, he says expressly concerning the Lord, as concerning man: "If then, 
passing from all these observations, you were to proceed to put me to shame by saying, perchance 
impersonating certain parties. This man has then sinned; for this man has suffered ;-if you permit, I will say. 
He has not sinned; but was like a child suffering. If you were to insist more urgently, I would say. That the 
man you name is man, but that God is righteous: ' For no one is pure,' as one said, ' from pollution.' "[1] But 
the hypothesis of Basilides[2] says that the soul, having sinned before in another life, endures punishment in 
this-the elect soul with honour by marfyrdom, the other purged by appropriate punishment. How can this be 
true, when the confessing and suffering punishment or not depends on ourselves? For in the case of the 
man who shall deny. Providence, as held by Basilides, is done away with. I will ask him, then, in the case of 
a confessor who has been arrested, whether he will confess and be punished in virtue of Providence or not? 

For in the case of denying lie will not be punished. But if, for the sake of escaping and evading the necessity 
of punishing such an one, he shall say that the destruction of those who shall deny is of Providence, he will 
be a martyr against his will. And how any more is it the case, that there is laid up in heaven the very glorious 
recompense to him who has witnessed, for his witnessing? If Providence did not permit the sinner to get the 
length of sinning, it is unjust in both cases; both in not rescuing the man who is dragged to punishment for 
righteousness' sake, and in having rescued him who wished to do wrong, he having done it as far as volition 
was concerned, but [Providence] having prevented the deed, and unjustly favoured the sinner. And how 
impious, in deifying the devil, and in daring to call the Lord a sinful man! For the devil tempting us, knowing 
what we are, but not knowing if we will hold out, but wishing to dislodge us from the faith, attempts also to 
bring us into subjection to himself. Which is all that is allowed to him, partly from the necessity of saving us, 
who have taken occasion from the commandment, from ourselves; partly for the confusion of him who has 
tempted and failed; for the confirmation of the members of the Church, and the conscience of those who 
admire the constancy [displayed]. But if martyrdom be retribution by way of punishment, then also faith and 
doctrine, on account of which martyrdom comes, are co-operators in punishment-than which, what other 
absurdity could be greater? But with reference to these dogmas, whether the soul is changed to another 
body, also of the devil, at the proper time mention will be made. But at present, to what has been already 
said, let us add the following: Where any more is faith in the retribution of sins committed before martyrdom 
takes place? And where is love to God, which is persecuted and endures for the truth? And where is the 
praise of him who has confessed, or the censure of him who has denied? And for what use is right conduct, 
the mortification of the lusts, and the hating of no creature? But if, as Basilides himself says, we suppose one 
part of the declared will of God to be the loving of all things because all things bear a relation to the Whole, 
and another "not to lust after anything," and a third "not to hate anything," by the will of God these also will be 
punishments, which it were impious to think. For neither did the Lord suffer by the will of the Father, nor are 
those who are persecuted by the will of God; since either of two things is the case: either persecution in 
consequence of the will of God is a good thing, or those who decree and afflict are guiltless. But nothing is 
without the will of the Lord of the universe. It remains to say that such things happen without the prevention of 
God; for this alone saves both the providence and the goodness of God. We must not therefore think that 
He actively produces afflictions (far be it that we should think this!); but we must be persuaded that He does 
not prevent those that cause them, but overrules for good the crimes of His enemies: "I will therefore," He 
says, "destroy the wall, and it shall be for treading under foot. "[3] Providence being a disciplinary art;[4] in 
the case of others for each individual's sins, and in the case of the Lord and His apostles for ours. To this 
point says the divine apostle: "For this is the will of God, even your sanctification, that ye abstain from 
fornication: that each one of you should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honour; not in 
the lust of concupiscence, as the Gentiles who know not the Lord: that none of you should overreach or take 
advantage of his brother in any matter; because the Lord is the avenger in respect of all such, as we also 
told you before, and testified. For God hath not called us unto uncleanness, but to holiness. Wherefore he 
that despiseth, despiseth not man, but God, who hath also given His Holy Spirit to you."[1] Wherefore the 
Lord was not prohibited from this sanctification of ours, if, then, one of them were to say, in reply, that the 
martyr is punished for sins committed before this embodying, and that he will again reap the fruit of his 
conduct in this life, for that such are the arrangements of the [divine administration], we shall ask him if the 
retribution takes place by Providence. For if it be not of the divine administration, the economy of expiations 
is gone, and their hypothesis falls to the ground; but if expiations are by Providence, punishments are by 
Providence too. But Providence, although it begins, so to speak, to move with the Ruler, yet is implanted in 
substances along with their origin by the God of the universe. Such being the case, they must confess either 
that punish-merit is not just, and those who condemn and persecute the martyrs do right, or that persecutions 
even are wrought by the will of God. Labour and fear are not, then, as they say, incident to affairs as rust to 
iron, but come upon the soul through its own will. And on these points there is much to say, which will be 
reserved for future consideration, taking them up in due course. 

CHAP. XIII.--VALENTINIAN'S VAGARIES ABOUT THE ABOLITION OF DEATH REFUTED. 

Valentinian, in a homily, writes in these words: "Ye are originally immortal, and children of eternal life, and ye 
would have death distributed to you, that ye may spend and lavish it, and that death may die in you and by 
you; for when we dissolve the world, and are not yourselves dissolved, ye have dominion over creation and 
all corruption." For he also, similarly with Basilides, supposes a class saved by nature, and that this different 
race has come hitherto us from above for the abolition of death, and that the origin of death is the work of the 
Creator of the world. Wherefore also he so expounds that Scripture, "No man shall see the face of God, and 
live," as if He were the cause of death. Respecting this God, he makes those allusions when writing in these 
expressions: "As much as the image is inferior to the living face, so much is the world inferior to the living 
AEon. What is, then, the cause of the image? The majesty of the face, which exhibits the figure to the painter. 

to be honoured by his name; for the form is not found exactly to the life, but the name supplies what is 
wanting in the effigy. The invisibility of God co-operates also in order to the faith of that which has been 
fashioned." For the Creator, called God and Father, he designated as "Painter," and "Wisdom," whose 
image that which is formed is, to the glory of the invisible One; since the things which proceed from a pair are 
complements, and those which proceed from one are images. But since what is seen is no part of Him, the 
soul comes from what is intermediate, which is different; and this is the inspiration of the different spirit, and 
generally what is breathed into the soul, which is the image of the spirit. And in general, what is said of the 
Creator, who was made according to the image, they say was foretold by a sensible image in the book of 
Genesis respecting the origin of man; and the likeness they transfer to themselves, teaching that the 
addition of the different spirit was made; unknown to the Creator. When, then, we treat of the unity of the God 
who is proclaimed in the law, the prophets, and the Gospel, we shall also discuss this; for the topic is 
supreme. [2] But we must advance to that which is urgent. If for the purpose of doing away with death the 
peculiar race has come, it is not Christ who has abolished death, unless He also is said to be of the same 
essence with them. And if He abolished it to this end, that it might not touch the peculiar race, it is not these, 
the rivals of the Creator, who breathe into the image of their intermediate spirit the life from above-in 
accordance with the principle of their dogma-that abolish death. But should they say that this takes place 
by His mother,[3] or should they say that they, along with Christ, war against death, let them own their secret 
dogma that they have the hardihood to assail the divine power of the Creator, by setting to rights His 
creation, as if they were superior, endeavouring to save the vital image which He was not able to rescue 
from corruption. Then the Lord would be superior to God the Creator; for the son would never contend with 
the father, especially among the gods. But the point that the Creator of all things, the omnipotent Lord, is the 
Father of the Son, we have deferred till the discussion of these points, in which we have undertaken to 
dispute against the heresies, showing that He alone is the God proclaimed by Him. 
But the apostle, writing to us with reference to the endurance of afflictions, says, "And this is of God, that it is 
given to you on behalf of Christ, not only to believe on Him, but also to suffer for His sake; having the same 
conflict which ye saw in me, and now hear to be in me. If there is therefore any consolation in Christ, if any 
comfort of love, if any communion of spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfil ye my joy, that ye may be of the 
same mind, having the same love, unanimous, thinking one thing. And if he is offered on the sacrifice and 
service of faith, joying and rejoicing"[1] with the Philippians, to whom the apostle speaks, calling them 
"fellow-partakers of joy, "[2] how does he say that they are of one soul, and having a soul? Likewise, also, 
writing respecting Timothy and himself, he says, "For I have no one like-souled, who will nobly care for your 
state. For all seek their own, not the-things which are Jesus Christ's. "[3] 
Let not the above-mentioned people, then, call us, by way of reproach, "natural men" 
(<greek>yukikoi</greek>), nor the Phrygians[4] either; for these now call those who do not apply 
themselves to the new prophecy "natural men" (<greek>yukikoi</greek>), with whom we shall discuss in our 
remarks on "Prophecy. "[5] The perfect man ought therefore to practise love, and thence to haste to the 
divine friendship, fulfilling the commandments from love. And loving one's enemies does not mean loving 
wickedness, or impiety, or adultery, or theft; but the thief, the impious, the adulterer, not as far as he sins, and 
in respect of the actions by which he stains the name of man, but as he is a man, and the work of God. 
Assuredly sin is an activity, not an existence: and therefore it is not a work of God. Now sinners are called 
enemies of God-enemies, that is, of the commands which they do not obey, as those who obey become 
friends, the one named so from their fellowship, the others from their estrangement, which is the result of free 
choice; for there is neither enmity nor sin without the enemy and the sinner. And the command "to covet 
nothing," not as if the things to be desired did not belong to us, does not teach us not to entertain desire, as 
those suppose who teach that the Creator is different from the first God, not as if creation was loathsome and 
bad (for such opinions are impious). But we say that the things of the world are not our own, not as if they 
were monstrous, not as if they did not belong to God, the Lord of the universe, but because we do not 
continue among them for ever; being, in respect of possession, not ours, and passing from one to another in 
succession; but belonging to us, for whom they were made in respect of use, so long as it is necessary to 
continue with them. In accordance, therefore, with natural appetite, things disallowed are to be used rightly, 
avoiding all excess and inordinate affection. 

CHAP. XIV.-THE LOVE OF ALL, EVEN OF OUR ENEMIES. 

How great also is benignity! "Love your enemies," it is said, "bless them who curse you, and pray for them 
who despitefully use you, "[6] and the like; to which it is added, "that ye may be the children of your Father 
who is in heaven," in allusion to resemblance to God. Again, it is said, "Agree with thine adversary quickly, 
whilst thou art in the way with him. "[7] The adversary is not the body, as some would have it, but the devil, 
and those assimilated to him, who walks along with us in the person of men, who emulate his deeds in this 
earthly life. It is inevitable, then, that those who confess themselves to belong to Christ, but find themselves in 
the midst of the devil's works, suffer the most hostile treatment. For it is written, "Lost he deliver thee to the 
judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officers of Satan's kingdom." "For I am persuaded that neither 
death," through the assault of persecutors, "nor life" in this world, "nor angels," the apostate ones, " nor 
powers" (and Satan's power is the life which he chose, for such are the powers and principalities of 
darkness belonging to him), "nor things present," amid which we exist during the time of life, as the hope 
entertained by the soldier, and the merchant's gain, "nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature," in 
consequence of the energy proper to a man,-opposes the faith of him who acts according to free choice. 
"Creature" is synonymous with activity, being our work, and such activity "shall not be able to separate us 
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. "[8] You have got a compendious account of the 
gnostic martyr. 

CHAP. XV. --ON AVOIDING OFFENCE. 

"We know that we all have knowledge"-common knowledge in common things, and the knowledge that 
there is one God. For he was writing to believers; whence he adds, "But knowledge (gnosis) is not in all," 
being communicated to few. And there are those who say that the knowledge about things sacrificed to 
idols is not promulgated among all, "lest our liberty prove a stumbling-block to the weak. For by thy 
knowledge he that is weak is destroyed. "[1] Should they say, "Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, ought 
that to be bought?" adding, by way of interrogation, "asking no questions, "[2] as if equivalent to "asking 
questions," they give a ridiculous interpretation. For the apostle says, "All other things buy out of the 
shambles, asking no questions," with the exception of the things mentioned in the Catholic epistle of all the 
apostles, [3] "with the consent of the Holy Ghost," which is written in the Acts of the Apostles, and conveyed 
to the faithful by the hands of Paul himself. For they intimated "that they must of necessity abstain from things 
offered to idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, and from fornication, from which keeping 
themselves, they should do well." It is a different matter, then, which is expressed by the apostle: "Have we 
not power to eat and to drink? Have we not power to lead about a sister, a wife, as the rest of the apostles, 
as the brethren of the Lord and Cephas? But we have not used this power," he says, "but bear all things, lest 
we should occasion hindrance to the Gospel of Christ;" namely, by bearing about burdens, when it was 
necessary to be untrammelled for all things; or to become an example to those who wish to exercise 
temperance, not encouraging each other to eat greedily of what is set before us, and not to consort 
inconsiderately with woman. And especially is it incumbent on those entrusted with such a dispensation to 
exhibit to disciples a pure example. "For though I be free from all men, I have made myself servant to all," it 
is said, "that I might gain all. And every one that striveth for mastery is temperate in all things. "[4] "But the 
earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof."[5] For conscience' sake, then, we are to abstain from what we 
ought to abstain. "Conscience, I say, not his own," for it is endued with knowledge, "but that of the other," lest 
he be trained badly, and by imitating in ignorance what he knows not, he become a despiser instead of a 
strong-minded man. "For why is my liberty judged of by another conscience? For if I by grace am a 
partaker, why am I evil spoken of for that for which I give thanks? Whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God 
"[6]-what you are commanded to do by the rule of faith. 

CHAP. XVI. -PASSAGES OF SCRIPTURE RESPECTING THE CONSTANCY, PATIENCE, 
AND LOVE OF THE MARTYRS. 

"With the heart man believeth unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. 

Wherefore the Scripture saith, Whosoever believeth on Him shall not be ashamed; that is, the word of faith 
which we preach: for if thou confess the word with thy mouth that Jesus is Lord, and believe in thy heart that 
God hath raised Him from the dead, thou shalt be saved. "[7] There is clearly described the perfect 
righteousness, fulfilled both in practice and contemplation. Wherefore we are "to bless those who persecute 
us. Bless, and curse not. "[8] " For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of a good conscience, that in holiness 
and sincerity we know God" by this inconsiderable instance exhibiting the work of love, that "not in fleshly 
wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world. "[9] So far the apostle 
respecting knowledge; and in the second Epistle to the Corinthians he calls the common "teaching of faith" 
the savour of knowledge. "For unto this day the same veil remains on many in the reading of the Old 
Testament,"[10] not being uncovered by turning to the Lord. Wherefore also to those capable of perceiving 
he showed resurrection, that of the life still in the flesh, creeping on its belly. Whence also he applied the 
name "brood of vipers" to the voluptuous, who serve the belly and the pudenda, and cut off one another's 
heads for the sake of worldly pleasures. "Little children, let us not love in word, or in tongue," says John, 
teaching them to be perfect, "but in deed and in truth; hereby shall we know that we are of the truth. "[1 1] And if 
"God be love," piety also is love: "there is no fear in love; but perfect love casteth out fear."[12] "This is the 
love of God, that we keep His commandments. "[1 3] And again, to him who desires to become a Gnostic, it 
is written, "But be thou an example of the believers, in word, in conversation, in love, in faith, in purity. "[14] For 
perfection in faith differs, I think, from ordinary faith. And the divine apostle furnishes the rule for the Gnostic in 
these words, writing as follows: "For I have learned, in whatsoever state I am, to be content. I know both how 
to be abased, and I know how to abound. Everywhere and in all things I am instructed both to be full and to 
be hungry, both to abound and to lack. I can do all things through Him who strengtheneth me. "[15] And also 
when discussing with others in order to put them, to shame, he does not shrink from saying, "But call to mind 
the former days, in which, after ye were illuminated, ye endured a great fight of afflictions; partly, whilst ye 
were made a gazing-stock, both by reproaches and afflictions; and partly, whilst ye became companions of 
them that were so used. For ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and took with joy the spoiling of your 
goods, knowing that you have a better and enduring substance. Cast not away therefore your confidence, 
which hath great recompense of reward. For ye have need of patience, that, after doing the will of God, ye 
may obtain the promise. For yet a little while, and He that cometh will come, and will not tarry. Now the just 
shall live by faith: and if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. But we are not of them 
that draw back unto perdition, but of them that believe to the saving of the soul."[1] He then brings forward a 
swarm of divine examples. For was it not "by faith," he says, this endurance, that they acted nobly who "had 
trial of mockeries and scourgings, and, moreover, of bonds and imprisonments? They were stoned, they 
were tempted, were slain with the sword. They wandered about in sheep-skins and goat-skins, being 
destitute, afflicted, tormented, of whom the world was not worthy. They wandered in deserts, in mountains, in 
dens, and caves of the earth. And all having received a good report, through faith, received not the promise 
of God" (what is expressed by a parasiopesis is left to be understood, viz., "alone "). He adds accordingly, 
"God having provided some better thing for us (for He was good), that they should not without us be made 
perfect. Wherefore also, having encompassing us such a cloud," holy and transparent, "of witnesses, laying 
aside every weight, and the sin which doth so easily beset us, let us run with patience the race set before us, 
looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith. "[2] Since, then, he specifies one salvation in Christ of 
the righteous, [3] and of us he has expressed the former unambiguously, and saying nothing less respecting 
Moses, adds, "Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt: for he had 
respect to the recompense of the reward. By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king: for he 
endured as seeing Him who is invisible. "[4] The divine Wisdom says of the martyrs, "They seemed in the 
eyes of the foolish to die, and their departure was reckoned a calamity, and their migration from us an 
affliction. But they are in peace. For though in the sight of men they were punished, their hope was full of 
immortality. "[5] He then adds, teaching martyrdom to be a glorious purification, "And being chastened a 
little, they shall be benefited much; because God proved them," that is, suffered them to be tried, to put them 
to the proof, and to put to shame the author of their trial, "and found them worthy of Himself," plainly to be 
called sons. "As gold in the furnace He proved them, and as a whole burned-offering of sacrifice He 
accepted them. And in the time of their visitation they will shine forth, even as sparks run along the stubble. 
They shall judge the nations, and rule over the peoples, and the Lord shall reign over them forever."[6] 

CHAP. XVII. --PASSAGES FROM CLEMENT'S EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS ON 
MARTYRDOM. 

Moreover, in the Epistle to the Corinthians, the Apostle[7] Clement also, drawing a picture of the Gnostic, 
says:[8] "For who that has sojourned among you has not proved your perfect and firm faith? and has not 
admired your sound and gentle piety? and has not celebrated the munificent style of your hospitality? and 
has not felicitated your complete and sure knowledge? For ye did all things impartially, and walked in the 

ordinances of God;" and so forth. 

Then more clearly: "Let us fix our eyes on those who have yielded perfect service to His magnificent glory. 
Let us take Enoch, who, being by his obedience found righteous, was translated; and Noah, who, having 
believed, was saved; and Abraham, who for his faith and hospitality was called the friend of God, and was 
the father of Isaac." "For hospitality and piety. Lot was saved from Sodom." "For faith and hospitality, Rahab 
the harlot was saved." "From patience and faith they walked about in goat-skins, and sheep-skins, and 
folds of camels' hair, proclaiming the kingdom of Christ. We name His prophets Ellas, and Eliseus, and 
Ezekiel, and John." 

"For Abraham, who for his free faith was called ' the friend of God,' was not elated by glory, but modestly 
said, 'I am dust and ashes. '[9] And of Job it is thus written: ' Job was just and blameless, true and pious, 
abstaining from all evil. '"[10] He it was who overcame the tempter by patience, and at once testified and 
was testified to by God; who keeps hold of humility, and says, "No one is pure from defilement, not even if 
his life were but for one day."[1 1] "Moses, 'the servant who was faithful in all his house,' said to Him who 
uttered the oracles from the bush,' Who am I, that Thou sendest me? I am slow of speech, and of a 
stammering tongue,' to minister the voice of God in human speech. And again: ' I am smoke from a pot.'" 
"For God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the humble. "[1] 

"David too, of whom the Lord, testifying, says, 'I found a man after my own heart, David the son of Jesse. 
With my holy oil I anointed him. '[2] But he also says to God, 'Pity me, O God, according to Thy mercy; and 
according to the multitude of Thy tender mercies, blot out my transgression. Wash me thoroughly from mine 
iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. For I know my transgression, and my sin is ever before me.' "[3] Then, 
alluding to sin which is not subject to the law, in the exercise of the moderation of true knowledge, he adds, 
"Against Thee only have I sinned, and done evil in Thy sight."[4] For the Scripture somewhere says, "The 
Spirit of the Lord is a lamp, searching the recesses of the belly. "[5] And the more of a Gnostic a man 
becomes by doing right, the nearer is the illuminating Spirit to him. "Thus the Lord draws near to the 
righteous, and none of the thoughts and reasonings of which we are the authors escape Him-I mean the 
Lord Jesus," the scrutinizer by His omnipotent will of our heart, "whose blood was consecrated[6] for us. Let 
us therefore respect those who are over us, and reverence the elders; let us honour the young, and let us 
teach the discipline of God." For blessed is he who shah do and teach the Lord's commands worthily; and 
he is of a magnanimous mind, and of a mind contemplative of truth. "Let us direct our wives to what is good; 
let them exhibit," says he, "the lovable disposition of chastity; let them show the guileless will of their 
meekness; let them manifest the gentleness of their tongue by silence; let them give their love not according 
to their inclinations, but equal love in sanctity to all i that fear God. Let our children share in the discipline that 
is in Christ; let them learn what humility avails before God; what is the power of holy love before God, how 
lovely and great is the fear of the Lord, saving all that walk in it holily; with a pure heart: for He is the Searcher 
of the thoughts and sentiments, whose breath is in us, and when He wills He will take it away." 
"Now all those things are confirmed by the faith that is in Christ. 'Come, ye children,' says the Lord, ' hearken 
to me, and I will teach you the fear of the Lord. Who is the man that desireth life, that loveth to see good 
days?'[7] Then He subjoins the gnostic mystery of the numbers seven and eight. 'Stop thy tongue from evil, 
and thy lips from speaking guile. Depart from evil, and do good. Seek peace, and pursue it.'[8] For in these 
words He alludes to knowledge (gnosis), with abstinence from evil and the doing of what is good, teaching 
that it is to be perfected by word and deed. ' The eyes of the Lord are on the righteous, and His ears are to 
their prayer. But the face of God is against those thai do evil, to root out their memory from the earth. The 
righteous cried, and the Lord heard, and delivered him out of all his distresses. '[9] ' Many are the stripes of 
sinners; but those who hope in the Lord, mercy shall compass about.'"[1 0] "A multitude of mercy," he nobly 
says, "surrounds him that trusts in the Lord." 

For it is written in the Epistle to the Corinthians, "Through Jesus Christ our foolish and darkened mind springs 
up to the light. By Him the Sovereign Lord wished us to taste the knowledge that is immortal." And, showing 
more expressly the peculiar nature of knowledge, he added: "These things, then, being clear to us, looking 
into the depths of divine knowledge, we ought to do all things in order which the Sovereign Lord 
commanded us to perform at the appointed seasons. Let the wise man, then, show his wisdom not in words 
only, but in good deeds. Let the humble not testify to himself, but allow testimony to be borne to him by 
another. Let not him who is pure in the flesh boast, knowing that it is another who furnishes him with 
continence. Ye see, brethren, that the more we are subjected to peril, the more knowledge are we counted 
worthy of." 

CHAP. XVIII. -ON LOVE, AND THE REPRESSING OF OUR DESIRES. 

"The decorous tendency of our philanthropy, therefore," according to Clement, "seeks the common good;" 
whether by suffering martyrdom, or by teaching by deed and word,-the latter being twofold, unwritten and 
written. This is love, to love God and our neighbour. "This conducts to the height which is unutterable. [1 1] ' 

Love covers a multitude of sins. [12] Love bearetii all things, suffereth all things. '[13] Love joins us to God, 
does all things in concord. In love, all the chosen of God were perfected. Apart from love, nothing is well 
pleasing to God." "Of its perfection there is no unfolding," it is said. "Who is fit to be found in it, except those 
whom. God counts worthy ?" To the point the Apostle Paul speaks, "If I give my body, and have not love, I 
am sounding brass, and a tinkling cymbal. "[14] If it is not from a disposition determined by gnostic love that I 
shall testify, he means; but if through fear and expected reward, moving my lips in order to testify to the Lord 
that I shall confess the Lord, I am a common man, sounding the Lord's name, not knowing Him. "For there is 
the people that loveth with the lips; and there is another which gives the body to be burned." "And if I give all 
my goods in alms," he says, not according to the principle of loving communication, but on account of 
recompense, either from him who has received the benefit, or the Lord who has promised; "and if I have all 
faith so as to remove mountains," and cast away obscuring passions, and be not faithful to the Lord from 
love, "I am nothing," as in comparison of him who testifies as a Gnostic, and the crowd, and being reckoned 
nothing better. 

"Now all the generations from Adam to this day are gone. But they who have been perfected in love, through 
the grace of God, hold the place of the godly, who shall be manifested at the visitation of the kingdom of 
Christ." Love permits not to sin; but if it fall into any such case, by reason of the interference of the: adversary, 
in imitation of David, it will sing: "I will confess unto the Lord, and it will please Him above a young bullock 
that has horns and hoofs. Let the poor see it, and be glad." For he says, "Sacrifice to God a sacrifice of 
praise, and pay to the Lord thy vows; and call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou 
Shalt glorify me."[1] "For the sacrifice of God is a broken spirit."[2] 

"God," then, being good, "is love," it is said. [3] Whose "love worketh no ill to his neighhour,"[4] neither 
injuring nor revenging ever, but, in a word, doing good to all according to the image of God. "Love is," then, 
"the fulfilling of the law; "[4] like as Christ, that is the presence of the Lord who loves us; and our loving 
teaching of, and discipline according to Christ. By love, then, the commands not to commit adultery, and not 
to covet one's neighbour's wife, are fulfilled, [these sins being] formerly prohibited by fear. 
The same work, then, presents a difference, according as it is done by fear, or accomplished by love, and 
is wrought by faith or by knowledge. Rightly, therefore, their rewards are different. To the Gnostic "are 
prepared what eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor hath entered into the heart of man;" but to him who has 
exercised simple faith He testifies a hundredfold in return for what he has left,-a promise which has turned 
out to fall within human comprehension. Come to this point, I recollect one who called himself a Gnostic. For, 
expounding the words, "But i say unto you, he that looketh on a woman to lust after, hath committed 
adultery, "[5] he thought that it was not bare desire that was condemned; but if through the desire the act that 
results from it proceeding beyond the desire is accomplished in it. For dream employs phantasy and the 
body. Accordingly, the historians relate the following decision, of Bocchoris the just. [6] A youth, falling in love 
with a courtezan, persuades the girl, for a stipulated reward, to come to him next day. But his desire being 
unexpectedly satiated, by laying hold of the girl in a dream, by anticipation, when the object of his love 
came according to stipulation, he prohibited her from coming in. But she, on learning what had taken place, 
demanded the reward, saying that in this way she had sated the lover's desire. They came accordingly to 
the judge. He, ordering the youth to hold out the purse containing the reward in the sun, bade the courtezan 
take hold of the shadow; facetiously bidding him pay the image of a reward for the image of an embrace. 
Accordingly one dreams, the soul assenting to the vision. But he dreams waking, who looks so as to lust; 
not only, as that Gnostic said, if along with the sight of the woman he imagine in his mind intercourse, for this 
is already the act of lust, as lust; but if one looks on beauty of person (the Word says), and the flesh seem to 
him in the way of lust to be fair, looking on cam ally and sinfully, he is judged because he admired. For, on 
the other hand, he who in chaste love looks on beauty, thinks not that the flesh is beautiful, but the spirit, 
admiring, as I judge, the body as an image, by whose beauty he transports himself to the Artist, and to the 
true beauty; exhibiting the sacred symbol, the bright impress of righteousness to the angels that wait on the 
ascension;[7] I mean the unction of acceptance, the quality of disposition which resides in the soul that is 
gladdened by the communication of the Holy Spirit. This glory, which Shone forth on the face of Moses, the 
people could not look on. Wherefore he took a veil for the glory, to those who looked cam ally. For those, 
who demand toll, detain those who bring in any worldly things, who are burdened with their own passions. 
But him that is free of all things which are subject to duty, and is full of knowledge, and of the righteousness of 
works, they pass on with their good wishes, blessing the man with his work. "And his life shall not fall 
away"-the leaf of the living tree that is nourished "by the water-courses. "[8] Now the righteous is likened to 
fruit-bearing trees, and not only to such as are of the nature[1] of tall-growing ones. And in the sacrificial 
oblations, according to the law, there were those who looked for blemishes in the sacrifices. They who are 
skilled in such matters distinguish propension[2] (<greek>orexis</greek>) from lust 

(<greek>epiqumia</greek>); and assign the latter, as being irrational, to pleasures and licentiousness; and 
propension, as being a rational movement, they assign to the necessities of nature. 

CHAP. XIX. -WOMEN AS WELL AS MEN CAPABLE OF PERFECTION. 

In this perfection it is possible for man and woman equally to share. It is not only Moses, then, that heard 
from God, "I have spoken to thee once, and twice, saying, I have seen this people, and lo, it is stiff-necked. 
Suffer me to exterminate them, and blot out their name from under heaven; and I will make thee into a great 
and wonderful nation much greater than this;" who answers not regarding himself, but the common salvation: 
"By no means, O Lord; forgive this people their sin, or blot me out of the book of the living. "[3] How great was 
his perfection, in wishing to die together with the people, rather than be saved alone ! 
But Judith too, who became perfect among women, in the siege of the city, at the entreaty of the elders went 
forth into the strangers' camp, despising all danger for her country's sake, giving herself into the enemy's 
hand in faith in God; and straightway she obtained the reward of her faith,-though a woman, prevailing over 
the enemy of her faith, and gaining possession of the head of Holofernes. And again, Esther perfect by faith, 
who rescued Israel from the power of the king and the satrap's cruelty: a woman alone, afflicted with 
fastings, [4] held back ten thousand armed[5] hands, annulling by her faith the tyrant's decree; him indeed 
she appeased, Haman she restrained, and Israel she preserved scathless by her perfect prayer to God. I 
pass over in silence Susanna and the sister of Moses, since the latter was the prophet's associate in 
commanding the host, being superior to all the women among the Hebrews who were in repute for their 
wisdom; and the former in her surpassing modesty, going even to death condemned by licentious admirers, 
remained the unwavering martyr of chastity. 

Dion, too, the philosopher, tells that a certain woman Lysidica, through excess of modesty, bathed in her 
clothes; and that Philotera, when she was to enter the bath, gradually drew back her tunic as the water 
covered the naked parts; and then rising by degrees, put it on. And did not Lesena of Attica manfully bear 
the torture ? She being privy to the conspiracy of Harmodius and Aristogeiton against Hipparchus, uttered 
not a word, though severely tortured. And they say that the Argolic women, under the guidance of Telesilla 
the poetess, turned to flight the doughty Spartans by merely showing themselves; and that she produced in 
them fearlessness of death. Similarly speaks he who composed the Danais respecting the daughters of 
Danaus:- 

"And then the daughters of Danaus swiftly armed themselves. 
Before the fair-flowing river, majestic Nile[4]," 

and so forth. 

And the rest of the poets sing of Atalanta's swiftness in the chase, of Anticlea's love for children, of Alcestis's 
love for her husband, of the courage of Makaeria and of the Hyacinthides. What shall I say ? Did not 
Theano the Pythagorean make such progress in philosophy, that to him who looked intently at her, and 
said, "Your arm is beautiful," she answered "Yes, but it is not public." Characterized by the same propriety, 
there is also reported the following reply. [6] When asked when a woman after being with her husband 
attends the Thesmophoria, said, "From her own husband at once, from a stranger never." Themisto too, of 
Lampsacus, the daughter of Zoilus, the wife of Leontes of Lampsacus, studied the Epicurean philosophy, as 
Myia the daughter of Theano the Pythagorean, and Arignote, who wrote the history of Dionysius. 
And the daughters of Diodorus, who was called Kronus, all became dialecticians, as Philo the dialectician 
says in the Mrenexenus, whose names are mentioned as follows-Menexene, Argia, Theognis, Artemesia, 
Pantaclea. I also recollect a female Cynic,-she was called Hipparchia, a Maronite, the wife of Crates, -in 
whose case the so-called dog-wedding was celebrated in the Pcecile. Arete of Cyrene, too, the daughter of 
Aristippus, educated her son Aristippus, who was surnamed Mother-taught. Lastheneia of Arcis, and 
Axiothea of Phlius, studied philosophy with Plato. Besides, Aspasia of Miletus, of whom the writers of 
comedy write much, was trained by Socrates in philosophy, by Pericles in rhetoric. I omit, on account of the 
length of the discourse, the rest; enumerating neither the poetesses Corinna, Telesilla, Myia, and Sappho; 
nor the painters, as Irene the daughter of Cratinus, and Anaxandra the daughter of Nealces, according to the 
account of Didymus in the Symposiaci. The daughter of Cleobulus, the sage and monarch of the Lindii, was 
not ashamed to wash the feet of her father's guests. Also the wife of Abraham, the blessed Sarah, in her own 
person prepared the cakes baked in the ashes for the angels; and princely maidens among the Hebrews 
fed sheep. Whence also the Nausicaa of Homer went to the washing-tubs. 

The wise woman, then, win first choose to persuade her husband to be her associate in what is conducive to 
happiness. And should that be found impracticable, let her by herself earnestly aim at virtue, gaining her 
husband's consent in everything, so as never to do anything against his will, with exception of what is 
reckoned as contributing to virtue and salvation. But if one keeps from such a mode of life either wife or 
maid-servant, whose heart is set on it; what such a person in that case plainly does is nothing else than 
determine to drive her away from righteousness and sobriety, and to choose to make his own house wicked 
and licentious. 

It is not then possible that man or woman can be conversant with anything whatever, without the advantage 
of education, and application, and training; and virtue, we have said, depends not on others, but on 
ourselves above all. Other things one can repress, by waging war against them; but with what depends on 
one's self, this is entirely out of the question, even with the most strenuous persistence. For the gift is one 
conferred by God, and not in the power of any other. Whence licentiousness should be regarded as the evil 
of no other one than of him who is guilty of licentiousness; and temperance, on the other hand, as the good 
of him who is able to practise it. 

CHAP. XX. -A GOOD WIFE. 

The woman who, with propriety, loves her husband, Euripides describes, while admonishing, - 

"That when her husband says aught. 

She ought to regard him as speaking well if she say nothing; 

And if she will say anything, to do her endeavour to gratify her husband." 

And again he subjoins the like :- 

"And that the wife should sweetly look sad with her husband. 

Should aught evil befall him. 

And have in common a share of sorrow and joy." 

Then, describing her as gentle and kind even in misfortunes, he adds:- 

"And I, when you are ill, will, sharing your sickness bear it; 
And I will bear my share in your misfortunes." 

And:- 

"Nothing is bitter to me. 

For with friends one ought to be happy. 

For what else is friendship but this?" 

The marriage, then, that is consummated according to the word, is sanctified, if the union be under 
subjection to God, and be conducted "with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having hearts sprinkled 
from an evil conscience, and the body washed with pure water, and holding the confession of hope; for He 
is faithful that promised." And the happiness of marriage ought never to be estimated either by wealth or 
beauty, but by virtue. 

"Beauty," says the tragedy ,- 

"Helps no wife with her husband; 

But virtue has helped many; for every good wife 

Who is attached to her husband knows how to pracise 

sobriety." 

Then, as giving admonitions, he says :- 

"First, then, this is incumbent on her who is endowed with mind. 
That even if her husband be ugly, he must appear good-looking; 
For it is for the mind, not the eye, to judge." 

And so forth. 

For with perfect propriety Scripture has said that woman is given by God as "an help" to man. It is evident, 
then, in my opinion, that she will charge herself with remedying, by good sense and persuasion, each of the 
annoyances that originate with her husband in domestic economy. And if he do not yield, then she will 
endeavour, as far as possible for human nature, to lead a sinless life; whether it be necessary to die, in 
accordance with reason, or to live; considering that God is her helper and associate in such a course of 
conduct, her true defender and Saviour both for the present and for the future; making Him the leader and 
guide of all her actions, reckoning sobriety and righteousness her work, and making the favour of God her 

end. Gracefully, therefore, the apostle says in the Epistle to Titus, "that the eider women should be of godly 
behaviour, should not be slanderers, not enslaved to much wine; that they should counsel the young women 
to be lovers of their husbands, lovers of their children, discreet, chaste, housekeepers, good, subject to their 
own husbands; that the word of God be not blasphemed. "[1] But rather, he says, "Follow peace with all men, 
and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord: looking diligently, lest there be any fornicator or 
profane person, as Esau, who for one morsel surrendered his birth-right; and lest any root of bitterness 
springing up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled. "[2] And then, as putting the finishing stroke to the 
question about marriage, he adds: "Marriage is honourable in all, and the bed undefiled: but whoremongers 
and adulterers God will judge. "[3] And one aim and one end, as far as regards perfection, being 
demonstrated to belong to the man and the woman, Peter in his Epistle says, "Though now for a season, if 
need be, ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations; that the trial of your faith, being much more 
precious than that of gold which perisheth, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise, and honour, 
and glory at the revelation of Jesus Christ; whom, having not seen, ye love; in whom, though now ye see Him 
not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory, receiving the end of your faith, the 
salvation of your souls. "[1] Wherefore also Paul rejoices for Christ's sake that he was "in labours, more 
abundantly, in stripes above measure, in deaths oft."[2] 

CHAP. XXI. -DESCRIPTION OF THE PERFECT MAN, OR GNOSTIC. 

Here I find perfection apprehended variously in relation to Him who excels in every virtue. Accordingly one 
is perfected as pious, and as patient, and as continent, and as a worker, and as a martyr, and as a Gnostic. 
But I know no one of men perfect in all things at once, while still human, though according to the mere letter of 
the law, except Him alone who for us clothed Himself with humanity. Who then is perfect? He who professes 
abstinence from what is bad. Well, this is the way to the Gospel and to well-doing. But gnostic perfection in 
the case of the legal man is the acceptance of the Gospel, that he that is after the law may be perfect. For so 
he, who was after the law, Moses, foretold that it was necessary to hear in order that we might, according to 
the apostle, receive Christ, the fulness of the law.[3] But now in the Gospel the Gnostic attains proficiency not 
only by making use of the law as a step, but by understanding and comprehending it, as the Lord who gave 
the Covenants delivered it to the apostles. And if he conduct himself rightly (as assuredly it is impossible to 
attain knowledge (gnosis) by bad conduct); and if, further, having made an eminently right confession, he 
become a martyr out of love, obtaining considerable renown as among men; not even thus will he be called 
perfect in the flesh beforehand; since it is the close of life which claims this appellation, when the gnostic 
martyr has first shown the perfect work, and rightly exhibited it, and having thankfully shed his blood, has 
yielded up the ghost: blessed then will he be, and truly proclaimed perfect, "that the excellency of the power 
may be of God, and not of us," as the apostle says. Only let us preserve free-will and love: "troubled on 
every side, yet not distressed; perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but 
not destroyed. "[4] For those who strive after perfection, according to the same apostle, must "give no 
offence in anything, but in everything approve themselves not to men, but to God." And, as a consequence, 
also they ought to yield to men; for it is reasonable, on account of abusive calumnies: Here is the 
specification: "in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, in 
tumults, in labours, in watchings, in fastings, in pureness, in knowledge, in long-suffering, in kindness, in the 
Holy Ghost, in love unfeigned, in the word of truth, in the power of God, "[5] that we may be the temples of 
God, purified "from all filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit." "And I," He says, "will receive you; and I will be 
to you for a Father, and ye shall be to Me for sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty. "[6] "Let us then," 
he says, "perfect holiness in the fear of God." For though fear beget pain, "I rejoice," he says, "not that ye 
were made sorry, but that ye showed susceptibility to repentance. For ye sorrowed after a godly sort, that ye 
might receive damage by us in nothing. For godly sorrow worketh repentance unto salvation not to be 
regretted; but the sorrow of the world worketh death. For this same thing that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, 
what earnestness it wrought in you; yea, what clearing of yourselves; yea, what compunction; yea, what fear; 
yea, what desire; yea, what zeal; yea, revenge! In all things ye have showed yourselves clear in the 
matter."[7] Such are the preparatory exercises of gnostic discipline. And since the omnipotent God Himself 
"gave some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some pastors and teachers, for the 
perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all attain to the 
unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of 
the fulness of Christ; "[8] we are then to strive to reach manhood as befits the Gnostic, and to be as perfect 
as we can while still abiding in the flesh, making it our study with perfect concord here to concur with the will 
of God, to the restoration of what is the truly perfect nobleness and relationship, to the fulness of Christ, that 
which perfectly depends on our perfection. 

And now we perceive where, and how, and when the divine apostle mentions the perfect man, and how he 
shows the differences of the perfect. And again, on the other hand: "The manifestation of the Spirit is given 

for our profit. For to one is given tiie word of wisdom by tiie Spirit; to anotiier tiie word of l<nowledge 
according to tiie same Spirit; to anotiier faitli tlirougli tiie same Spirit; to anotiier the gifts of healing through 
the same Spirit; to another the working of miracles; to another prophecy; to another discernment of spirits; to 
another diversities of tongues; to another the interpretation of tongues: and all these worketh the one and the 
same Spirit, distributing to each one according as He wills.'" Such being the case, the prophets are perfect 
in prophecy, the righteous in righteousness, and the martyrs in confession, and others in preaching, not that 
they are not sharers in the common virtues, but are proficient in those to which they are appointed. For what 
man in his senses would say that a prophet was not righteous? For what? did not righteous men like 
Abraham prophesy? 

"For to one God has given warlike deeds. 
To another the accomplishment of the dance. 
To another the lyre and song, "[2] 

says Homer. "But each has his own proper gift of God "[3]-one in one way, another in another. But the 
apostles were perfected in all. You will find, then, if you choose, in their acts and writings, knowledge, life, 
preaching, righteousness, purity, prophecy. We must know, then, that if Paul is' young in respect to 
time[4]-having flourished immediately after the Lord's ascension-yet his writings depend on the Old 
Testament, breathing and speaking of them. For faith in Christ and the knowledge of the Gospel are the 
explanation and fulfilment of the law; and therefore it was said to the Hebrews, "If ye believe not, neither shall 
you understand;"[5] that is, unless you believe what is prophesied in the law, and oracularly delivered by 
the law, you will not understand the Old Testament, which He by His coming expounded. 

CHAP. XXII. -THE TRUE GNOSTIC DOES GOOD, NOT FROM FEAR OF PUNISHMENT OR 
HOPE OF REWARD, BUT ONLY FOR THE SAKE OF GOOD ITSELF. 

The man of understanding and perspicacity is, then, a Gnostic. And his business is not abstinence from 
what is evil (for this is a step to the highest perfection), or the doing of good out of fear. For it is written, 
"Whither shall I flee, and where shall I hide myself from Thy presence ? If I ascend into heaven. Thou art 
there; if I go away to the uttermost parts of the sea, there is Thy right hand; if I go down into the depths, there 
is Thy Spirit. "[6] Nor any more is he to do so from hope of promised recompense. For it is said, "Behold the 
Lord, and His reward is before His face, to give to every one according to his works; what eye hath not 
seen, and ear hath not heard, and hath not entered into the heart of man what God hath prepared for them 
that love Him. "[7] But only the doing of good out of love, and for the sake of its own excellence, is to be the 
Gnostic's choice. Now, in the person of God it is said to the Lord, "Ask of Me, and I will give the heathen for 
Thine inheritance;"[8] teaching Him to ask a truly regal request-that is, the salvation of men without price, 
that we may inherit and possess the Lord. For, on the contrary, to desire knowledge about God for any 
practical purpose, that this may be done, or that may not be done, is not proper to the Gnostic; but the 
knowledge itself suffices as the reason for contemplation. For I will dare aver that it is not because he 
wishes to be saved that he, who devotes himself to knowledge for the sake of the divine science itself, 
chooses knowledge. For the exertion of the intellect by exercise is prolonged to a perpetual exertion. And 
the perpetual exertion of the intellect is the essence of an intelligent being, which results from an 
uninterrupted process of admixture, and remains eternal contemplation, a living substance. Could we, then, 
suppose any one proposing to the Gnostic whether he would choose the knowledge of God or everlasting 
salvation; and if these, which are entirely identical, were separable, he would without the least hesitation 
choose the knowledge of God, deeming that property of faith, which from love ascends to knowledge, 
desirable, for its own sake. This, then, is the perfect man's first form of doing good, when it is done not for 
any advantage in what pertains to him, but because he judges it right to do good; and the energy being 
vigorously exerted in all things, in the very act becomes good; not, good in some things, and not good in 
others; but consisting in the habit of doing good, neither for glory, nor, as the philosophers say, for 
reputation, nor from reward either from men or God; but so as to pass life after the image and likeness of the 
Lord. 

And if, in doing good, he be met with anything adverse, he will let the recompense pass without resentment 
as if it were good, he being just and good "to the just and the unjust." To such the Lord says, "Be ye, as your 
Father is perfect." 

To him the flesh is dead; but he himself lives alone, having consecrated the sepulchre into a holy temple to 
the Lord, having turned towards God the old sinful soul. 

Such an one is no longer continent, but has reached a state of passionlessness, waiting to put on the divine 
image. "If thou doest alms," it is said, "let no one know it; and if thou fastest, anoint thyself, that God alone 
may know,"[1] and not a single human being. Not even he himself who shows mercy ought to know that he 

does show mercy; for in this way he will be sometimes merciful, sometimes not. And when he shall do good 
by habit, he will imitate the nature of good, and his disposition will be his nature and his practice. There is no 
necessity for removing those who are raised on high, but there is necessity for those who are walking to 
reach the requisite goal, by passing over the whole of the narrow way. For this is to be drawn by the Father, 
to become worthy to receive the power of grace from God, so as to run without hindrance. And if some hate 
the elect, such an one knows their ignorance, and pities their minds for its folly. 

As is right, then, knowledge itself loves and teaches the ignorant, and instructs the whole creation to honour 
God Almighty. And if such an one teaches to love God, he will not hold virtue as a thing to be lost in any 
case, either awake or in a dream, or in any vision; since the habit never goes out of itself by falling from 
being a habit. Whether, then, knowledge be said to be habit or disposition; on account of diverse 
sentiments never obtaining access, the guiding faculty, remaining unaltered, admits no alteration of 
appearances by framing in dreams visionary conceptions out of its movements by day. Wherefore also the 
Lord enjoins "to watch," so that our soul may never be perturbed with passion, even in dreams; but also to 
keep the life of the night pure and stainless, as if spent in the day. For assimilation to God, as far as we can, 
is preserving the mind in its relation to the same things. And this is the relation of mind as mind. 
But the variety of disposition arises from inordinate affection to material things. And for this reason, as they 
appear to me, to have called night Euphrone; since then the soul, released from the perceptions of sense, 
turns in on itself, and has a truer hold of intelligence (<greek>Fronhsis</greek>).[2] Wherefore the mysteries 
are for the most part celebrated by night, indicating the withdrawal of the soul from the body, which takes 
place by night. "Let us not then sleep, as do others; but let us watch and be sober. For they that sleep, sleep 
in the night; and they that are drunken, are drunken in the night. But let us who are of the day be sober, putting 
on the breastplate of faith and love, and as an helmet the hope of salvation. "[3] And as to what, again, they 
say of sleep, the very same things are to be understood of death. For each exhibits the departure of the 
soul, the one more, the other less; as we may also get this in Heraclitus: "Man touches night in himself, when 
dead and his light quenched; and alive, when he sleeps he touches the dead; and awake, when he shuts 
his eyes, he touches the sleeper."[4] "For blessed are those that have seen the Lord, "[5] according to the 
apostle; "for it is high time to awake out of sleep. For now is our salvation nearer than when we believed. 
The night is far spent, the day is at hand. Let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and put on the 
armour of light."[6] By day and light he designates figuratively the Son, and by the armour of light 
metaphorically the promises. 

So it is said that we ought to go washed to sacrifices and prayers, clean and bright; and that this external 
adornment and purification are practised for a sign. Now purity is to think holy thoughts. Further, there is the 
image of baptism, which also was handed down to the poets from Moses as follows:- 
"And she having drawn water, and wearing on her body clean clothes. "[7] 

It is Penelope that is going to prayer:- 

"And Telemachus, 

Having washed his hands in the hoary sea, prayed to Athene. "[8] 

It was a custom of the Jews to wash frequently after being in bed. It was then well said,- 
"Be pure, not by washing of water, but in the mind." 

For sanctity, as I conceive it, is perfect pureness of mind, and deeds, and thoughts, and words too, and in its 
last degree sinlessness in dreams. 

And sufficient purification to a man, I reckon, is thorough and sure repentance. If, condemning ourselves for 
our former actions, we go forward, afterthese things taking thought,[9] and divesting our mind both of the 
things which please us through the senses, and of our former transgressions. 

If, then, we are to give the etymology of <greek>episthmh</greek>, knowledge, its signification is to be 
derived from <greek>stasiu</greek>, placing; for our soul, which was formerly borne, now in one way, now in 
another, it settles in objects. Similarly faith is to be explained etymologically, as the settling 
(<greek>stasiu</greek>) of our soul respecting that which is. 

But we desire to learn about the man who is always and in all things righteous; who, neither dreading the 
penalty proceeding from the law, nor fearing to entertain hatred of evil in the case of those who live with him 
and who prosecute the injured, nor dreading danger at the hands of those who do wrong, remains righteous. 
For he who, on account of these considerations, abstains from anything wrong, is not voluntarily kind, but is 
good from fear. Even Epicurus says, that the man who in his estimation was wise, "would not do wrong to 
any one for the sake of gain; for he could not persuade himself that he would escape detection." So that, if 
he knew he would not be detected, he would, according to him, do evil. And such are the doctrines of 
darkness. If, too, one shall abstain from doing wrong from hope of the recompense given by God on 

account of righteous deeds, he is not on this supposition spontaneously good. For as fear mal<es that man 
just, so reward mal<es this one; or rather, mal<es him appear to be just. But with the hope after death-a good 
hope to the good, to the bad the reverse-not only they who follow after Barbarian wisdom, but also the 
Pythagoreans, are acquainted. For the latter also proposed hope as an end to those who philosophize. 
Whereas Socrates[1] also, in the Phaedo, says "that good souls depart hence with a good hope;" and 
again, denouncing the wicked, he sets against this the assertion, "For they live with an evil hope." With him 
Heraclitus manifestly agrees in his dissertations concerning men: "There awaits man after death what they 
neither hope nor think." Divinely, therefore, Paul writes expressly, "Tribulation worketh, patience, and 
patience experience, and experience hope; and hope maketh not ashamed. "[2] For the patience is on 
account of the hope in the future. Now hope is synonymous with the recompense and restitution of hope; 
which maketh not ashamed, not being any more vilified. 

But he who obeys the mere call, as he is called, neither for fear, nor for enjoyments, is on his way to 
knowledge (<greek>gnwsiu</greek>). For he does not consider whether any extrinsic lucrative gain or 
enjoyment follows to him; but drawn by the love of Him who is the true object of love, and led to what is 
requisite, practises piety. So that not even were we to suppose him to receive from God leave to do things 
forbidden with impunity; not even if he were to get the promise that he would receive as a reward the good 
things of the blessed; but besides, not even if he could persuade himself that God would be hoodwinked 
with reference to what he does (which is impossible), would he ever wish to do aught contrary to right 
reason, having once made choice of what is truly good and worthy of choice on its own account, and 
therefore to be loved. For it is not in the food of the belly, that we have heard good to be situated. But he has 
heard that "meat will not commend us, "[3] nor marriage, nor abstinence from marriage in ignorance; but 
virtuous gnostic conduct. For the dog, which is an irrational animal, may be said to be continent, dreading as 
it does the uplifted stick, and therefore keeping away from the meat. But let the predicted promise be taken 
away, and the threatened dread cancelled, and the impending danger removed, and the disposition of 
such people will be revealed. 

CHAP. XXIII. -THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED. 

For it is not suitable to the nature of the thing itself, that they should apprehend in the truly gnostic manner the 
truth, that all things which were created for our use are good; as, for example, marriage and procreation, 
when used in moderation; and that it is better than good to i become free of passion, and virtuous by 
assimilation to the divine. But in the case of external things, agreeable or disagreeable, from some they 
abstain, from others not. But in those things from which they abstain from disgust, they plainly find fault with 
the creature and the Creator; and though in appearance they walk faithfully, the opinion they maintain is 
impious. That command, "Thou shall not lust," needs neither the necessity arising from fear, which compels 
to keep from things that are pleasant; nor the reward, which by promise persuades to restrain the impulses 
of passion. 

And those who obey God through the promise, caught by the bait of pleasure, choose obedience not for the 
sake of the commandment, but for the sake of the promise. Nor will turning away from objects of sense, as a 
matter of necessary consequence, produce attachment to intellectual objects. On the contrary, the 
attachment to intellectual objects naturally becomes to the Gnostic an influence which draws away from the 
objects of sense; inasmuch as he, in virtue of the selection of what is good, has chosen what is good 
according to knowledge (<greek>gnwstikwu</greek>), admiring generation, and by sanctifying the Creator 
sanctifying assimilation to the divine. But I shall free myself from lust, let him say, O Lord, for the sake of 
alliance with Thee. For the economy of creation is good, and all things are well administered: nothing 
happens without a cause. I must be in what is Thine, O Omnipotent One. And if I am there, I am near Thee. 
And I would be free of fear that I may be able to draw near to Thee, and to be satisfied with little, practising 
Thy just choice between things good and things like. 

Right mystically and sacredly the apostte, teaching us the choice which is truly gracious, not in the way of 
rejection of other things as bad, but so as to do things better than what is good, has spoken, saying, "So he 
that giveth his virgin in marriage doeth well; and he that giveth her not doeth better; as far as respects 
seemliness and undistracted attendance on the Lord."[1] 

Now we know that things which are difficult are not essential; but that things which are essential have been 
graciously made easy of attainment by God. Wherefore Democritus well says, that "nature and instruction" 
are like each other. And we have briefly assigned the cause. For instruction harmonizes man, and by 
harmonizing makes him natural; and it is no matter whether one was made such as he is by nature, or 
transformed by time and education. The Lord has furnished both; that which is by creation, and that which is 
by creating again and renewal through the covenant. And that is preferable which is advantageous to what 
is superior; but what is superior to everything is mind. So, then, what is really good is seen to be most 
pleasant, and of itself produces the fruit which is desired-tranquillity of soul. "And he who hears Me," it is 

said, "shall rest in peace, confident, and shall be calm without fear of any evil. "[2] "Rely with all thy heart and 

thy mind on God."[3] 

On this wise it is possible for the Gnostic already to have become God. "I said. Ye are gods, and[4] sons of 

the highest." And Empedocles says that the souls of the wise become gods, writing as follows:- 

"At last prophets, minstrels, and physicians. 

And the foremost among mortal men, approach; 

Whence spring gods supreme in honours." 

Man, then, genetically considered, is formed in accordance with the idea of the connate spirit. For he is not 
created formless and shapeless in the workshop of nature, where mystically the production of man is 
accomplished, both art and essence being common. But the individual man is stamped according to the 
impression produced in the soul by the objects of his choice. Thus we say that Adam was perfect, as far as 
respects his formation; for none of the distinctive characteristics of the idea and form of man were wanting to 
him; but in the act of coming into being he received perfection. And he was justified by obedience; this was 
reaching manhood, as far as depended on him. And the cause lay in his choosing, and especially in his 
choosing what was forbidden. God was not the cause. 

For production is twofold-of things procreated, and of things that grow. And manliness in man, who is 
subject to perturbation, as they say, makes him who partakes of it essentially fearless and invincible; and 
anger is the mind's satellite in patience, and endurance, and the like; and self-constraint and salutary sense 
are set over desire. But God is impassible, free of anger, destitute of desire. And He is not free of fear, in the 
sense of avoiding what is terrible; or temperate, in the sense of having command of desires. For neither can 
the nature of God fall in with anything terrible, nor does God flee fear; just as He will not feel desire, so as to 
rule over desires. Accordingly that Pythagorean saying was mystically uttered respecting us, "that man 
ought to become one;" for the high priest himself is one, God being one in the immutable state of the 
perpetual flow[5] or good things. Now the Saviour has taken away wrath in and with lust, wrath being lust of 
vengeance. For universally liability to feeling belongs to every kind of desire; and man, when deified purely 
into a passionless state, becomes a unit. As, then, those, who at sea are held by an anchor, pull at the 
anchor, but do not drag it to them, but drag themselves to the anchor; so those who, according to the gnostic 
life, draw God towards them, imperceptibly bring themselves to God: for he who reverences God, 
reverences himself. In the contemplative life, then, one in worshipping God attends to himself, and through 
his own spotless purification beholds the holy God holily; for self-control, being present, surveying and 
contemplating itself uninterruptedly, is as far as possible assimilated to God. 

CHAP. XXIV.-THE REASON AND END OF DIVINE PUNISHMENTS. 

Now that is in our power, of which equally with its opposite we are masters,-as, say to philosophize or not, to 
believe or disbelieve. In consequence, then, of our being equally masters of each of the opposites, what 
depends on us is found possible. Now the commandments may be done or not done by us, who, as is 
reasonable, are liable to praise and blame. And those, again, who are punished on account of sins 
committed by them, are punished for them alone; for what is done is past, and what is done can never be 
undone. The sins committed before faith are accordingly forgiven by the Lord, not that they may be undone, 
but as if they had not been done. "But not all," says Basilides,[6] "but only sins involuntary and in ignorance, 
are forgiven;" as would be the case were it a man, and not God, that conferred such a boon. To such an one 
Scripture says, "Thou thoughtestthat I would be like thee. "[7] But if we are punished for voluntary sins, we 
are punished not that the sins which are done may be undone, but because they were done. But punishment 
does not avail to him who has sinned, to undo his sin, but that he may sin no more, and that no one else fall 
into the like. Therefore the good God corrects for these three causes: First, that he who is corrected may 
become better than his former self; then that those who are capable of being saved by examples may be 
driven back, being admonished; and thirdly, that he who is injured may not be readily despised, and be apt 
to receive injury. And there are two methods of correction-the instructive and the punitive, which we have 
called the disciplinary. It ought to be known, then, that those who fall into sin after baptism[1] are those who 
are subjected to discipline; for the deeds done before are remitted, and those done after are purged. It is in 
reference to the unbelieving that it is said, "that they are reckoned as the chaff which the wind drives from the 
face of the earth, and the drop which falls from a vessel. "[2] 

CHAP. XXV.--TRUE PERFECTION CONSISTS IN THE KNOWLEDGE AND LOVE OF GOD. 

"Happy he who possesses the culture of knowledge, and is not moved to the injury of the citizens or to 
wrong actions, but contemplates the undecaying order of immortal nature, how and in what way and manner 
it subsists. To such the practice of base deeds attaches not," Rightly, then, Plato says, "that the man who 

devotes himself to the contemplation of ideas will live as a god among men; now the mind is the place of 
ideas, and God is mind." He says that be who contemplates the unseen God lives as a god among men. 
And in the Sophist, Socrates calls the stranger of Elea, who was a dialectician, "god:" "Such are the gods 
who, like stranger guests, frequent cities. For when the soul, rising above the sphere of generation, is by 
itself apart, and dwells amidst ideas," like the Coryphaeus in Theaetetus, now become as an angel, it will 
be with Christ, being rapt in contemplation, ever keeping in view the will of God; in reality "Alone wise, while 
these flit like shadows. "[3] For the dead bury their dead." Whence Jeremiah says: "I will fill it with the 
earth-born dead whom mine anger has smitten. "[4] 

God, then, being not a subject for demonstration, cannot be the object of science. But the Son is wisdom, 
and knowledge, and truth, and all else that has affinity thereto. He is also susceptible of demonstration and 
of description. And all the powers of the Spirit, becoming collectively one thing, terminate in the same 
point-that is, in the Son. But He is incapable of being declared, in respect of the idea of each one of His 
powers. And the Son is neither simply one thing as one thing, nor many things as parts, but one thing as all 
things; whence also He is all things. For He is the circle of all powers rolled and united into one unity. 
Wherefore the Word is called the Alpha and the Omega, of whom alone the end becomes beginning, and 
ends again at the original beginning without any break. Wherefore also to believe in Him, and by Him, is to 
become a unit, being indissolubly united in Him; and to disbelieve is to be separated, disjoined, divided. 
"Wherefore thus saith the Lord, Every alien son is uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in flesh" (that 
is, unclean in body and soul): "there shall not enter one of the strangers into the midst of the house of Israel, 
but the Lerites."[5] He calls those that would not believe, but would disbelieve, strangers. Only those who 
live purely being true priests of God. Wherefore, of all the circumcised tribes, those anointed to be high 
priests, and kings, and prophets, were reckoned more holy. Whence He commands them not to touch dead 
bodies, or approach the dead; not that the body was polluted, but that sin and disobedience were incarnate, 
and embodied, and dead, and therefore abominable. It was only, then, when a father and mother, a son and 
daughter died, that the priest was allowed to enter, because these were related only by flesh and seed, to 
whom the priest was indebted for the immediate cause of his entrance into life. And they purify themselves 
seven days, the period in which Creation was consummated. For on the seventh day the rest is celebrated; 
and on the eighth he brings a propitiation, as is written in Ezekiel, according to which propitiation the promise 
is to be received. [6] And the perfect propitiation, I take it, is that propitious faith in the Gospel which is by the 
law and the prophets, and the purity which shows itself in universal obedience, with the abandonment of the 
things of the world; in order to that grateful surrender of the tabernacle, which results from the enjoyment of 
the soul. Whether, then, the time be that which through the seven periods enumerated returns to the chiefest 
rest,[7] or the seven heavens, which some reckon one above the other; or whether also the fixed sphere 
which borders on the intellectual world be called the eighth, the expression denotes that the Gnostic ought to 
rise out of the sphere of creation and of sin. After these seven days, sacrifices are offered for sins. For there 
is still fear of change, and it touches the seventh circle. The righteous Job says: "Naked came I out of my 
mother's womb, and naked shall I return there;"[1] not naked of possessions, for that were a trivial and 
common thing; but, as a just man, he departs naked of evil and sin, and of the unsightly shape which follows 
those who have led bad lives. For this was what was said, "Unless ye be converted, and become as 
children, "[2] pure in flesh, holy in soul by abstinence from evil deeds; showing that He would have us to be 
such as also He generated us from our mother-the water.[3] For the intent of one generation succeeding 
another is to immortalize by progress. "But the lamp of the wicked shall be put out."[4] That purity in body 
and soul which the Gnostic partakes of, the all-wise Moses indicated, by employing repetition in describing 
the incorruptibility of body and of soul in the person of Rebecca, thus: "Now the virgin was fair, and man had 
not known her."[5] And Rebecca, interpreted, means "glory of God;" and the glory of God is immortality. [6] 
This is in reality righteousness, not to desire other things, but to be entirely the consecrated temple of the 
Lord. Righteousness is peace of life and a well-conditioned state, to which the Lord dismissed her when He 
said, "Depart into peace. "[7] For Salem is, by interpretation, peace; of which our Saviour is enrolled King, as 
Moses says, Melchizedek king of Salem, priest of the most high God, who gave bread and wine, furnishing 
consecrated food for a type of the Eucharist. And Melchizedek is interpreted "righteous king;" and the name 
is a synonym for righteousness and peace. Basilides however, supposes that Righteousness and her 
daughter Peace dwell stationed in the eighth sphere. 

But we must pass from physics to ethics, which are clearer; for the discourse concerning these will follow 
after the treatise in hand. The Saviour Himself, then, plainly initiates us into the mysteries, according to the 
words of the tragedy: [8]- 
"Seeing those who see, he also gives the orgies." 

And if you ask, 

"These orgies, what is their nature 

You will hear again:- 

"It is forbidden to mortals uninitiated in the Bacchic rites to know." 

And if any one will inquire curiously what they are, let him hear:- 
"It is not lawful for thee to hear, but they are worth knowing; 
The rites of the God detest him who practises impiety." 

Now God, who is without beginning, is the perfect beginning of the universe, and the producer of the 
beginning. As, then. He is being. He is the first principle of the department of action, as He is good, of 
morals; as He is mind, on the other hand. He is the first principle of reasoning and of judgment. Whence also 
He alone is Teacher, who is the only Son of the Most High Father, the Instructor of men. 

CHAP. XXVI. -HOW THE PERFECT MAN TREATS THE BODY AND THE THINGS OF THE 
WORLD. 

Those, then, who run down created existence and vilify the body are wrong; not considering that the frame of 
man was formed erect for the contemplation of heaven, and that the organization of the senses tends to 
knowledge; and that the members and parts are arranged for good, not for pleasure. Whence this abode 
becomes receptive of the soul which is most precious to God; and is dignified with the Holy Spirit through 
the sanctification of soul and body, perfected with the perfection of the Saviour. And the succession of the 
three virtues is found in the Gnostic, who morally, physically, and logically occupies himself with God. For 
wisdom is the knowledge of things divine and human; and righteousness is the concord of the parts of the 
soul; and holiness is the service of God. But if one were to say that he disparaged the flesh, and generation 
on account of it, by quoting Isaiah, who says, "All flesh is grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of 
grass: the grass is withered, and the flower has fallen; but the word of the Lord endureth for ever; "[9] let him 
hear the Spirit interpreting the matter in question by Jeremiah, "And I scattered them like dry sticks, that are 
made to fly by the wind into the desert. This is the lot and portion of your disobedience, saith the Lord. As 
thou hast forgotten Me, and hast trusted in lies, so will I discover thy hinder parts to thy face; and thy disgrace 
shall be seen, thy adultery, and thy neighing," and so on. [10] For "the flower of grass," and "walking after the 
flesh," and "being carnal," according to the apostle, are those who are in their sins. The soul of man is 
confessedly the better part of man, and the body the inferior. But neither is the soul good by nature, nor, on 
the other hand, is the body bad by nature. Nor is that which is not good straightway bad. For there are things 
which occupy a middle place, and among them are things to be preferred, and things to be rejected. The 
constitution of man, then, which has its place among things of sense, was necessarily composed of things 
diverse, but not opposite-body and soul. 

Always therefore the good actions, as better, attach to the better and ruling spirit; and voluptuous and sinful 
actions are attributed to the worse, the sinful one. 

Now the soul of the wise man and Gnostic, as sojourning in the body, conducts itself towards it gravely and 
respectfully, not with inordinate affections, as about to leave the tabernacle if the time of departure summon. 
"I am a stranger in the earth, and a sojourner with you," it is said.[1] And hence Basilides says, that he 
apprehends that the election are strangers to the world, being supramundane by nature. But this is not the 
case. For all things are of one God. And no one is a stranger to the world by nature, their essence being 
one, and God one. But the elect man dwells as a sojourner, knowing all things to be possessed and 
disposed of; and he makes use of the things which the Pythagoreans make out to be the threefold good 
things. The body, too, as one sent on a distant pilgrimage, uses inns and dwellings by the way, having care 
of the things of the world, of the places where he halts; but leaving his dwelling-place and property without 
excessive emotion; readily following him that leads him away from life; by no means and on no occasion 
turning back; giving thanks for his sojourn, and blessing [God] for his departure, embracing the mansion that 
is in heaven. "For we know, that, if the earthly house of our tabernacle be dissolved, we have a building of 
God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. For we that are in this tabernacle do groan, 
desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven: if so be that being clothed we shall not be 
found naked. For we as the apostle says; "walk by faith, not by sight,"[2] "and we are willing rather to be 
absent from the body, and present with God." The rather is in comparison. And comparison obtains in the 
case of things that fall under resemblance; as the more valiant man is more valiant among the valiant, and 
most valiant among cowards. Whence he adds, "Wherefore we strive, whether present or absent, to be 
accepted with Him, "[3] that is, God, whose work and creation are all things, both the world and things 
supramundane. I admire Epicharmus, who clearly says:- 
"Endowed with pious mind, you will not, in dying. 
Suffer aught evil. The spirit will dwell in heaven above;" 

and the minstrel[4] who sings:- 

"The souls of the wicked flit about below the skies on earth, 
In murderous pains beneath inevitable yokes of evils; 
But those of the pious dwell in the heavens, 
Hymning in songs the Great, the Blessed One." 

The soul is not then sent down from heaven to what is worse. For God works all things up to what is better. 
But the soul which has chosen the best life-the life that is from God and righteousness-exchanges earth for 
heaven. With reason therefore. Job, who had attained to knowledge, said, "Now I know that thou canst do all 
things; and nothing is impossible to Thee. For who tells me of what I know not, great and wonderful things 
with which I was unacquainted ? And I felt myself vile, considering myself to be earth and ashes. "[5] For he 
who, being in a state of ignorance, is sinful, "is earth and ashes; "while he who is in a state of knowledge, 
being assimilated as far as possible to God, is already spiritual, and so elect. And that Scripture calls the 
senseless and disobedient "earth," will be made clear by Jeremiah the prophet, saying, in reference to 
Joachim and his brethren "Earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord; Write this man, as man 
excommunicated. "[6] And another prophet says again, "Hear, O heaven; and give ear, O earth, "[7] calling 
understanding "ear," and the soul of the Gnostic, that of the man who has applied himself to the 
contemplation of heaven and divine things, and in this way has become an Israelite, "heaven." For again he 
calls him who has made ignorance and hardness of heart his choice, "earth. "And the expression" give ear" 
he derives from the "organs of hearing, the ears," attributing carnal things to those who cleave to the things 
of sense. Such are they of whom Micah the prophet says, "Hear the word of the Lord, ye peoples who dwell 
with pangs. "[8] And Abraham said, "By no means. The Lord is He who judgeth the earth; "[9] "since he that 
believeth not, is," according to the utterance of the Saviour, "condemned already. "[10] And there is written in 
the Kings[11] the judgment and sentence of the Lord, which stands thus: "The Lord hears the righteous, but 
the wicked He saveth not, because they do not desire to know God." For the Almighty will not accomplish 
what is absurd. What do the heresies say to this utterance, seeing Scripture proclaims the Almighty God to 
be good, and not the author of evil and wrong, if indeed ignorance arises from one not knowing? But God 
does nothing absurd. "For this God," it is said, "is our God, and there is none to save besides Him. "[12] "For 
there is no unrighteousness with God,"[1] according to the apostle. And clearly yet the prophet teaches the 
will of God, and the gnostic proficiency, in these words: "And now, Israel, what doth the Lord God require of 
thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, and walk in all His ways, and love Him, and serve Him alone?"[2] He asks 
of thee, who hast the power of choosing salvation. What is it, then, that the Pythagoreans mean when they 
bid us "pray with the voice"? As seems to me, not that they thought the Divinity could not hear those who 
speak silently, but because they wished prayers tO be right, which no one would be ashamed to make in 
the knowledge of many. We shall, however, treat of prayer in due course by and by. But we ought to have 
works that cry aloud, as becoming "those who walk in the day. "[3] "Let thy works shine, "[4] and behold a 
man and his works before his face. "For behold God and His works. "[5] For the gnostic must, as far as is 
possible, imitate God. And the poets call the elect in their pages godlike and gods, and equal to the gods, 
and equal in sagacity to Zeus, and having counsels like the gods, and resembling the gods, -nibbling, as 
seems to me, at the expression, "in the image and likeness. "[6] 

Euripides accordingly says, "Golden wings are round my back, and I am shod with the winged sandals of 
the Sirens; and I shall go aloft into the wide ether, to hold convene with Zeus." 

But I shall pray the Spirit of Christ to wing me to my Jerusalem. For the Stoics say that heaven is properly a 
city, but places here on earth are not cities; for they are called so, but are not. For a city is an important thing, 
and the people a decorous body, and a multitude of men regulated by law as the church by the word-a city 
on earth impregnable-free from tyranny; a product of the divine will on earth as in heaven. Images of this city 
the poets create with their pen. For the Hyperboreans, and the Arimaspian cities, and the Elysian plains, are 
commonwealths of just men. And we know Plato's city placed as a pattern in heaven. [7] 

THE STROMATA, OR MISCELLANIES: BOOK V(chap.ito 

Chap. XII) ^^t 

BOOKV. 

CHAP. I. -ON FAITH 

Of the Gnostic so much has been cursorily, as it were, written. We proceed now to the sequel, and must 
again contemplate faith; for there are some that draw the distinction, that faith has reference to the Son, and 
knowledge to the Spirit. But it has escaped their notice that, in order to believe truly in the Son, we must 
believe that He is the Son, and that He came, and how, and for what, and respecting His passion; and we 
must know who is the Son of God. Now neither is knowledge without faith, nor faith without knowledge. Nor is 
the Father without the Son; for the Son is with the Father. And the Son is the true teacher respecting the 
Father; and that we may believe in the Son, we must know the Father, with whom also is the Son. Again, in 
order that we may know the Father, we must believe in the Son, that it is the Son of God who teaches; for 
from faith to knowledge by the Son is the Father. And the knowledge of the Son and Father, which is 
according to the gnostic rule-that which in reality is gnostic-is the attainment and comprehension of the truth 
by the truth. 

We, then, are those who are believers in what is not believed, and who are Gnostics as to what is unknown; 
that is. Gnostics as to what is unknown and disbelieved by all, but believed and known by a few; and 
Gnostics, not describing actions by speech, but Gnostics in the exercise of contemplation. Happy is he who 
speaks in! the ears of the hearing. Now faith is the ear of the soul. And such the Lord intimates faith to be, 
when He says, "He that hath ears to hear, let him hear;"[1] so that by believing he may comprehend what He 
says, as He says it. Homer, too, the oldest of the poets, using the word "hear" instead of perceive"-the 
specific for the generic term-writes:- 
"Him most they heard."[2] 

For, in fine, the agreement and harmony of the faith of both[3] contribute to one end-salvation. We have in 
the apostle an unerring witness: "For I desire to see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual gift, in 
order that ye may be strengthened; that is, that I may be comforted in you, by the mutual faith of you and 
me. "[4] And further on again he adds, "The righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith. "[5] The 
apostle, then, manifestly announces a twofold faith, or rather one which admits of growth and perfection; for 
the common faith lies beneath as a foundation. [6] To those, therefore, who desire to be healed, and are 
moved by faith. He added, "Thy faith hath saved thee. "[7] But that which is excellently built upon is 
consummated in the believer, and is again perfected by the faith which results from instruction and the word, 
in order to the performance of the commandments. Such were the apostles, in whose case it is said that 
"faith removed mountains and transplanted trees. "[8] Whence, perceiving the greatness of its power, they 
asked "that faith might be added to them;"[9] a faith which salutarily bites the soil "like a grain of mustard," 
and grows magnificently in it, to such a degree that the reasons of things sublime rest on it. For if one by 
nature knows God, as Basilides thinks, who calls intelligence of a superior order at once faith and kingship, 
and a creation worthy of the essence of the Creator; and explains that near Him exists not power, but 
essence and nature and substance; and says that faith is not the rational assent of the soul exercising 
free-will, but an undefined beauty, belonging immediately to the creature;-the precepts both of the Old and 
of the New Testament are, then, superfluous, if one is saved by nature, as Valentinus would have it, and is a 
believer and an elect man by nature, as Basilides thinks; and nature would have been able, one time or 
other, to have shone forth, apart from the Saviour's appearance. Butwere they to say that the visit of the 
Saviour was necessary, then the properties of nature are gone from them, the elect being saved by 
instruction, and purification, and the doing of good works. Abraham, accordingly, who through hearing 
believed the voice, which promised under the oak in Mamre," I will give this land to thee, and to thy seed," 
was either elect or not. But if he was not, how did he straightway believe, as it were naturally? And if he was 
elect, their hypothesis is done away with, inasmuch as even previous to the coming of the Lord an election 
was found, and that saved: "For it was reckoned to him for righteousness. "[1] For if any one, following 
Marcion, should dare to say that the Creator (<greek>Dhmiourgon</greek>) saved the man that believed on 
him, even before the advent of the Lord, (the' election being saved with their own proper salvation); the 
power of the good Being will be eclipsed; inasmuch as late only, and subsequent to the Creator spoken of 

by them in words of be good men, it made tiie attempt to save, and by instruction, and in imitation of iiim. But 
if, being sucii, tiie good Being save, according to tiiem; neitiier is it iiis own tiiat lie saves, nor is it witii tiie 
consent of iiim wiio formed tiie creation tiiat lie essays salvation, but by force or fraud. And iiow can lie any 
more be good, acting tiius, and being posterior? But if tiie locality is different, and the dwelling-place of the 
Omnipotent is remote from the dwelling-place of the good God; yet the will of him who saves, having been 
the first to begin, is not inferior to that of the good God. From what has been previously proved, those who 
believe not are proved senseless: "For their paths are perverted, and they know not peace," saith the 
prophet. [2] "But foolish and unlearned questions" the divine Paul exhorted to "avoid, because they gender 
strifes. "[3] And Aeschylus exclaims:- 

"In what profits not, labour not in vain." 

For that investigation, which accords with faith, which builds, on the foundation of faith, [4] the august 
knowledge of the truth, we know to be the best. Now we know that neither things which are clear are made 
subjects of investigation, such as if it is day, while it is day; nor things unknown, and never destined to 
become clear, as whether the stars are even or odd in number; northings convertible; and those are so 
which can be said equally by those who take the opposite side, as if what is in the womb is a living creature 
or not. A fourth mode is, when, from either side of those, there is advanced an unanswerable and 
irrefragable argument. If, then, the ground of inquiry, according to all of these modes, is removed, faith is 
established. For we advance to them the unanswerable consideration, that it is God who speaks and 
comes to our help in writing, respecting each one of the points regarding which I investigate. Who, then, is so 
impious as to disbelieve God, and to demand proofs from God as from men? Again, some questions 
demand the evidence of the senses, [5] as if one were to ask whether the fire be warm, or the snow white; 
and some admonition and rebuke, as the question if you ought to honour your parents. And there are those 
that deserve punishment, as to ask proofs of the existence of Providence. There being then a Providence, it 
were impious to think that the whole of prophecy and the economy in reference to a Saviour did not take 
place in accordance with Providence. And perchance one should not even attempt to demonstrate such 
points, the divine Providence being evident from the sight of all its skilful and wise works which, are seen, 
some of which take place in order, and some appear in order. And He who communicated to us being and 
life, has communicated to us also reason, wishing us to live rationally and rightly. For the Word of the Father 
of the universe is not the uttered word (<greek>logou</greek> <greek>proForikou</greek>), but the wisdom 
and most manifest kindness of God, and His power too, which is almighty and truly divine, and not 
incapable of being conceived by those who do not confess-the all-potent will. But since some are 
unbelieving, and some are disputations, all do not attain to the perfection of the good. For neither is it 
possible to attain it without the exercise of free choice; nor does the whole depend on our own purpose; as, 
for example, what is defined to happen. "For by grace we are saved:" not, indeed, without good works; but 
we must, by being formed for what is good, acquire an inclination for it. And we must possess the healthy 
mind which is fixed on the pursuit of the good; in order to which we have the greatest need of divine grace, 
and of right teaching, and of holy susceptibility, and of the drawing of the Father to Him. For, bound in this 
earthly body, we apprehend the objects of sense by means of the body; but we grasp intellectual objects 
by means of the logical faculty itself. But if one expect to apprehend all things by the senses, he has fallen 
far from the truth. Spiritually, therefore, the apostle writes respecting the knowledge of God, "For now we see 
as through a glass, but then face to face."[1] For the vision of the truth is given but to few. Accordingly, Plato 
says in the Epinomis, "I do not say that it is possible for all to be blessed and happy; only a few. Whilst we 
live, I pronounce this to be the case. But there is a good hope that after death I shall attain all." To the same 
effect is what we find in Moses: "No man shall see My face, and live. "[2] For it is evident that no one during 
the period of life has been able to apprehend God clearly. But" the pure in heart shall see God, "[3] when 
they arrive at the final perfection. For since the soul became too enfeebled for the apprehension of realities, 
we needed a divine teacher. The Saviour is sent down-a teacher and leader in the acquisition of the 
good-the secret and sacred token of the great Providence. "Where, then, is the scribe? where is the 
searcher of this world? Hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world?"[4] it is said. And again, "I will 
destroy the wisdom of the wise, and bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent, "[5] plainly of those 
wise in their own eyes, and disputatious. Excellently therefore Jeremiah says, "Thus saith the Lord, Stand in 
the ways, and ask for the eternal paths, "what is the good way, and walk in it, and ye shall find expiation for 
your souls. "[6] Ask, he says, and inquire of those who know, without contention and dispute. And on learning 
the way of truth, let us walk on the right way, without turning till we attain to what we desire: It was therefore with 
reason that the king of the Romans (his name was Numa), being a Pythagorean, first of all men, erected a 
temple to Faith and Peace. "And to Abraham, on believing, righteousness was reckoned. "[7] He, 
prosecuting the lofty philosophy of aerial phenomena, and the sublime philosophy of the movements in the 
heavens, was called Abram, which is interpreted "sublime father."[8] But afterwards, on looking up to 

heaven, whether it was that he saw the Son in the spirit, as some explain, or a glorious angel, or in any other 
way recognised God to be superior to the creation, and all the order in it, he receives in addition the Alpha, 
the knowledge of the one and only God, and is called Abraam, having, instead of a natural philosopher, 
become wise, and a lover of God. For it is interpreted, "elect father of sound." For by sound is the uttered 
word: the mind is its father; and the mind of the good man is elect. I cannot forbear praising exceedingly the 
poet of Agrigentum, who celebrates faith as follows:- 
"Friends, I know, then, that there is truth in the myths 
Which I will relate. But very difficult to men. 
And irksome to the mind, is the attempt of faith. "[9] 

Wherefore also the apostle exhorts, "that your faith should not be in the wisdom of men," who profess to 
persuade, "but in the power of God,"[1 0] which alone without proofs, by mere faith, is able to save. "For the 
most approved of those that are reputable knows how to keep watch. And justice will apprehend the forger 
and witnesses of lies," says the Ephesian.[1 1] For he, having derived his knowledge from the barbarian 
philosophy, is acquainted with the purification by fire of those who have led bad lives, which the Stoics 
afterwards called the Conflagration (<greek>ekpurwsiu</greek>), in which also they teach that each will 
arise exactly as he was, so treating of the resurrection; while Plato says as follows, that the earth at certain 
periods is purified by fire and water: "There have been many destructions of men in many ways; and there 
shall be very great ones by fire and water; and others briefer by innumerable causes." And after a little he 
adds: "And, in truth, there is a change of the objects which revolve about earth and heaven; and in the 
course of long periods there is the destruction of the objects on earth by a great conflagration." Then he 
subjoins respecting the deluge: "But when, again, the gods deluge the earth to purify it with water, those on 
the mountains herdsmen and shepherds, are saved; those in your cities are carried down by the rivers into 
the sea." And we showed in the first Miscellany[12] that the philosophers of the Greeks are called thieves, 
inasmuch as they have taken without acknowledgment their principal dogmas from Moses and the 
prophets. To which also we shall add, that the angels who had obtained the superior rank, having sunk into 
pleasures, told to the women[13] the secrets which had come to their knowledge; while the rest of the angels 
concealed them, or rather, kept them against the coming of the Lord. Thence emanated the doctrine of 
providence, and the revelation of high things; and prophecy having already been imparted to the 
philosophers of the Greeks, the treatment of dogma arose among the philosophers, sometimes true when 
they hit the mark, and sometimes erroneous, when they comprehended not the secret of the prophetic 
allegory. And this it is proposed briefly to indicate in running over the points requiring mention. Faith, then, 
we say, we are to show must not be inert and alone, but accompanied with investigation. For I do not say 
that we are not to inquire at all. For "Search, and thou shaltfind,"[1] it is said. 
"What is sought may be captured. 
But what is neglected escapes," 
according to Sophocles. 

The like also says Menander the comic poet:- 

"All things sought. 

The wisest say, need anxious thought." 

But we ought to direct the visual faculty of the soul aright to discovery, and to clear away obstacles; and to 

cast clean away contention, and envy, and strife, destined to perish miserably from among men. 

For very beautifully does Timon of Phlius write:- 

"And Strife, the Plague of Mortals, stalks vainly shrieking. 

The sister of Murderous Quarrel and Discord, 

Which rolls blindly over all things. But then 

It sets its head towards men, and casts them on hope." 

Then a little below he adds:- 

"For who hath set these to fight in deadly strife? 

A rabble keeping pace with Echo; for, enraged at those silent. 

It raised an evil disease against men, and many perished;" 

Of the speech which denies what is false, and of the dilemma, of that which is concealed, of the Sorites, and 
of the Crocodilean, of that which is open, and of ambiguities and sophisms. To inquire, then, respecting 
God, if it tend not to strife, but to discovery, is salutary. For it is written in David, "The poor eat, and shall be 
filled; and they shall praise the Lord that seek Him. Your heart shall live for ever."[2] For they who seek Him 
after the true search, praising the Lord, shall be filled with the gift that comes from God, that is, knowledge. 

And their soul shall live; for the soul is figuratively termed the heart, which ministers life: for by the Son is the 
Father known. 

We ought not to surrender our ears to all who speak and write rashly. For cups also, which are taken hold of 
by many by the ears, are dirtied, and lose the ears; and besides, when they fall they are broken. In the same 
way also, those, who have polluted the pure hearing of faith by many trifles, at last becoming deaf to the 
truth, become useless and fall to the earth. It is not, then, without reason that we commanded boys to kiss 
their relations, holding them by the ears; indicating this, that the feeling of love is engendered by hearing. 
And "God," who is known to those who love, "is love, "[3] as "God," who by instruction is communicated to 
the faithful, "is faithful; "[4] and we must be allied to Him by divine love: so that by like we may see like, 
hearing the word of truth guilelessly and purely, as children who obey us. And this was what he, whoever he 
was, indicated who wrote on the entrance to the temple at Epidaurus the inscription:- 

"Pure he must be who goes within 
The incense-perfumed fane." 

And purity is "to think holy thoughts." "Except ye become as these little children, ye shall not enter," it is said, 
"into the kingdom of heaven. "[5] For there the temple of God is seen established on three foundations-faith, 
hope, and love. 

CHAP. II. --ON HOPE. 

Respecting faith we have adduced sufficient testimonies of writings among the Greeks. But in order not to 
exceed bounds, through eagerness to collect a very great many also respecting hope and love, suffice it 
merely to say that in the Crito Socrates, who prefers a good life and death to life itself, thinks that we have 
hope of another life after death. 

Also in the Phaedrus he says, "That only when in a separate state can the soul become partaker of the 
wisdom which is true, and surpasses human power; and when, having reached the end of hope by 
philosophic love, desire shall waft it to heaven, then," says he, "does it receive the commencement of 
another, an immortal life." And in the Symposium he says, "That there is instilled into all the natural love of 
generating what is like, and in men of generating men alone, and in the good man of the generation of the 
counterpart of himself. But it is impossible for the good man to do this without possessing the perfect virtues, 
in which he will train the youth who have recourse to him." And as he says in the Theaetetus, "He will beget 
and finish men. For some procreate by the body, others by the soul;" since also with the barbarian 
philosophers to teach and enlighten is called to regenerate; and "I have begotten you in Jesus Christ, "[6] 
says the good apostle somewhere. 
Empedocles, too, enumerates friendship among the elements, conceiving it as a combining love:- 

"Which do you look at with your mind; and don't sit gaping with your eyes." 

Parmenides, too, in his poem, alluding to hope, speaks thus:- 

"Yet look with the mind certainly on what is absent as present. 

For it will not sever that which is from the grasp it has of that which is Not, even if scattered in every direction 

over the world or combined." 

CHAP. III. -THE OBJECTS OF FAITH AND HOPE PERCEIVED BY THE MIND ALONE. 

For he who hopes, as he who believes, sees intellectual objects and future things with the mind. If, then, we 
affirm that aught is just, and affirm it to be good, and we also say that truth is something, yet we have never 
seen any of such objects with our eyes, but with our mind alone. Now the Word of God says, "I am the 
truth. "[1] The Word is then to be contemplated by the mind. "Do you aver," it was said, [2] "that there are any 
true philosophers?" "Yes," said I, "those who love to contemplate the truth." In the Phaedrus also, Plato, 
speaking of the truth, shows it as an idea. Now an idea is a conception of God; and this the barbarians have 
termed the Word of God. The words are as follow: "For one must then dare to speak the truth, especially in 
speaking of the truth. For the essence of the soul, being colourless, formless, and intangible, is visible only 
to God, [3] its guide." Now the Word issuing forth was the cause of creation; then also he generated himself, 
"when the Word had become flesh, "[4] that He might be seen. The righteous man will seek the discovery 
that flows from love, to which if he haste he prospers. For it is said, "To him that knocketh, it shall be opened: 
ask, and it shall be given to you. "[5] "For the violent that storm the kingdom "[6] are not so in disputations 
speeches; but by continuance in a right life and unceasing prayers, are said "to take it by force," wiping 

away the blots left by their previous sins. 

"You may obtain wickedness, even in great abundance? 

And him who toils God helps; 

For the gifts of the Muses, hard to win. 

Lie not before you, for any one to bear away." 

The knowledge of ignorance is, then, the first lesson in walking according to the Word. An ignorant man has 

sought, and having sought, he finds the teacher; and finding has believed, and believing has hoped; and 

henceforward having loved, is assimilated to what was loved-en-deavouring to be what he first loved. Such 

is the method Socrates shows Alcibiades, who thus questions: "Do you not think that I shall know about what 

is right otherwise?" "Yes, if you have found out." "But you don't think I have found out?" "Certainly, if you have 

sought." 

"Then you don't think that I have sought?" "Yes, if you think you do not know. "[8] So with the lamps of the 

wise virgins, lighted at night in the great darkness of ignorance, which the Scripture signified by "night." Wise 

souls, pure as virgins, understanding themselves to be situated amidst the ignorance of the world, kindle the 

light, and rouse the mind, and illumine the darkness, and dispel ignorance, and seek truth, and await the 

appearance of the Teacher. 

"The mob, then," said I, "cannot become a philosopher."[9] 

"Many rod-bearers there are, but few Bacchi," according to Plato. "For many are called, but few 

chosen. "[10] "Knowledge is not in all,"[1 1] says the apostle. "And pray that we may be delivered from 

unreasonable and wicked men: for all men have not faith. "[12] And the Poetics of Cleanthes, the Stoic, writes 

to the following effect:- 

"Look not to glory, wishing to be suddenly wise. 

And fear not the undiscerning and rash opinon of the many; 

For the multitude has not an intelligent, or wise, or right judgment. 

And it is in few men that you will find this. "[13] 

And more sententiously the comic poet briefly says:- 
"It is a shame to judge of what is right by much noise." 

For they heard, I think, that excellent wisdom, which says to us, "Watch your opportunity in the midst of the 
foolish, and in the midst of the intelligent continue. "[14] And again, "The wise will conceal sense. "[15] For the 
many demand demonstration as a pledge of truth, not satisfied with the bare salvation by faith. 
"But it is strongly incumbent to disbelieve the dominant wicked. 
And as is enjoined by the assurance of our muse. 
Know by dissecting the utterance within your breast." 

"For this is habitual to the wicked," says Empedocles, "to wish to overbear what is true by disbelieving it." 
And that our tenets are probable and worthy of belief, the Greeks shall know, the point being more 
thoroughly investigated in what follows. For we are taught what is like by what is like. For says Solomon, 
"Answer a fool according to his folly. "[1 5] Wherefore also, to those that ask the wisdom that is with us, we are 
to hold out things suitable, that with the greatest possible ease they may, through their own ideas, be likely 
to arrive at faith in the truth. For "I became all things to all men, that I might gain all men."[1] Since also "the 
rain" of the divine grace is sent down "on the just and the unjust."[2] "Is He the God of the Jews only, and not 
also of the Gentiles? Yes, also of the Gentiles: if indeed He is one God, "[3] exclaims the noble apostle. 

CHAP. IV. --DIVINE THINGS WRAPPED UP IN FIGURES BOTH IN THE SACRED AND IN 
HEATHEN WRITERS. 

But since they will believe neither in what is good justly nor in knowledge unto salvation, we ourselves 
reckoning what they claim as belonging to us, because all things are God's; and especially since what is 
good proceeded from us to the Greeks, let us handle those things as they are capable of hearing. For 
intelligence or rectitude this great crowd estimates not by truth, but by what they are delighted with. And they 
will be pleased not more with other things than with what is like themselves. For he who is still blind and 
dumb, not having understanding, or the undazzled and keen vision of the contemplative soul, which the 
Saviour confers, like the uninitiated at the mysteries, or the unmusical at dances, not being yet pure and 
worthy of the pure truth, but still discordant and disordered and material, must stand outside of the divine 
choir. "For we compare spiritual things with spiritual. "[4] Wherefore, in accordance with the method of 
concealment, the truly sacred Word truly divine and most necessary for us, deposited in the shrine of truth, 
was by the Egyptians indicated by what were called among them adyta, and by the Hebrews by the veil. 

Only the consecrated-that is, those devoted to God, circumcised in the desire of the passions for the sal<e 
of love to that which is alone divine-were allowed access to them. For Plato also thought it not lawful for "the 
impure to touch the pure." 

Thence the prophecies and oracles are spoken in enigmas, and the mysteries are not exhibited 
incontinently to all and sundry, but only after certain purifications and previous instructions. 
"For the Muse was not then Greedy of gain or mercenary; Nor were Terpsichore's sweet. Honey-toned, 
silvery soft-voiced Strains made merchandise of." Now those instructed among the Egyptians learned first 
of all that style of the Egyptian letters which is called Epistolographic; and second, the Hieratic, which the 
sacred scribes practise; and finally, and last of all, the Hieroglyphic, of which one kind which is by the first 
elements is literal (Kyriologic), and the other Symbolic. Of the Symbolic, one kind speaks literally by 
imitation, and another writes as it were figuratively; and another is quite allegorical, using certain enigmas. 
Wishing to express Sun in writing, they make a circle; and Moon, a figure like the Moon, like its proper 
shape. But in using the figurative style, by transposing and transferring, by changing and by transforming in 
many ways as suits them, they draw characters. In relating the praises of the kings in theological myths, they 
write in anaglyphs. [5] Let the following stand as a specimen of the third species-the Enigmatic. For the rest 
of the stars, on account of their oblique course, they have figured like the bodies of serpents; but the sun, 
like that of a beetle, because it makes a round figure of ox-dung, [6] and rolls it before its face. And they say 
that this creature lives six months underground, and the other division of the year above ground, and emits 
its seed into the ball, and brings forth; and that there is not a female beetle. All then, in a word, who have 
spoken of divine things, both Barbarians and Greeks, have veiled the first principles of things, and 
delivered the truth in enigmas, and symbols, and allegories, and metaphors, and such like tropes. [7] Such 
also are the oracles among the Greeks. And the Pythian Apollo is called Loxias. Also the maxims of those 
among the Greeks called wise men, in a few sayings indicate the unfolding of matter of considerable 
importance. Such certainly is that maxim, "Spare Time:" either because life is short, and we ought not to 
expend this time in vain; or, on the other hand, it bids you spare your personal expenses; so that, though you 
live many years, necessaries may not fail you. Similarly also the maxim "Know thyself shows many things; 
both that thou art mortal, and that thou wast born a human being; and also that, in comparison with the other 
excellences of life, thou art of no account, because thou sayest that thou art rich or renowned; or, on the other 
hand, that, being rich or renowned, you are not honoured on account of your advantages alone. And it says. 
Know for what thou wert born, and whose image thou art; and what is thy essence, and what thy creation, and 
what thy relation to God, and the like. And the Spirit says by Isaiah the prophet, "I will give thee treasures, 
hidden, dark."[8] Now wisdom, hard to hunt, is the treasures of God and unfailing riches. But those, taught in 
theology by those prophets, the poets, philosophize much by way of a hidden sense. I mean Orpheus, 
Linus, Musaeus, Homer, and Hesiod, and those in this fashion wise. The persuasive style of poetry is for 
them a veil for the many. Dreams and signs are all more or less obscure to men, not from jealousy (for it 
were wrong to conceive of God as subject to passions), but in order that research, introducing to the 
understanding of enigmas, may haste to the discovery of truth. Thus Sophocles the tragic poet somewhere 
says:- 

"And God I know to be such an one. 
Ever the revealer of enigmas to the wise. 
But to the perverse bad, although a teacher in few words, "- 

putting bad instead of simple. Expressly then respecting all our Scripture, as if spoken in a parable, it is 
written in the Psalms, "Hear, O My people. My law: incline your ear to the words of My mouth. I will open My 
mouth in parables, I will utter My problems from the beginning. "[1] Similarly speaks the noble apostle to the 
following effect: "Howbeitwe speak wisdom among those that are perfect; yet not the wisdom of this world, 
nor of the princes of this world, that come to nought. But we speak the wisdom of God hidden in a mystery; 
which none of the princes of this world knew. For had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of 
glory."[2] 

The philosophers did not exert themselves in contemning the appearance of the Lord. It therefore follows 
that it is the opinion of the wise among the Jews which the apostle inveighs against it. Wherefore he adds, 
"But we preach, as it is written, what eye hath not seen, and ear hath not heard, and hath not entered into the 
heart of man, what God hath prepared for them that love Him. For God hath revealed it to us by the Spirit. For 
the Spirit searcheth all things, even the deep things of God. "[3] For he recognises the spiritual man and the 
Gnostic as the disciple of the Holy Spirit dispensed by God, which is the mind of Christ. "But the natural man 
receiveth not the things of the Spirit, for they are foolishness to him. "[4] Now the apostle, in contradistinction 
to gnostic perfection, calls the common faith[5] the foundation, and sometimes milk, writing on this wise: 
"Brethren, I could not speak to you as to spiritual, but as to carnal, to babes in Christ. I have fed you with milk, 
not with meat: for ye were not able. Neither yet are ye now able. For ye are yet carnal: for whereas there is 
among you envy and strife, are ye not carnal, and walk as men? "[6] Which things are the choice of those 
men who are sinners. But those who abstain from these things give their thoughts to divine things, and 

partake of gnostic food. "According to tiie grace," it is said, "given to me as a wise master builder, I iiave 
laid the foundation. And another buildeth on it gold and silver, precious stones. "[7] Such is the gnostic 
superstructure on the foundation of faith in Christ Jesus. But "the stubble, and the wood, and the hay," are the 
additions of heresies. "But the fire shall try every man's work, of what sort it is." In allusion to the gnostic 
edifice also in the Epistle to the Romans, he says, "For I desire to see you, that I may impart unto you a 
spiritual gift, that ye may be established. "[8] It was impossible that gifts of this sort could be written without 
disguise. 

CHAP. V.-ON THE SYMBOLS OF PYTHAGORAS. 

Now the Pythagorean symbols were connected with the Barbarian philosophy in the most recondite way. 

For instance, the Samian counsels "not to have a swallow in the house ;" that is, not to receive a loquacious, 

whispering, garrulous man, who cannot contain what has been communicated to him. "For the swallow, and 

the turtle, and the sparrows of the field, know the times of their entrance, "[9] says the Scripture; and one 

ought never to dwell with trifles. And the turtle-dove murmuring shows the thankless slander of fault-finding, 

and is rightly expelled the house. 

"Don't mutter against me, sitting by one in one place, another in another."[10] 

The swallow too, which suggests the fable of Pandion, seeing it is right to detest the incidents reported of it, 

some of which we hear Tereus suffered, and some of which he inflicted. It pursues also the musical 

grasshoppers, whence he who is a persecutor of the word ought to be driven away. 

"By sceptre-bearing Here, whose eye surveys Olympus, I have a rusty closet for tongues," 

says Poetry. Aeschylus also says:- 

"But, I, too, have a key as a guard on my tongue." Again Pythagoras commanded, "When the pot is lifted off 

the fire, not to leave its mark in the ashes, but to scatter them;" and "people on getting up from bed, to shake 

the bed-clothes." For he intimated that it was necessary not only to efface the mark, but not to leave even a 

trace of anger; and that on its ceasing to boil, it was to be composed, and all memory of injury to be wiped 

out. "And let not the sun," says the Scripture, "go down upon your wrath. "[11] And he that said, "Thou shall 

not desire, "[12] took away all memory of wrong; for wrath is found to be the impulse of concupiscence in a 

mild soul, especially seeking irrational revenge. In the same way "the bed is ordered to be shaken up," so 

that there may be no recollection of effusion in sleep, [1] or sleep in the day-time; nor, besides, of pleasure 

during the night. And he intimated that the vision of the dark ought to be dissipated speedily by the light of 

truth. "Be angry, and sin not," says David, teaching us that we ought not to assent to the impression, and not 

to follow it up by action, and so confirm wrath. 

Again, "Don't sail on land" is a Pythagorean saw, and shows that taxes and similar contracts, being 

troublesome and fluctuating, ought to be declined. Wherefore also the Word says that the tax-gatherers 

shall be saved with difficulty. [2] 

And again, "Don't wear a ring, nor engrave on it the images of the gods," enjoins Pythagoras; as Moses 

ages before enacted expressly, that neither a graven, nor molten, nor moulded, nor painted likeness should 

be made; so that we may not cleave to things of sense, but pass to intellectual objects: for familiarity with the 

sight disparages the reverence of what is divine; and to worship that which is immaterial by matter, is to 

dishonour it by sense. [3] Wherefore the wisest of the Egypflan priests decided that the temple of Athene 

should be hypaethral, just as the Hebrews constructed the temple without an image. And some, in 

worshipping God, make a representation of heaven containing the stars; and so worship, although Scripture 

says, "Let of Eurysus the Pythagorean, which is as follows, who in his book On Fortune, having said that the 

"Creator, on making man, took Himself as an exemplar," added, "And the body is like the other things, as 

being made of the same material, and fashioned by the best workman, who wrought it, taking Himself as the 

archetype." And, in fine, Pythagoras and his followers, with Plato also, and most of the other philosophers, 

were best acquainted with the Lawgiver, as may be concluded from their doctrine. And by a happy 

utterance of divinaflon, not without divine help, concurring in certain propheflc declaraflons, and, seizing the 

truth in portions and aspects, in terms not obscure, and not going beyond the explanaflon of the things, they 

honoured it on as pertaining the appearance of relation with the truth. Whence the Hellenic philosophy is like 

the torch of wick which men kindle, artificially stealing the light from the sun. But on the proclamation of the 

Word all that holy light shone forth. Then in houses by night the stolen light is useful; but by day the fire 

blazes, and all the night is illuminated by such a sun of intellectual light. 

Now Pythagoras made an epitome of the statements on righteousness in Moses, when he said, "Do not 

step over the balance;" that is, do not transgress equality in distribuflon, honouring justice so. 

"Which friends to friends for ever, binds. 

To cifles, cities-to allies, allies. 

For equality is what is right for men; 

But less to greater ever hostile grows. 

And days of hate begin," as is said witii poetic grace. 

Wiierefore tiie Lord says, "Tal<e IVIy yol<e, for it is gentle and liglit."[5] And on tiie disciples, striving for the 
pre-eminence. He enjoins equality with simplicity, saying "that they must become as little children. "[6] 
Likewise also the apostle writes, that "no one in Christ is bond or free, or Greek or Jew. For the creation in 
Christ Jesus is new, is equality, free of strife-not grasping-just." For envy, and jealousy, and bitterness, 
stand without the divine choir. 

Thus also those skilled in the mysteries forbid "to eat the heart;" teaching that we ought not to gnaw and 
consume the soul by idleness and by vexation, on account of things which happen against one's wishes. 
Wretched, accordingly, was the man whom Homer also says, wandering alone, "ate his own heart." But 
again, seeing the Gospel supposes two ways-the apostles, too, similarly with all the prophets-and seeing 
they call that one "narrow and confined" which is circumscribed according to the commandments and 
prohibitions, and the opposite one, which leads to perdition, "broad and roomy," open to pleasures and 
wrath, and say, "Blessed is the man who walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly, and standeth not in the 
way of sinners. "[7] Hence also comes the fable of Prodicus of Ceus about Virtue and Vice. [8] And 
Pythagoras shrinks not from prohibiting to walk on the public thoroughfares, enjoining the necessity of not 
following the sentiments of the many, which are crude and inconsistent. And Aristocritus, in the first book of 
his Positions against Heracliodorus, mentions a letter to this effect: "Atoeeas king of the Scythians to the 
people of Byzantium: Do not impair my revenues in case my mares drink your water;" for the Barbarian 
indicated symbolically that he would make war on them. Likewise also the poet Euphorion introduces 
Nestor saying, - 
"We have not yet wet the Achaean steeds in Simois." 

Therefore also the Egyptians place Sphinxes[1] before their temples, to signify that the doctrine respecting 
God is enigmatical and obscure; perhaps also that we ought both to love and fear the Divine Being: to love 
Him as gentle and benign to the pious; to fear Him as inexorably just to the impious; for the sphinx shows the 
image of a wild beast and of a man together. 

CHAP. VI. --THE MYSTIC MEANING OF THE TABERNACLE AND ITS FURNITURE. 

It were tedious to go over all the Prophets and the Law, specifying what is spoken in enigmas; for almost the 
whole Scripture gives its utterances in this way. It may suffice, I think, for any one possessed of intelligence, 
for the proof of the point in hand, to select a few examples. 

Now concealment is evinced in the reference of the seven circuits around the temple, which are made 
mention of among the Hebrews; and the equipment on the robe, indicating by the various symbols, which 
had reference to visible objects, the agreement which from heaven reaches down to earth. And the covering 
and the veil were variegated with blue, and purple, and scarlet, and linen. And so it was suggested that the 
nature of the elements contained the revelation of God. For purple is from water, linen from the earth; blue, 
being dark, is like the air, as scarlet is like fire. 

In the midst of the covering and veil, where the priests were allowed to enter, was situated the altar of 
incense, the symbol of the earth placed in the middle of this universe; and from it came the fumes of incense. 
And that place intermediate between the inner veil, where the high priest alone, on prescribed days, was 
permitted to enter, and the external court which surrounded it-free to all the Hebrews-was, they say, the 
middlemost point of heaven and earth. But others say it was the symbol of the intellectual world, and that of 
sense. The coveting, then, the barrier of popular unbelief, was stretched in front of the five pillars, keeping 
back those in the surrounding space. 

So very mystically the five loaves are broken by the Saviour, and fill the crowd of the listeners. For great is 
the crowd that keep to the things of sense, as if they were the only things in existence. "Cast your eyes 
round, and see," says Plato, "that none of the uninitiated listen." Such are they who think that nothing else 
exists, but what they can hold tight with their hands; but do not admit as in the department of existence, 
actions and processes of generation, and the whole of the unseen. For such are those who keep by the five 
senses. But the knowledge of God is a thing inaccessible to the ears and like organs of this kind of people. 
Hence the Son is said to be the Father's face, being the revealer of the Father's character to the five senses 
by clothing Himself with flesh. "But if we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit."[2] "For we walk by faith, 
not by sight,"[3] the noble apostle says. Within the veil, then, is concealed the sacerdotal service; and it 
keeps those engaged in it far from those without. 

Again, there is the veil of the entrance into the holy of holies. Four pillars there are, the sign of the sacred 
tetrad of the ancient covenants. [4] Further, the mystic name of four letters which was affixed to those alone to 
whom the adytum was accessible, is called Jave, which is interpreted, "Who is and shall be." The name of 
God, too, among the Greeks contains four letters. 

Now the Lord, having come alone into the intellectual world, enters by His sufferings, introduced into the 

knowledge of the Ineffable, ascending above every name which is known by sound. The lamp, too, was 

placed to the south of the altar of incense; and by it were shown the motions of the seven planets, that 

perform their revolutions towards the south. For three branches rose on either side of the tamp, and lights on 

them; since also the sun, like the lamp, set in the midst of all the planets, dispenses with a kind of divine 

music the light to those above and to those below. 

The golden lamp conveys another enigma as a symbol of Christ, not in respect of form alone, but in his 

casting light, "at sundry times and divers manners, "[5] on those who believe on Him and hope, and who see 

by means of the ministry of the First-born. And they say that the seven eyes of the Lord "are the seven spirits 

resting on the rod that springs from the root of Jesse. "[6] 

North of the altar of incense was placed a table, on which there was "the exhibition of the loaves;" for the 

most nourishing of the winds are those of the north. And thus are signified certain seats of churches 

conspiring so as to form one body and one assemblage. [7] 

And the things recorded of the sacred ark signify the properties of the world of thought, which is hidden and 

closed to the many. 

And those golden figures, each of them with six wings, signify either the two bears, as some will have it, or 

rather the two hemispheres. And the name cherubim meant "much knowledge." But both together have 

twelve wings, and by the zodiac and time, which moves on it, point out the world of sense. It is of them, I think, 

that Tragedy, discoursing of Nature, says:- 

"Unwearied Time circles full in perennial flow. 
Producing itself. And the twin-bears 
On the swift wandering motions of their wings. 
Keep the Atlantean pole." 

And Atlas, [1] the unsuffering pole, may mean the fixed sphere, or better perhaps, motionless eternity. But I 
think it better to regard the ark, so called from the Hebrew word Thebotha,[2] as signifying something else. It 
is interpreted, one instead of one in all places. Whether, then, it is the eighth region and the world of thought, 
or God, all-embracing, and without shape, and invisible, that is indicated, we may for the present defer 
saying. But it signifies the repose which dwells with the adoring spirits, which are meant by the cherubim. 
For He who prohibited the making of a graven image, would never Himself have made an image in the 
likeness of holy things. [3] Nor is there at all any composite thing, and creature endowed with sensation, of 
the sort in heaven. But the face is a symbol of the rational soul, and the wings are the lofty ministers and 
energies of powers fight and left; and the voice is delightsome glory in ceaseless contemplation. Let it 
suffice that the mystic interpretation has advanced so far. 

Now the high priest's robe is the symbol of the world of sense. The seven planets are represented by the 
five stones and the two carbuncles, for Saturn and the Moon. The former is southern, and moist, and earthy, 
and heavy; the latter aerial, whence she is called by some Artemis, as if Aerotomos (cutting the air); and the 
air is cloudy. And cooperating as they did in the production of things here below, those that by Divine 
Providence are set over the planets are rightly represented as placed on the breast and shoulders; and by 
them was the work of creation, the first week. And the breast is the seat of the heart and soul. 
Differently, the stones might be the various phases of salvation; some occupying the upper, some the lower 
parts of the entire body saved. The three hundred and sixty bells, suspended from the robe, is the space of 
a year, "the acceptable year of the Lord," proclaiming and resounding the stupendous manifestation of the 
Saviour. Further, the broad gold mitre indicates the regal power of the Lord, "since the Head of the Church" 
is the Savour.[4] The mitre that is on it[i.e., the head] is, then, a sign of most princely rule; and otherwise we 
have heard it said, "The Head of Christ is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ."[5] Moreover, there 
was the breastplate, comprising the ephod, which is the symbol of work, and the oracle 
<greek>logion</greek>; and this indicated the Word <greek>logos</greek> by which it was framed, and is 
the symbol of heaven, made by the Word, [6] and subjected to Christ, the Head of all things, inasmuch as it 
moves in the same way, and in a like manner. The luminous emerald stones, therefore, in the ephod, signify 
the sun and moon, the helpers of nature. The shoulder, I take it, is the commencement of the hand. 
The twelve stones, set in four rows on the breast, describe for us the circle of the zodiac, in the four changes 
of the year. It was otherwise requisite that the law and the prophets should be placed beneath the Lord's 
head, because in both Testaments mention is made of the righteous. For were we to say that the apostles 
were at once prophets and righteous, we should say well, "since one and the self-same Holy Spirit works in 
all. "[7] And as the Lord is above the whole world, yea, above the world of thought, so the name engraven on 
the plate has been regarded to signify, above all rule and authority; and it was inscribed with reference both 
to the written commandments and the manifestation to sense. And it is the name of God that is expressed; 
since, as the Son sees the goodness of the Father, God the Saviour works, being called the first principle of 

all things, which was imaged forth from the invisible God first, and before the ages, and which fashioned all 
things which came into being after itself. Nay more, the oracles exhibits the prophecy which by the Word 
cries and preaches, and the judgment that is to come; since it is the same Word which prophesies, and 
judges, and discriminates all things. 

And they say that the robe prophesied the ministry in the flesh, by which He was seen in closer relation to 
the world. So the high priest, putting off his consecrated robe (the universe, and the creation in the universe, 
were consecrated by Him assenting that, what was made, was good), washes himself, and puts on the other 
tunic-a holy-of holies one, so to speak-which is to accompany him into the adytum; exhibiting, as seems to 
me, the Levite and Gnostic, as the chief of other priests (those bathed in water, and clothed in faith alone, 
and expecting their own individual abode), himself distinguishing the objects of the intellect from the things of 
sense, rising above other priests, hasting to the entrance to the world of ideas, to wash himself from the 
things here below, not in water, as formerly one was cleansed on being enrolled in the tribe of Levi. But 
purified already by the gnostic Word in his whole heart, and thoroughly regulated, and having improved that 
mode of life received from the priest to the highest pitch, being quite sanctified both in word and life, and 
having put on the bright array of glory, and received the ineffable inheritance of that spiritual and perfect 
man, "which eye hath not seen and ear hath not heard, and it hath not entered into the heart of man;" and 
having become son and friend, he is now replenished with insatiable contemplation face to face. For there 
is nothing like hearing the Word Himself, who by means of the Scripture inspires fuller intelligence. For so it 
is said, "And he shall put off the linen robe, which he had put on when he entered into the holy place; and 
shall lay it aside there, and wash his body in water in the holy place, and put on his robe."[1] But in one way, 
as I think, the Lord puts off and puts on by descending into the region of sense; and in another, he who 
through Him has believed puts off and puts on, as the apostle intimated, the consecrated stole. Thence, 
after the image of the Lord, the worthiest were chosen from the sacred tribes to be high priests, and those 
elected to the kingly office and to prophecy were anointed. 

CHAP. VII. -THE EGYPTIAN SYMBOLS AND ENIGMAS OF SACRED THINGS. 

Whence also the Egyptians did not entrust the mysteries they possessed to all and sundry, and did not 
divulge the knowledge of divine things to the profane; but only to those destined to ascend the throne, and 
those of the priests that were judged the worthiest, from their nurture, culture, and birth. Similar, then, to the 
Hebrew enigmas in respect to concealment, are those of the Egyptians also. Of the Egyptians, some show 
the sun on a ship, others on a crocodile. And they signify hereby, that the sun, making a passage through 
the delicious and moist air, generates time; which is symbolized by the crocodile in some other sacerdotal 
account. Further, at Diospolis in Egypt, on the temple called Pylon, there was figured a boy as the symbol of 
production, and an old man as that of decay. A hawk, on the other hand, was the symbol of God, as a fish of 
hate; and, according to a different symbolism, the crocodile; of impudence. The whole symbol, then, when 
put together, appears to teach this: "Oh ye who are born and die, God hates impudence." 
And there are those who fashion ears and eyes of costly material, and consecrate them, dedicating them in 
the temples to the gods-by this plainly indicating that God sees and hears all things. Besides, the lion is 
with them the symbol of strength and prowess, as the ox clearly is of the earth itself, and husbandry and 
food, and the horse of fortitude and confidence; while, on the other hand, the sphinx, of strength combined 
with intelligence-as it had a body entirely that of a lion, and the face of a man. Similarly to these, to indicate 
intelligence, and memory, and power, and art, a man is sculptured in the temples. And in what is called 
among them the Komasiae of the gods, they carry about golden images-two dogs, one hawk, and one ibis; 
and the four figures of the images they call four letters. For the dogs are symbols of the two hemispheres, 
which, as it were, go round and keep watch; the hawk, of the sun, for it is fiery and destructive (so they 
attribute pestilential diseases to the sun); the ibis, of the moon, likening the shady parts to that which is dark 
in plumage, and the luminous to the light. And some will have it that by the dogs are meant the tropics, which 
guard and watch the sun's passage to the south and north. The hawk signifies the equinoctial line, which is 
high and parched with heat, as the ibis the ecliptic. For the ibis seems, above other animals, to have 
furnished to the Egyptians the first rudiments of the invention of number and measure, as the oblique line did 
of circles. 

CHAP. VIM. --THE USE OF THE SYMBOLIC STYLE BY POETS AND PHILOSOPHERS. 

But it was not only the most highly intellectual of the Egyptians, but also such of other barbarians as 
prosecuted philosophy, that affected the symbolical style. They say, then, that Idanthuris king of the 
Scythians, as Pherecydes of Syros relates, sent to Darius, on his passing the Ister in threat of war, a symbol, 
instead of a letter, consisting of a mouse, a frog, a bird, a javelin, a plough. And there being a doubt in 
reference to them, as was to be expected, Orontopagas the Chiliarch said that they were to resign the 

kingdom; taking dwellings to be meant by the mouse, waters by the frog, air by the bird, land by the plough, 
arms by the javelin. ButXiphodres interpreted the contrary; for he said, "If we do not take our flight like birds, 
or like mice get below the earth, or like frogs beneath the water, we shall not escape their arrows; for we are 
not lords of the territory." 

It is said that Anacharsis the Scythian, while asleep, covered the pudenda with his left hand, and his mouth 
with his fight, to intimate that both ought to be mastered, but that it was a greater thing to master the tongue 
than voluptuousness. 

And why should I linger over the barbarians, when I can adduce the Greeks as exceedingly addicted to the 
use of the method of concealment? Androcydes the Pythagorean says the far-famed so-called Ephesian 
letters were of the class of symbols. For he said that <greek>askion</greek> (shadowless) meant 
darkness, for it has no shadow; and <greek>katas</greek»<greek>kion</greek> (shadowy) light, since it 
casts with its rays the shadow; and <greek>lix</greek> if is the earth, according to an ancient' appellation; 
and <greek>tetras</greek> is the year, in reference to the seasons; and 
<greek>d</greek>><greek>amnameneus</greek> is the sun, which overpowers 

(<greek>damazwn</greek>); and <greek>ta</greek> <greek>aisia</greek> is the true voice. And then the 
symbol intimates that divine things have been arranged in harmonious order-darkness to light, the sun to 
the year, and the earth to nature's processes of production of every sort. Also Dionysius Thrax, the 
grammarian, in his book. Respecting the Exposition of the Symbolical Signification in Circles, says 
expressly, "Some signified actions not by words only, but also by symbols: by words, as is the case of what 
are called the Delphic maxims, 'Nothing in excess,' 'Know thyself,' and the like; and by symbols, as the 
wheel that is turned in the temples of the gods, derived from the Egyptians, and the branches that are given 
to the worshippers. For the Thracian Orpheus says:- 

"Whatever works of branches are a care to men on earth. 
Not one has one fate in the mind, but all things 
Revolve around; and it is not lawful to stand at one point. 
But each one keeps an equal part of the race as they began." 

The branches either stand as the symbol of the first food, or they are that the multitude may know that fruits 
spring and grow universally, remaining a very long time; but that the duration of life allotted to themselves is 
brief. And it is on this account that they will have it that the branches are given; and perhaps also that they 
may know, that as these, on the other hand, are burned, so also they themselves speedily leave this life, 
and will become fuel for fire. 

Very useful, then, is the mode of symbolic interpretation for many purposes; and it is helpful to the right 
theology, and to piety, and to the display of intelligence, and the practice of brevity, and the exhibition of 
wisdom. "For the use of symbolical speech is characteristic of the wise man," appositely remarks the 
grammarian Didymus, "and the explanation of what is signified by it." And indeed the most elementary 
instruction of children embraces the interpretation of the four elements; for it is said that the Phrygians call 
water Bedu, as also Orpheus says:[1]- 

"And bright water is poured down, the Bedu of the nymphs." 

Dion Thytes also seems to write similarly:- 

"And taking Bedu, pour it on your hands, and turn to divination." 

On the other hand, the comic poet, Philydeus, understands by Bedu the air, as being (Biodoros) life-giver, in 
the following lines :- 

"I pray that I may inhale the salutary Bedu, 
Which is the most essential part of health; 
Inhale the pure, the unsullied air." 

In the same opinion also concurs Neanthes of Cyzicum, who writes that the Macedonian priests invoke 
Bedu, which they interpret to mean the air, to be propitious to them and to their children. And Zaps some 
have ignorantly taken for fire (from <greek>zesin</greek>, boiling); for so the sea is called, as Euphorion, in 
his reply to Theoridas:- 

"And Zaps, destroyer of ships, wrecked it on the rocks." 

And Dionysius Iambus similarly:- 

"Briny Zaps moans about the maddened deep." 

Similarly Cratinus the younger, the comic poet:- 

"Zaps casts forth shrimps and little fishes." 

And Simmias of Rhodes:- 

"Parent of the Ignetes and the Telchines briny Zaps was born. "[2] 

And <greek>kqwn</greek> is the earth <greek>kekxmenh</greek> spread forth to bigness. And Plectron, 
according to some, is the sky (<greek>polos</greek>), according to others, it is the air, which strikes 
(<greek>plh</greek»<greek>s</greek>/246><greek>o</greek>/225>/235><greek>a</greek>) and moves 
to nature and increase, and which fills all things. But these have not read Cleanthes the philosopher, who 
expressly calls Plectron the sun; for darting his beams in the east, as if striking the world, he leads the light to 
its harmonious course. And from the sun it signifies also the rest of the stars, the Sphinx is not the 
comprehension[3] of the universe, and the revolution of the world, according to the poet Aratus; but perhaps 
it is the spiritual tone which pervades and holds together the universe. But it is better to regard it as the ether, 
which holds together and presses all things; as also Empedocles says:- 

"But come now, first will I speak of the Sun, the first principle of all things. 
From which all, that we look upon, has sprung. 
Both earth, and billowy deep, and humid air; 
Titan and Ether too, which binds all things around." 

And Apollodorus of Corcyra says that these lines were recited by Branchus the seer, when purifying the 
Milesians from plague; for he, sprinkling the multitude with branches of laurel, led off the hymn somehow as 
follows :- 
"Sing Boys Hecaergus and Hecaerga." 

And the people accompanied him, saying, "Bedu,[1] Zaps, Chthon, Plectron, Sphinx, Cnaxzbi, Chthyptes, 
Phlegmos, Drops." Callimachus relates the story in iambics. Cnaxzbi is, by derivation, the plague, from its 
gnawing (<greek>knaiein</greek>) and destroying <greek>diafqeirein</greek>, and 
<greek>qxyai</greek> is to consume with a thunderbolt. Thespis the tragic poet says that something else 
was signified by these, writing thus: "Lo, I offer to thee a libation of white Cnaxzbi, having pressed it from the 
yellow nurses. Lo, to thee, O two-horned Pan, mixing Chthyptes cheese with red honey, I place it on thy 
sacred altars. Lo, to thee I pour as a libation the sparkling gleam of Bromius."He signifies, as I think, the 
soul's first milk-like nutriment of the four-and-twenty elements, after which solidified milk comes as food. And 
last, he teaches of the blood of the vine of the Word, the sparkling wine, the perfecting gladness of 
instruction. And Drops is the operating Word, which, beginning with elementary training, and advancing to 
the growth of the man, inflames and illumines man up to the measure of maturity. The third is said to be a 
writing copy for children-<greek>marptes</greek>, <greek>sfigx</greek> 
<greek>klwy</greek>,<greek>zxnkqhdo</greek><s225. And it signifies, in my opinion, that by the 
arrangement of the elements and of the world, we must advance to the knowledge of what is more perfect, 
since eternal salvation is attained by force and toil; for <greek>maryai</greek> is to grasp. And the 
harmony of the world is meant by the Sphinx; and <greek>zunkqhdon</greek> means difficulty; and 
<greek>klwys</greek> means at once the secret knowledge of the Lord and day. Well! does not Epigenes, 
in his book on the Poetry of Orpheus, in exhibiting the peculiarities found in Orpheus, [2] say that by " the 
curved rods" (<greek>keraisi</greek>) is meant "ploughs;"and by the warp (<greek>sthmosi</greek>), the 
furrows; and the woof (<greek>mitos</greek>) is a figurative expression for the seed; and that the tears of 
Zeus signify a shower; and that the "parts" (<greek>moirai</greek>) are, again, the phases of the moon, the 
thirtieth day, and the fifteenth, and the new moon, and that Orpheus accordingly calls them "white-robed," as 
being parts of the light? Again, that the Spring is called "flowery," from its nature; and Night "still," on account 
of rest; and the Moon" Gorgonian," on account of the face in it; and that the time in which it is necessary to 
sow is called Aphrodite by the "Theologian." [3] In the same way, too, the Pythagoreans figuratively called 
the planets the "dogs of Persephone;" and to the sea they applied the metaphorical appellation of "the 
tears of Kronus." Myriads on myriads of enigmatical utterances by both poets and philosophers are to be 
found; and there are also whole books which present the mind of the writer veiled, as that of Heraclitus On 

Nature, who on this very account is called "Obscure." Similar to this book is the Theology of Pherecydes of 
Syrup; for Euphorion the poet, and the Causes of Callimachus, and the Alexandra of Lycophron, and the like, 
are proposed as an exercise in exposition to all the grammarians. 

It is, then, proper that the Barbarian philosophy, on which it is our business to speak, should prophecy also 
obscurely and by symbols, as was evinced. Such are the injunctions of Moses: "These common things, the 
sow, the hawk, the eagle, and the raven, are not to be eaten. "[4] For the sow is the emblem of voluptuous 
and unclean lust of food, and lecherous and filthy licentiousness in venery, always prurient, and material, 
and lying in the mire, and fattening for slaughter and destruction. 

Again, he commands to eat that which parts the hoof and ruminates; "intimating," says Barnabas, "that we 
ought to cleave to those who fear the Lord, and meditate in their heart on that portion of the word which they 
have received, to those who speak and keep the Lord's statutes, to those to whom meditation is a work of 
gladness, and who ruminate on the word of the Lord. And what is the parted hoof? That the righteous walks 
in this world, and expects the holy eternity to come." Then he adds, "See how well Moses enacted. But 
whence could they understand or comprehend these things? We who have rightly understood speak the 
commandments as the Lord wished; wherefore He circumcised our ears and hearts, that we may 
comprehend these things. And when he says, 'Thou shalt not eat the eagle, the hawk, the kite, and the 
crow;[1] he says,' Thou shalt not adhere to or become like those men who know not how to procure for 
themselves subsistence by toil and sweat, but live by plunder, and lawlessly.' For the eagle indicates 
robbery, the hawk injustice, and the raven greed. It is also written,' With the innocent man thou wilt be 
innocent, and with the chosen choice, and with the perverse thou shall pervert.'[5] It is incumbent on us to 
cleave to the saints, because they that cleave to them shall be sanctified. "[6] 
Thence Theognis writes:- 

"For from the good you will learn good things; 

But if you mix with the bad, you will destroy any mind you may have." 

And when, again, it is said in the ode, "For He hath triumphed gloriously: the home and his rider hath He cast 
into the sea;"[1] the manylimbed and brutal affection, lust, with the rider mounted, who gives the reins to 
pleasures, "He has cast into the sea," throwing them away into the disorders of the world. Thus also Plato, in 
his book On the Soul, says that the charioteer and the horse that ran off-the irrational part, which is divided in 
two, into anger and concupiscence-fall down; and so the myth intimates that it was through the 
licentiousness of the steeds that Phaethon was thrown out. Also in the case of Joseph: the brothers having 
envied this young man, who by his knowledge was possessed of uncommon foresight, stripped off the coat 
of many colours, and took and threw him into a pit (the pit was empty, it had no water), rejecting the good 
man's varied knowledge, springing from his love of instruction; or, in the exercise of the bare faith, which is 
according to the law, they threw him into the pit empty of water, selling him into Egypt, which was destitute of 
the divine word. And the pit was destitute of knowledge; into which being thrown and stript of his knowledge, 
he that had become unconsciously wise, stript of knowledge, seemed like his brethren. Otherwise 
interpreted, the coat of many colours is lust, which takes its way into a yawning pit. "And if one open up or 
hew out a pit," it is said, "and do not cover it, and there fall in there a calf or ass, the owner of the pit shall pay 
the price in money, and give it to his neighbour; and the dead body shall be his. [2] Here add that prophecy: 
"The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's crib: but Israel hath not understood Me. "[3] In order, 
then, that none of those, who have fallen in with the knowledge taught by thee, may become incapable of 
holding the truth, and disobey and fall away, it is said. Be thou sure in the treatment of the word, and shut up 
the living spring in the depth from those who approach irrationally, but reach drink to those that thirst for truth. 
Conceal it, then, from those who are unfit to receive the depth of knowledge, and so cover the pit. The owner 
of the pit, then, the Gnostic, shall himself be punished, incurring the blame of the others stumbling, and of 
being overwhelmed by the greatness of the word, he himself being of small capacity; or transferring the 
worker into the region of speculation, and on that account dislodging him from off-hand faith. "And will pay 
money," rendering a reckoning, and submitting his accounts to the "omnipotent Will." 
This, then, is the type of "the law and the prophets which were until John; "[4] while he, though speaking more 
perspicuously as no longer prophesying, but pointing out as now present. Him, who was proclaimed 
symbolically from the beginning, nevertheless said, "I am not worthy to loose the latchet of the Lord's 
shoe. "[5] For he confesses that he is not worthy to baptize so great a Power; for it behooves those, who 
purify others, to free the soul from the body and its sins, as the foot from the thong. Perhaps also this 
signified the final exertion of the Saviour's power toward us-the immediate, I mean-that by His presence, 
concealed in the enigma of prophecy, inasmuch as he, by pointing out to sight Him that had been 
prophesied of, and indicating the Presence which had come, walking forth into the light, loosed the latchet of 
the oracles of the[old] economy, by unveiling the meaning of the symbols. 
And the observances practised by the Romans in the case of wills have a place here; those balances and 

small coins to denote justice, and freeing of slaves, and rubbing of the ears. For these observances are, 
that things may be transacted with justice; and those for the dispensing of honour; and the last, that he who 
happens to be near, as if a burden were imposed on him, should stand and hear and take the post of 
mediator. 

CHAP. IX. -REASONS FOR VEILING THE TRUTH IN SYMBOLS. 

But, as appears, I have, in my eagerness to establish my point, insensibly gone beyond what is requisite. 
For life would fail me to adduce the multitude of those who philosophize in a symbolical manner. For the 
sake, then, of memory and brevity, and of attracting to the truth, such are the Scriptures of the Barbarian 
philosophy. 

For only to those who often approach them, and have given them a trial by faith and in their whole life, will 
they supply the real philosophy and the true theology. They also wish us to require an interpreter and guide. 
For so they considered, that, receiving truth at the hands of those who knew it well, we would be more 
earnest and less liable to deception, and those worthy of them would profit. Besides, all things that shine 
through a veil show the truth grander and more imposing; as fruits shining through water, and figures through 
veils, which give added reflections to them. For, in addition to the fact that things unconcealed are perceived 
in one way, the rays of light shining round reveal defects. Since, then, we may draw several meanings, as 
we do from what is expressed in veiled form, such being the case, the ignorant and unlearned man fails. But 
the Gnostior apprehends. Now, then, it is not wished that all things should be exposed indiscriminately to all 
and sundry, or the benefits of wisdom communicated to those who have not even in a dream been purified 
in soul, (for it is not allowed to hand to every chance comer what has been procured with such laborious 
efforts); nor are the mysteries of the word to be expounded to the profane. 

They say, then, that Hipparchus the Pythagorean, being guilty of writing the tenets of Pythagoras in plain 
language, was expelled from the school, and a pillar raised for him as if he had been dead. Wherefore also 
in the Barbarian philosophy they call those dead who have fallen away from the dogmas, and have placed 
the mind in subjection to carnal passions. "For what fellowship hath righteousness and iniquity?" according 
to the divine apostle. "Or what communion hath light with darkness? or what concord hath Christ with Belial? 
or what portion hath the believer with the unbeliever?"[1] For the honours of the Olympians and of mortals lie 
apart. "Wherefore also go forth from the midst of them, and be separated, saith the Lord, and touch not the 
unclean thing; and I will receive you, and will be to you for a Father, and ye shall be my sons and 
daughters."[2] 

It was not only the Pythagoreans and Plato then, that concealed many things; but the Epicureans too say 
that they have things that may not be uttered, and do not allow all to peruse those writings. The Stoics also 
say that by the first Zeno things were written which they do not readily allow disciples to read, without their 
first giving proof whether or not they are genuine philosophers. And the disciples of Aristotle say that some 
of their treatises are esoteric, and others common and exoteric. Further, those who instituted the mysteries, 
being philosophers, buried their doctrines in myths, so as not to be obvious to all. Did they then, by veiling 
human opinions, prevent the ignorant from handling them; and was it not more beneficial for the holy and 
blessed contemplation of realities to be concealed? But it was not only the tenets of the Barbarian 
philosophy, or the Pythagorean myths. But even those myths in Plato (in the Republic, that of Hero the 
Armenian; and in the Gorgias, that of Aeacus and Rhadamanthus; and in the Phoedo, that of Tartarus; and in 
the Protagoras, that of Prometheus and Epimetheus; and besides these, that of the war between the Atlantini 
and the Athenians in the Atlanticum) r are to be expounded allegorically, not absolutely n in all their 
expressions, but in those which express the general sense. And these we shall find indicated by symbols 
under the veil of allegory. Also the association of Pythagoras, and the twofold intercourse with the 
associates which designates the majority, hearers (<greek>akousmatikoi</greek>), and the others that 
have a genuine attachment to philosophy, disciples (224><greek>aqhmatikoi</greek>, yet signified that 
something was spoken to the multitude, and something concealed from them. Perchance, too, the twofold 
species of the Peripatetic teaching-that called probable, and that called knowable-came very near the 
distinction between opinion on the one hand, and glory and truth on the other. 

"To win the flowers of fair renown from men. 
Be not induced to speak aught more than right." 

The Ionic muses accordingly expressly say, "That the majority of people, wise in their own estimation, follow 
minstrels and make use of laws, knowing that many are bad, few good; but that the best pursue glory: for the 
best make choice of the everlasting glory of men above all. But the multitude cram themselves like brutes, 
measuring happiness by the belly and the pudenda, and the basest things in us." And the great 
Parmenides of Elea is introduced describing thus the teaching of the two ways:- 

"The one is the dauntless heart of convincing truth; 

The other is in the opinions of men, in whom is no true faith." 

CHAP. X.-THE OPINION OF THE APOSTLES ON VEILING THE MYSTERIES OF THE 
FAITH. 

Rightly, therefore, the divine apostle says, "By revelation the mystery was made known to me (as I wrote 
before in brief, in accordance with which, when ye read, ye may understand my knowledge in the mystery of 
Christ), which in other ages was not made known to the sons of men, as it is now revealed to His holy 
apostles and prophets. "[3] For there is an instruction of the perfect, of which, writing to the Golossians, he 
says, "We cease not to pray for you, and beseech that ye may be filled with the knowledge of His will in all 
wisdom and spiritual understanding; that ye may walk worthy of the Lord to all pleasing; being fruitful in every 
good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God; strengthened with all might according to the glory of 
His power."[4] And again he says, "According to the disposition of the grace of God which is given me, that 
ye may fulfil the word of God; the mystery which has been hid from ages and generations, which now is 
manifested to His saints: to whom God wished to make known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery 
among the nations. "[5] So that, on the one hand, then, are the mysteries which were hid till the time of the 
apostles, and were delivered by them as they received from the Lord, and, concealed in the Old 
Testament, were manifested to the saints. And, on the other hand, there is "the riches of the glory of the 
mystery in the Gentiles," which is faith and hope in Christ; which in another place he has called the 
"foundation. "[1] And again, as if in eagerness to divulge this knowledge, he thus writes: "Warning every man 
in all wisdom, that we may present every man (the whole man) perfect in Christ;" not every man simply, since 
no one would be unbelieving. Nor does he call every man who believes in Christ perfect; but he[2] says all 
the man, as if he said the whole man, as if purified in body and soul. For that the knowledge does not 
appertain to all, he expressly adds: "Being knit together in love, and unto all the riches of the full assurance 
of knowledge, to the acknowledgment of the mystery of God in Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of 
wisdom and of knowledge. "[3] "Continue in prayer, watching therein with thanksgiving. "[4] And thanksgiving 
has place not for the soul and spiritual blessings alone, but also for the body, and for the good things of the 
body. And he still more clearly reveals that knowledge belongs not to all, by adding: "Praying at the same 
time for you, that God would open to us a door to speak the mystery of Christ, for which I am bound; that I 
may make it known as I ought to speak."[5] For there were certainly, among the Hebrews, some things 
delivered unwritten. "For when ye ought to be teachers for the time," it is said, as if they had grown old in the 
Old Testament, "ye have again need that one teach you which be the first principles of the oracles of God; 
and are become such as have need of milk, and not of solid food. For every one that par-taketh of milk is 
unskilful in the word of righteousness; for he is a babe, being instructed with the first lessons. But solid food 
belongs to those who are of full age, who by reason of use have their senses exercised so as to distinguish 
between good and evil. Wherefore, leaving the first principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on to 
perfection. "[6] 

Barnabas, too, who in person preached the word along with the apostle in the ministry of the Gentiles, says, 
"I write to you most simply, that ye may understand." Then below, exhibiting already a clearer trace of 
gnostic tradition, he says, "What says the other prophet Moses to them? Lo, thus saith the Lord God, Enter 
ye into the good land which the Lord God sware, the God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob; and ye 
received for an inheritance that land, flowing with milk and honey. [7] What says knowledge? Learn, hope, it 
says, in Jesus, who is to be manifested to you in the flesh. For man is the suffering land; for from the face of 
the ground was the formation of Adam. What, then, does it say in reference to the good land, flowing with 
milk and honey? Blessed be our Lord, brethren, who has put into our hearts wisdom, and the understanding 
of His secrets. For the prophet says, "Who shall understand the Lord's parable but the wise and 
understanding, and he that loves his Lord?" It is but for few to comprehend these things. For it is not in the 
way of envy that the Lord announced in a Gospel, "My mystery is to me, and to the sons of my house;" 
placing the election in safety, and beyond anxiety; so that the things pertaining to what it has chosen and 
taken may be above the reach of envy. For he who has not the knowledge of good is wicked: for there is 
one good, the Father; and to be ignorant of the Father is death, as to know Him is eternal life, through 
participation in the power of the incorrupt One. And to be incorruptible is to participate in divinity; but revolt 
from the knowledge of God brings corruption. Again the prophet says: "And I will give thee treasures, 
concealed, dark, unseen; that they may know that I am the LORD. "[8] Similarly David sings: "For, lo. Thou 
hast loved truth; the obscure and hidden things of wisdom hast Thou showed me. "[9] "Day utters speech to 
day"[10] (what is clearly written), "and night to night proclaims knowledge" (which is hidden in a mystic veil); 
"and there are no words or utterances whose voices shall not be heard" by God, who said, "Shall one do 
what is secret, and I shall not see him?" 

Wherefore instruction, wiiicii reveals iiidden tilings, is caiied iiiumination, as it is tlie teaclier only who 
uncovers the lid of the ark, contrary to what the poets say, that "Zeus stops up the jar of good things, but 
opens that of evil." "For I know," says the apostle, "that when I come to you, I shall come in the fulness of the 
blessing of Christ;"[11] designating the spiritual gift, and the gnostic communication, which being present he 
desires to impart to them present as "the fulness of Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery sealed 
in the ages of eternity, but now manifested by the prophetic Scriptures, according to the command of the 
eternal God, made known to all the nations, in order to the obedience of faith," that is, those of the nations 
who believe that it is. But only to a few of them is shown what those things are which are contained in the 
mystery. Rightly then, Plato, in the Epistles, treating of God, says: "We must speak in enigmas that should 
the tablet come by any mischance on its leaves either by sea or land, he who reads may remain ignorant." 
For the God of the universe, who is above all speech, all conception, all thought, can never be committed to 
writing, being inexpressible even by His own power. And this too Plato showed, by saying: "Considering, 
then, these things, take care lest some time or other you repent on account of the present things, departing 
in a manner unworthy. The greatest safeguard is not to write, but learn; for it is utterly impossible that what is 
written will not vanish." 

Akin to this is what the holy Apostle Paul says, preserving the prophetic and truly ancient secret from which 
the teachings that were good were derived by the Greeks: "Howbeit we speak wisdom among them who 
are perfect; but not the wisdom of this world, or of the princes of this world, that come to nought; but we speak 
the wisdom of God hidden in a mystery. "[1] Then proceeding, he thus inculcates the caution against the 
divulging of his words to the multitude in the following terms: "And I, brethren, could not speak to you as to 
spiritual, but as to carnal, even to babes in Christ. I have fed you with milk, not with meat: for ye were not yet 
able; neither are ye now able. For ye are yet carnal. "[2] 

If, then, "the milk" is said by the apostle to belong to the babes, and "meat" to be the food of the full-grown, 
milk will be understood to be catechetical instruction-the first food, as it were, of the soul. And meat is the 
mystic contemplation; for this is the flesh and the blood of the Word, that is, the comprehension of the divine 
power and essence. "Taste and see that the Lord is Christ, "[3] it is said. For so He imparts of Himself to 
those who partake of such food in a more spiritual manner; when now the soul nourishes itself, according to 
the truth-loving Plato. For the knowledge of the divine essence is the meat and drink of the divine Word. 
Wherefore also Plato says, in the second book of the Republic, "It is those that sacrifice not a sow, but 
some great and difficult sacrifice," who ought to inquire respecting God. And the apostle writes, "Christ our 
passover was sacrificed for us;"[4]-a sacrifice hard to procure, in truth, the Son of God consecrated for us. 

CHAP, XI. -ABSTRACTION FROM MATERIAL THINGS NECESSARY IN ORDER TO ATTAIN 
TO THE TRUE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD. 

Now the sacrifice which is acceptable to God is unswerving abstraction from the body and its passions. 
This is the really true piety. And is not, on this account, philosophy rightly called by Socrates the practice of 
Death? For he who neither employs his eyes in the exercise of thought, nor draws aught from his other 
senses, but with pure mind itself applies to objects, practises the true philosophy. This is, then, the import of 
the silence of five years prescribed by Pythagoras, which he enjoined on his disciples; that, abstracting 
themselves from the objects of sense, they might with the mind alone contemplate the Deity. It was from 
Moses that the chief of the Greeks drew these philosophical tenets. [5] For he commands holocausts to be 
skinned and divided into parts. For the gnostic soul must be consecrated to the light, stript of the 
integuments of matter, devoid of the frivolousness of the body and of all the passions, which are acquired 
through vain and lying opinions, and divested of the lusts of the flesh. But the most of men, clothed with what 
is perishable, like cockles, and rolled all round in a ball in their excesses, like hedgehogs, entertain the 
same ideas of the blessed and incorruptible God as of themselves. But it has escaped their notice, though 
they be near us, that God has bestowed on us ten thousand things in which He does not share: birth, being 
Himself unborn; food. He wanting nothing; and growth. He being always equal; and long life and immortality. 
He being immortal and incapable of growing old. Wherefore let no one imagine that hands, and feet, and 
mouth, and eyes, and going in and coming out, and resentments and threats, are said by the Hebrews to be 
attributes of God. By no means; but that certain of these appellations are used more sacredly in an 
allegorical sense, which, as the discourse proceeds, we shall explain at the proper time. 
"Wisdom of all medicines is the Panacea, [1] writes Callimachus in the Epigrams. "And one becomes wise 
from another, both in past times and at present," says Bacchylides in the Paans; "for it is not very easy to 
find the portals of unutterable words." Beautifully, therefore, Isocrates writes in the Panathenaic, baring put 
the question, "Who, then, are well trained?" adds, "First, those who manage well the things which occur each 
day, whose opinion jumps with opportunity, and is able for the most part to hit on what is beneficial; then 
those who behave becomingly and rightly to those who approach them, who take lightly and easily 
annoyances and molestations offered by others, but conduct themselves as far as possible, to those with 

whom they have intercourse, with consummate care and moderation; further, those who have the command 

of their pleasures, and are not too much overcome by misfortunes, but conduct themselves in the midst of 

them with manliness, and in a way worthy of the nature which we share; fourth-and this is the greatest-those 

who are not corrupted by prosperity, and are not put beside themselves, or made haughty, but continue in 

the class of sensible people." Then he puts on the top-stone of the discourse: "Those who have the 

disposition of their soul well suited not to one only of these things, but to them all-those I assert to be wise 

and perfect men, and to possess all the virtues." 

Do you see how the Greeks deify the gnostic life (though not knowing how to become acquainted with it)? 

And what knowledge it is, they know not even in a dream. If, then, it is agreed among us that knowledge is 

the food of reason, "blessed truly are they," according to the Scripture, "who hunger and thirst after truth: for 

they shall be filled" with everlasting food. In the most wonderful harmony with these words, Euripides, the 

philosopher of the drama, is found in the following words, -making allusion, I know not how, at once to the 

Father and the Son:- 

"To thee, the Lord of all, I bring 

Cakes and libations too, O Zeus, 

Or Hades would'st thou choose be called; 

Do thou accept my offering of all fruits. 

Rare, full, poured forth." 

For a whole burnt-offering and rare sacrifice for us is Christ. And that unwittingly he mentions 
the Saviour, he will make plain, as he adds:-" 
For thou who, 'midst the heavenly gods, 
Jove's sceptre sway'st, dost also share 
The rule of those on earth." 

Then he says expressly:- 

"Send light to human souls that fain would know 

Whence conflicts spring, and what the root of ills. 

And of the blessed gods to whom due rites 

Of sacrifice we needs must pay, that so 

We may from troubles find repose." 

It is not then without reason that in the mysteries that obtain among the Greeks, lustrations hold the first place; 
as also the layer among the Barbarians. After these are the minor[1] mysteries, which have some 
foundation of instruction and of preliminary preparation for what is to come after; and the great mysteries, in 
which nothing remains to be learned of the universe, but only to contemplate and comprehend nature and 
things. 

We shall understand the mode of purification by confession, and that of contemplation by analysis, 
advancing by analysis to the first notion, beginning with the properties underlying it; abstracting from the 
body its physical properties, taking away the dimension of depth, then that of breadth, and then that of 
length. For the point which remains is a unit, so to speak, having position; from which if we abstract position, 
there is the conception of unity. 

If, then, abstracting all that belongs to bodies and things called incorporeal, we cast ourselves into the 
greatness of Christ, and thence advance into immensity by holiness, we may reach somehow to the 
conception of the Almighty, knowing not what He is, but what He is not. And form and motion, or standing, or 
a throne, or place, or right hand or left, are not at all to be conceived as belonging to the Father of the 
universe, although it is so written. But what each of these means will be shown in its proper place. The First 
Cause is not then in space, but above both space, and time, and name, and conception. 
Wherefore also Moses says, " Show Thyself to me,"[2]-intimating most clearly that God is not capable of 
being taught by man, or expressed in speech, but to be known only by His own power. For inquiry was 
obscure and dim; but the grace of knowledge is from Him by the Son. Most clearly Solomon shall testify to 
us, speaking thus: "The prudence of man is not in me: but God giveth me wisdom, and I know holy things. "[3] 
Now Moses, describing allegorically the divine prudence, called it the tree of life planted in Paradise; which 
Paradise may be the world in which all things proceeding from creation grow. In it also the Word blossomed 
and bore fruit, being "made flesh," and gave life to those "who had tasted of His graciousness;" since it was 
not without the wood of the tree that He came to our knowledge. For our life was hung on it, in order that we 
might believe. And Solomon again says: "She is a tree of immortality to those who take hold of her."[4] 
"Behold, I set before thy face life and death, to love the LORD thy God, and to walk in His ways, and hear 
His voice, and trust in life. But if ye transgress the statutes and the judgments which I have given you, ye 
shall be destroyed with destruction. For this is life, and the length of thy days, to love the LORD thy God. "[5] 

Again: "Abraham, when he came to the place which God told him of on the third day, looking up, saw the 
place afar off."[6] For the first day is that which is constituted by the sight of good things; and the second is 
the sours[1] best desire; on the third, the mind perceives spiritual things, the eyes of the understanding 
being opened by the Teacher who rose on the third day. The three days may be the mystery of the seal, [2] 
in which God. is really believed. It is consequently afar off that he sees the place. For the region of God is 
hard to attain; which Plato called the region of ideas, having learned from Moses that it was a place which 
contained all things universally. But it is seen by Abraham afar off, rightly, because of his being in the realms 
of generation, and he is forthwith initiated by the angel. Thence says the apostle: "Now we see as through a 
glass, but then face to face," by those sole pure and incorporeal applications of the intellect. In reasoning, it 
is possible to divine respecting God, if one attempt without any of the senses, by reason, to reach what is 
individual; and do not quit the sphere of existences, till, rising up to the things which transcend it, he 
apprehends by the intellect itself that which is good, moving in the very confines of the world of thought, 
according to Plato. 

Again, Moses, not allowing altars and temples to be constructed in many places, but raising one temple of 
God, announced that the world was only-begotten, as Basilides says, and that God is one, as does not as 
yet appear to Basilides. And since the gnostic Moses does not circumscribe within space Him that cannot 
be circumscribed, he set up no image in the temple to be worshipped; showing that God was invisible, and 
incapable of being circumscribed; and somehow leading the Hebrews to the conception of God by the 
honour for His name in the temple. Further, the Word, prohibiting the constructing of temples and all 
sacrifices, intimates that the Almighty is not contained in anything, by what He says: "What house will ye 
build to Me? saith the LORD. Heaven is my throne, "[3] and so on. Similarly respecting sacrifices: "I do not 
desire the blood of bulls and the fat of lambs, "[4] and what the Holy Spirit by the prophet in the sequel 
forbids. 

Most excellently, therefore, Euripides accords with these, when he writes:- 
"What house constructed by the workmen's hands. 
With folds of walls, can clothe the shape divine?" 

And of sacrifices he thus speaks:- 

"For God needs nought, if He is truly God. 

These of the minstrels are the wretched myths." 

"For it was not from need that God made the world; that He might reap honours from men and the other gods 
and demons, winning a kind of revenue from creation, and from us, fumes, and from the gods and demons, 
their proper ministries," says Plato. Most instructively, therefore, says Paul in the Acts of the Apostles: "The 
God that made the world, and all things in it, being the Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples 
made with hands; neither is worshipped by men's hands, as if He needed anything; seeing that it is He 
Himself that giveth to all breath, and life, and all things. "[5] And Zeno, the founder of the Stoic sect, says in 
this book of the Republic, "that we ought to make neither temples nor images; for that no work is worthy of 
the gods." And he was not afraid to write in these very words: "There will be no need to build temples. For a 
temple is not worth much, and ought not to be regarded as holy. For nothing is worth much, and holy, which is 
the work of builders and mechanics." Rightly, therefore, Plato too, recognising the world as God's temple, 
pointed out to the citizens a spot in the city where their idols were to be laid up. "Let not, then, any one 
again," he says, "consecrate temples to the gods. For gold and silver in other states, in the case of private 
individuals and in the temples, is an invidious possession; and ivory, a body which has abandoned the life, 
is not a sacred votive offering; and steel and brass are the instruments of wars; but whatever one wishes to 
dedicate, let it be wood of one tree, as also stone for common temples." Rightly, then, in the great Epistle he 
says: "For it is not capable of expression, like other branches of study. But as the result of great intimacy with 
this subject, and living with it, a sudden light, like that kindled by a coruscating fire, arising in the soul, feeds 
itself." Are not these statements like those of Zephaniah the prophet? "And the Spirit of the Lord took me, 
and brought me up to the fifth heaven, and I beheld angels called Lords; and their diadem was set on in the 
Holy Spirit; and each of them had a throne sevenfold brighter than the light of the rising sun; and they dwelt in 
temples of salvation, and hymned the ineffable. Most High God. "[6] 

CHAP. XII. -GOD CANNOT BE EMBRACED IN WORDS OR BY THE MIND. 

"For both is it a difficult task to discover the Father and Maker of this universe; and having found Him, it is 
impossible to declare Him to all. For this is by no means capable of expression, like the other subjects of 
instruction," says the truth-loving Plato. For he that had heard right well that the all-wise Moses, ascending 
the mount for holy contemplation, to the summit of intellectual objects, necessarily commands that the whole 
people do not accompany him. And when the Scripture says, "Moses entered into the thick darkness where 

God was," this shows to those capable of understanding, that God is invisible and beyond expression by 

words. And "the darkness "-which is, in truth, the unbelief and ignorance of the multitude- obstructs the 

gleam of truth. And again Orpheus, the theologian, aided from this quarter, says:- 

"One is perfect in himself, and all things are made the progeny of one," 

or, "are born;" for so also is it written. He adds:- 

"Him 

No one of mortals has seen, but He sees all." 

And he adds more clearly:- 

"Him see I not, for round about, a cloud 

Has settled; for in mortal eyes are small. 

And mortal pupils-only flesh and bones grow there." 

To these statements the apostle will testify: "I know a man in Christ, caught up into the third heaven, and 
thence into Paradise, who heard unutterable words which it is not lawful for a man to speak,"-intimating thus 
the impossibility of expressing God, and indicating that what is divine is unutterable by human[1] power; if, 
indeed, he begins to speak above the third heaven, as it is lawful to initiate the elect souls in the mysteries 
there. For I know what is in Plato (for the examples from the barbarian philosophy, which are many, are 
suggested now by the composition which, in accordance with promises previously given, waits the suitable 
time). For doubting, in Timaoeus, whether we ought to regard several worlds as to be understood by many 
heavens, or this one, he makes no distinction in the names, calling the world and heaven by the same 
name. But the words of the statement are as follows: "Whether, then, have we rightly spoken of one heaven, 
or of many and infinite? It were more correct to say one, if indeed it was created according to the model." 
Further, in the Epistle of the Romans to the Corinthians it is written, "An ocean illimitable by men and the 
worlds after it." Consequently, therefore, the noble apostle exclaims, "Oh the depth of the riches both of the 
wisdom and the knowledge of God !"[3] 

And was it not this which the prophet meant, when he ordered unleavened cakes[4] to be made, intimating 
that the truly sacred mystic word, respecting the unbegotten and His powers, ought to be concealed? In 
confirmation of these things, in the Epistle to the Corinthians the apostle plainly says: "Howbeit we speak 
wisdom among those who are perfect, but not the wisdom of this world, or of the princes of this world, that 
come to nought. But we speak the wisdom of God hidden in a mystery. "[5] And again in another place he 
says: "To the acknowledgment of the mystery of God in Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom 
and knowledge. "[6] These things the Saviour Himself seals when He says: "To you it is given to know the 
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven. "[7] And again the Gospel says that the Saviour spake to the apostles 
the word in a mystery. For prophecy says of Him: "He will open His mouth in parables, and will utter things 
kept secret from the foundation of the world. "[8] And now, by the parable of the leaven, the Lord shows 
concealment; for He says, "The kingdom of heaven is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three 
measures of meal, till the whole was leavened. "[9] For the tripartite soul is saved by obedience, through the 
spiritual power hidden in it by faith; or because the power of the word which is given to us, being strong[10] 
and powerful, draws to itself secretly and invisibly every one who receives it, and keeps it within himself, and 
brings his whole system into unity. 

Accordingly Solon has written most wisely respecting God thus:- 
"It is most difficult to apprehend the mind's invisible measure 
Which alone holds the boundaries of all things." 

For "the divine," says the poet of Agrigenturn,[1 1]- 

"Is not capable of being approached with our eyes. 

Or grasped with our hands; but the highway 

Of persuasion, highest o£ all, leads to men's minds." 

And John the apostle says: "No man hath seen God at any time. The only-begotten God, who is in the 

bosom of the Father, He hath declared Him,"[12]-calling invisibility and ineffableness the bosom of God. 

Hence some have called it the Depth, as containing and embosoming all things, inaccessible and 

boundless. 

This discourse respecting God is most difficult to handle. For since the first principle of everything is difficult 

to find out, the absolutely first and oldest principle, which is the cause of all other things being and having 

been, is difficult to exhibit. For bow can that be expressed which is neither genus, nor difference, nor 

species, nor individual, nor number; nay more, is neither an event, nor that to which an event happens? No 

one can rightly express Him wholly. For on account of His greatness He is ranked as the All, and is the 

Father of the universe. Nor are any parts to be predicated of Him. For the One is indivisible; wherefore also 

it is infinite, not considered with reference to inscrutability, but with reference to its being without dimensions. 

and not having a limit. And tiierefore it is witiiout form and name. And if we name it, we do not do so properly, 
terming it either the One, or the Good, or Mind, or Absolute Being, or Father, or God, or Creator or Lord. We 
speak not as supplying His name; but for want, we use good names, in order that the mind may have these 
as points of support, so as not to err in other respects. For each one by itself does not express God; but all 
together are indicative of the power of the Omnipotent. For predicates are expressed either from what 
belongs to things themselves, or from their mutual relation. But none of these are admissible in reference to 
God. Nor any more is He apprehended by the science of demonstration. For it depends on primary and 
better known principles. But there is nothing antecedent to the Unbegotten. 

It remains that we understand, then, the Unknown, by divine grace, and by the word alone that proceeds 
from Him; as Luke in the Acts of the Apostles relates that Paul said, "Men of Athens, I perceive that in all 
things ye are too superstitious. [1] For in walking about, and beholding the objects of your worship, I found an 
altar on which was inscribed. To the Unknown God. Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship. Him declare I 
unto you. "[2] 

CHAP. XIII. -THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD A DIVINE GIFT, ACCORDING TO THE 
PHILOSOPHERS. 

Everything, then, which falls under a name, is originated, whether they will or not. Whether, then, the Father 
Himself draws to Himself everyone who has led a pure life, and has reached the conception of the blessed 
and incorruptible nature; or whether the free-will which is in us, by reaching the knowledge of the good, leaps 
and bounds over the barriers, as the gymnasts say; yet it is not without eminent grace that the soul is 
winged, and soars, and is raised above the higher spheres, laying aside all that is heavy, and surrendering 
itself to its kindred element. 

Plato, too, in Meno, says that virtue is God-given, as the following expressions show: "From this argument 
then, O Meno, virtue is shown to come to those, in whom it is found, by divine providence." Does it not then 
appear that "the gnostic disposition" which has come to all is enigmatically called "divine providence?" And 
he adds more explicitly: "If, then, in this whole treatise we have investigated well, it results that virtue is 
neither by nature, nor is it taught, but is produced by divine providence, not without intelligence, in those in 
whom it is found." Wisdom which is God-given, as being the power of the Father, rouses indeed our free-will, 
and admits faith, and repays the application of the elect with its crowning fellowship. 
And now I will adduce Plato himself, who clearly deems it fit to believe the children of God. For, discoursing 
on gods that are visible and born, in Timaoeus, he says: "But to speak of the other demons, and to know 
their birth, is too much for us. But we must credit those who have formerly spoken, they being the offspring of 
the gods, as they said, and knowing well their progenitors, although they speak without probable and 
necessary proofs." I do not think it possible that clearer testimony could be borne by the Greeks, that our 
Saviour, and those anointed to prophesy (the latter being called the sons of God, and the Lord being His 
own Son), are the true witnesses respecting divine things. Wherefore also they ought to be believed, being 
inspired, he added. And were one to say in a more tragic vein, that we ought not to believe, 
"For it was not Zeus that told me these things," yet let him know that it was God Himself that promulgated the 
Scriptures by His Son. And he, who announces what is his own, is to be believed. "No one," says the Lord, 
"hath known the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son shall reveal Him. "[3] This, then, is to be 
believed, according to Plato, though it is announced and spoken "without probable and necessary proofs," 
but in the Old and New Testament. "For except ye believe," says the Lord, "ye shall die in your sins. "[4] And 
again: "He that believeth hath everlasting life. "[5] "Blessed are all they that put their trust in Him. "[6] For 
trusting is more than faith. For when one has believed[7] that the Son of God is our teacher, he trusts[8] that 
his teaching is true. And as "instruction," according to Empedocles, "makes the mind grow," so trust in the 
Lord makes faith grow. 

We say, then, that it is characteristic of the same persons to vilify philosophy, and run down faith, and to 
praise iniquity and felicitate a libidinous life. But now faith, if it is the voluntary assent of the soul, is still the 
doer of good things, the foundation of right conduct; and if Aristotle defines strictly when he teaches that 
<greek>poiein</greek> is applied to the irrational creatures and to inanimate things, while 
<greek>prattein</greek> is applicable to men only, let him correct those who say that God is the maker 
(<greek>poihths</greek>) of the universe. And what is done (<greek>prakton</greek>), he says, is as good 
or as necessary. To do wrong, then, is not good, for no one does wrong except for some other thing; and 
nothing that is necessary is voluntary. To do wrong, then, is voluntary, so that it is not necessary. But the 
good differ especially from the bad in inclinations and good desires. For all depravity of soul is 
accompanied with want of restraint; and he who acts from passion, acts from want of restraint and from 
depravity. 

I cannot help admiring in every particular that divine utterance: "Verily, verily, I say unto you. He that entereth 
not in by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber. But 
he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. To him the porter openeth." Then the Lord says 
in explanation, "I am the door of the sheep." [1] Men must then be saved by learning the truth through Christ, 
even if they attain philosophy. For now that is clearly shown "which was not made known to other ages, 
which is now revealed to the sons of men. "[2] For there was always a natural manifestation of the one 
Almighty God, among all right-thinking men; and the most, who had not quite divested themselves of shame 
with respect to the truth, apprehended the eternal beneficence in divine providence. In fine, then, Xenocrates 

the Chalcedonian was not quite without hope that the notion of the Divinity existed even in the irrational 
creatures. And Democritus, though against his will, will make this avowal by the consequences of his 
dogmas; for he represents the same images as issuing, from the divine essence, on men and on the 
irrational animals. [3] Far from destitute of a divine idea is man, who, it is written in Genesis, partook of 
inspiration, being endowed with a purer essence than the other animate creatures. Hence the Pythagoreans 
say that mind comes to man by divine providence, as Plato and Aristotle avow; but we assert that the Holy 
Spirit inspires him who has believed. The Platonists hold that mind is an effluence of divine dispensation in 
the soul, and they place the soul in the body. For it is expressly said by Joel, one of the twelve prophets, 
"And it shall come to pass after these things, I will pour out of My Spirit on all flesh, and your sons and your 
daughters shall prophesy." [4] But it is not as a portion of God that the Spirit is in each of us. But how this 
dispensation takes place, and what the Holy Spirit is, shall be shown by us in the books on prophecy, and in 
those on the soul. But "incredulity is good at concealing the depths of knowledge," according to Heraclitus; 
"for incredulity escapes from ignorance." 

CHAP. XIV. -GREEK PLAGIARISM FROM THE HEBREWS. 

Let us add in completion what follows, and exhibit now with greater clearness the plagiarism of the Greeks 
from the Barbarian philosophy. 

Now the Stoics say that God, like the soul, is essentially body and spirit.. You will find all this explicitly in their 
writings. Do not consider at present their allegories as the gnostic truth presents them; whether they show 
one thing and mean another, like the dexterous athletes. Well, they say that God pervades all being; while 
we call Him solely Maker, and Maker by the Word. They were misled by what is said in the book of 
Wisdom: "He pervades and passes through all by reason of His purity; " [5] since they did not understand 
that this was said of Wisdom, which was the first of the creation of God. 

So be it, they say. But the philosophers, the Stoics, and Plato, and Pythagoras, nay more, Aristotle the 
Peripatetic, suppose the existence of matter among the first principles; and not one first principle. Let them 
then know that what is called matter by them, is said by them to be without quality, and without form, and 
more daringly said by Plato to be non-existence. And does he not say very mystically, knowing that the true 
and real first cause is one, in these very words: "Now, then, let our opinion be so. As to the first principle or 
principles of the universe, or what opinion we ought to entertain about all these points, we are not now to 
speak, for no other cause than on account of its being difficult to explain our sentiments in accordance with 
the present form of discourse." But undoubtedly that prophetic expression, "Now the earth was invisible and 
formless," supplied them with the ground of material essence. 

And the introduction of "chance" was hence suggested to Epicurus, who misapprehended the statement, 
"Vanity of vanities, and all is vanity." And it occurred to Aristotle to extend Providence as far as the moon 
from this psalm: "Lord, Thy mercy is in the heavens; and Thy truth reacheth to the clouds." [6] For the 
explanation of the prophetic mysteries had not yet been revealed previous to the advent of the Lord. 
Punishments after death, on the other hand, and penal retribution by fire, were pilfered from the Barbarian 
philosophy both by all the poetic Muses and by the Hellenic philosophy. Plato, accordingly, in the last book 
of the Republic, says in these express terms: "Then these men fierce and fiery to look on, standing by, and 
hearing the sound, seized and took some aside and binding Aridaeus and the rest hand, foot, and head, 
and throwing them down, and flaying them, dragged them along the way, tearing their flesh with thorns." For 
the fiery men are meant to signify the angels, who seize and punish the wicked. "Who maketh," it is said, 
"His angels spirits; His ministers flaming fire." [1] It follows from this that the soul is immortal. For what is 
tortured or corrected being in a state of sensation lives, though said to suffer. Well! Did not Plato know of the 
rivers of fire and the depth of the earth, and Tartarus, called by the Barbarians Gehenna, naming, as he 
does prophetically, [2] Cocytus, and Acheron, and Pyriphlegethon, and introducing such corrective tortures 
for discipline? But indicating "the angels" as the Scripture says, "of the little ones, and of the least, which see 
God," and also the oversight reaching to us exercised by the tutelary angels? he shrinks not from writing, 
"That when all the souls have selected their several lives, according as it has fallen to their lot, they 
advance in order to Lachesis; and she sends along with each one, as his guide in life, and the joint 
accomplisher of his purposes, the demon which he has chosen." Perhaps also the demon of Socrates 
suggested to him something similar. 

Nay, the philosophers, having so heard from Moses, taught that the world was created. [4] And so Plato 
expressly said, "Whether was it that the world had no beginning of its existence, or derived its beginning 
from some beginning? For being visible, it is tangible; and being tangible, it has a body." Again, when he 
says, "It is a difficult task to find the Maker and Father of this universe," he not only showed that the universe 
was created, but points out that it was generated by him as a son, and that he is called its father, as deriving 
its being from him alone, and springing from non-existence. The Stoics, too, hold the tenet that the world was 
created. 

And that the devil so spoken of by the Barbarian philosophy, the prince of the demons, is a wicked spirit, 
Plato asserts in the tenth book of the Laws, in these words: "Must we not say that spirit which pervades the 
things that are moved on all sides, pervades also heaven? Well, what? One or more? Several, say I, in 
reply for you. Let us not suppose fewer than two-that which is beneficent, and that which is able to 
accomplish the opposite." Similarly in the Phoedrus he writes as follows: "Now there are other evils. But 
some demon has mingled pleasure with the most things at present." Further, in the tenth book of the Laws, 
he expressly emits that apostolic sentiment, [5] "Our contest is not with flesh and blood, but principalities, 
with powers, with the spiritual things of those which are in heaven;" writing thus: "For since we are agreed that 
heaven is full of many good beings; but it is also full of the opposite of these, and more of these; and as we 
assert such a contest is deathless, and requiring marvellous watchfulness." 

Again the Barbarian philosophy knows the world of thought and the world of sense-the former archetypal, 
and the latter the image of that which is called the model; and assigns the former to the Monad, as being 
perceived by the mind, and the world of sense to the number six. For six is called by the Pythagoreans 
marriage, as being the genital number; and he places in the Monad the invisible heaven and the holy earth, 
and intellectual light. For "in the beginning," it is said, "God made the heaven and the earth; and the earth 
was invisible." And it is added, "And God said. Let there be light; and there was light." [6] And in the material 
cosmogony He creates a solid heaven (and what is solid is capable of being perceived by sense), and a 
visible earth, and a light that is seen. Does not Plato hence appear to have left the ideas of living creatures 
in the intellectual world, and to make intellectual objects into sensible species according to their genera? 
Rightly then Moses says, that the body which Plato calls "the earthly tabernacle" was formed of the ground, 
but that the rational soul was breathed by God into man's face. For there, they say, the ruling faculty is 
situated; interpreting the access by the senses into the first man as the addition of the soul. 
Wherefore also man is said "to have been made in [God's] image and likeness." For the image of God is 
the divine and royal Word, the impassible man; and the image of the image is the human mind. And if you 
wish to apprehend the likeness by another name, you will find it named in Moses, a divine correspondence. 
For he says, "Walk after the Lord your God, and keep His commandments." [7] And I reckon all the virtuous, 
servants and followers of God. Hence the Stoics say that the end of philosophy is to live agreeable to 
nature; and Plato, likeness to God, as we have shown in the second Miscellany. And Zeno the Stoic, 
borrowing from Plato, and he from the Barbarian philosophy, says that all the good are friends of one 
another. For Socrates says in the Phoedrus, "that it has not been ordained that the bad should be a friend to 
the bad, nor the good be not a friend to the good;" as also he showed sufficiently in the Lysis, that friendship 
is never preserved in wickedness and vice. And the Athenian stranger similarly says, "that there is conduct 
pleasing and conformable to God, based on one ancient ground-principle. That like loves like, provided it 
be within measure. But things beyond measure are congenial neither to what is within nor what is beyond 
measure. Now it is the case that God is the measure to us of all things." Then proceeding, Plato [1] adds: 
"For every good man is like every other good man; and so being like to God, he is liked by every good 
man and by God." At this point I have just recollected the following. In the end of the Timoeus he says: "You 
must necessarily assimilate that which perceives to that which is perceived, according to its original nature; 
and it is by so assimilating it that you attain to the end of the highest life proposed by the gods to men, [2] for 
the present or the future time." For those have equal power with these. He, who seeks, will not stop till he find; 
and having found, he will wonder; and wondering, he will reign; and reigning, he will rest. And what? Were not 
also those expressions of Thales derived from these? The fact that God is glorified for ever, and that He is 
expressly called by us the Searcher of hearts, he interprets. For Thales being asked. What is the divinity? 
said. What has neither beginning nor end. And on another asking, "If a man could elude the knowledge of 
the Divine Being while doing aught?" said, "How could he who cannot do so while thinking?" 
Further, the Barbarian philosophy recognises good as alone excellent, and virtue as sufficient for 
happiness, when it says, "Behold, I have set before your eyes good and evil, life and death that ye may 
choose life." [3] For it calls good, "life," and the choice of it excellent, and the choice of the opposite "evil." 
And the end of good and of life is to become a lover of God: "For this is thy life and length of days," to love 
that which tends to the truth. And these points are yet clearer. For the Saviour, in enjoining to love God and 
our neighbour, says, "that on these two commandments hang the whole law and the prophets." Such are the 
tenets promulgated by the Stoics; and before these, by Socrates, in the Phoedrus, who prays, "O Pan, and 
ye other gods, give me to be beautiful within." And in the Theoetetus he says expressly, "For he that speaks 
well (<greek>kalws</greek>) is both beautiful and good." And in the Protagoras he avers to the 
companions of Protagoras that he has met with one more beautiful than Alcibiades, if indeed that which is 
wisest is most beautiful. For he said that virtue was the soul's beauty, and, on the contrary, that vice was the 
soul's deformity. Accordingly, Antipatrus the Stoic, who composed three books on the point, "That, 
according to Plato, only the beautiful is good," shows that, according to him, virtue is sufficient for happiness; 
and adduces several other dogmas agreeing with the Stoics. And by Aristobulus, who lived in the time of 
Ptolemy Philadelphus, who is mentioned by the composer of the epitome of the books of the Maccabees, 

there were abundant books to show that the Peripatetic philosophy was derived from the law of Moses and 
from the other prophets. Let such be the case. 

Plato plainly calls us brethren, as being of one God and one teacher, in the following words: "For ye who are 
in the state are entirely brethren (as we shall say to them, continuing our story). But the God who formed you, 
mixed gold in the composition of those of you who are fit to rule, at your birth, wherefore you are most highly 
honoured; and silver in the case of those who are helpers; and steel and brass in the case of farmers and 
other workers." Whence, of necessity, some embrace and love those things to which knowledge pertains; 
and others matters of opinion. Perchance he prophesies of that elect nature which is bent on knowledge; if 
by the supposition he makes of three natures he does not describe three politics, as some supposed: that 
of the Jews, the silver; that of the Greeks, the third; and that of the Christians, with whom has been mingled 
the regal gold, the Holy Spirit, the golden. [4] 

And exhibiting the Christian life, he writes in the Theoetetus in these words: "Let us now speak of the highest 
principles. For why should we speak of those who make an abuse of philosophy? These know neither the 
way to the forum, nor know they the court or the senate-house, or any other public assembly of the state. As 
for laws and decrees spoken or[5] written, they neither see nor hear them. But party feelings of political 
associations and public meetings, and revels with musicians [occupy them]; but they never even dream of 
taking part in affairs. Has any one conducted himself either well or ill in the state, or has aught evil 
descended to a man from his forefathers?-it escapes their attention as much as do the sands of the sea. 
And the man does not even know that he does not know all these things; but in reality his body alone is 
situated and dwells in the state, [6] while the man himself flies, according to Pindar, beneath the earth and 
above the sky, astronomizing, and exploring all nature on all sides. 

Again, with the Lord's saying, "Let your yea be yea, and your nay nay," may be compared the following: "But 
to admit a falsehood, and destroy a truth, is in nowise lawful." With the prohibition, also, against swearing 
agrees the saying in the tenth book of the Laws: "Let praise and an oath in everything be absent." 
And in general, Pythagoras, and Socrates, and Plato say that they hear God's voice while closely 
contemplating the fabric of the universe, made and preserved unceasingly by God. For they heard Moses 
say, "He said, and it was done," describing the word of God as an act. 

And founding on the formation of man from the dust, the philosophers constantly term the body earthy. 
Homer, too, does not hesitate to put the following as an imprecation:- 
"But may you all become earth and water." 

As Esaias says, "And trample them down as clay." And Callimachus clearly writes:- 
"That was the year in which Birds, fishes, quadrupeds. Spoke like Prometheus' clay." 

And the same again:- 

"If thee Prometheus formed. And thou art not of other clay." 

Hesiod says of Pandora:- 

"And bade Hephaestus, famed, with all his speed. Knead earth with water, and man's voice and mind 

Infuse." 

The Stoics, accordingly, define nature to be artificial fire, advancing systematically to generation. And God 
and His Word are by Scripture figuratively termed fire and light. But how? Does not Homer himself, is not 
Homer himself, paraphrasing the retreat of the water from the land, and the clear uncovering of the dry land, 
when he says of Tethys and Oceanus:- 

"For now for a long time they abstain from Each other's bed and love? "[1] 

Again, power in all things is by the most intellectual among the Greeks ascribed to God; Epicharmus-he 

was a Pythagorean-saying:- 

"Nothing escapes the divine. This it behoves thee to know. 

He is our observer. To God nought is impossible." 

And the lyric poet:- 

"And God from gloomy night 

Can raise unstained light. 

And can in darksome gloom obscure 

The day's refulgence pure." 

He alone who is able to make night during the period of day is God. 

In the Phoenomena Aratus writes thus:- 
"With Zeus let us begin; whom let us ne'er, 
Being men, leave unexpressed. All full of Zeus, 
The streets, and throngs of men, and full the sea. 
And shores, and everywhere we Zeus enjoy." 

He adds:- 
"Forwe also are 
His offspring; ...." 

that is, by creation. 

"Who, bland to men. 

Propitious signs displays, and to their tasks 

Arouses. For these signs in heaven He fixed. 

The constellations spread, and crowned the year 

With stars; to show to men the seasons' tasks. 

That all things may proceed in order sure. 

Him ever first. Him last too, they adore: 

Hail Father, marvel great-great boon to men." 

And before him. Homer, framing the world in accordance with Moses on the Vulcan-wrought shield, says:- 

"On it he fashioned earth, and sky, and sea. 

And all the signs with which the heaven is crowned." [2] 

For the Zeus celebrated in poems and prose compositions leads the mind up to God. And already, so to 
speak, Democritus writes, "that a few men are in the light, who stretch out their hands to that place which we 
Greeks now call the air. Zeus speaks all, and he hears all, and distributes and takes away, and he is king of 
all." And more mystically the Boeotian Pindar, being a Pythagorean, says:- 
"One is the race of gods and men. 
And of one mother both have breath;" 

that is, of matter: and names the one creator of these things, whom he calls Father, chief artificer, who 
furnishes the means of advancement on to divinity, according to merit. 

For I pass over Plato; he plainly, in the Epistle to Erastus and Coriscus, is seen to exhibit the Father and Son 
somehow or other from the Hebrew Scriptures, exhorting in these words: "In invoking by oath, with not 
illiterate gravity, and with culture, the sister of gravity, God the author of all, and invoking Him by oath as the 
Lord, the Father of the Leader, and author; whom if ye study with a truly philosophical spirit, ye shall know." 
And the address in the Timoeus calls the creator. Father, speaking thus: "Ye gods of gods, of whom I am 
Father; and the Creator of your works." So that when he says, "Around the king of all, all things are, and 
because of Him are all things; and he [or that] is the cause of all good things; and around the second are the 
things second in order; and around the third, the third," I understand nothing else than the Holy Trinity to be 
meant; for the third is the Holy Spirit, and the Son is the second, by whom all things were made according to 
the will ofthe Father. [3] 

And the same, in the tenth book ofthe Republic, mentions Eros the son of Armenius, who is Zoroaster. 
Zoroaster, then, writes: "These were composed by Zoroaster, the son of Armenius, a Pamphylian by birth: 
having died in battle, and been in Hades, I learned them ofthe gods." This Zoroaster, Plato says, having 
been placed on the funeral pyre, rose again to life in twelve days. He alludes perchance to the resurrection, 
or perchance to the fact that the path for souls to ascension lies through the twelve signs of the zodiac; and 
he himself says, that the descending pathway to birth is the same. In the same way we are to understand the 
twelve labours of Hercules, after which the soul obtains release from this entire world. 
I do not pass over Empedocles, who speaks thus physically of the renewal of all things, as consisting in a 
transmutation into the essence of fire, which is to take place. And most plainly ofthe same opinion is 
Heraclitus of Ephesus, who considered that there was a world everlasting, and recognised one 
perishable-that is, in its arrangement, not being different from the former, viewed in a certain aspect. But that 
he knew the imperishable world which consists ofthe universal essence to be everlastingly of a certain 
nature, he makes clear by speaking thus: "The same world of all things, neither any of the gods, nor any one 
of men, made. But there was, and is, and will be ever-living fire, kindled according to measure, [1] and 
quenched according to measure." And that he taught it to be generated and perishable, is shown by what 
follows: "There are transmutations of fire, -first, the sea; and ofthe sea the half is land, the half fiery vapour." 
For he says that these are the effects of power. For fire is by the Word of God, which governs all things. 

changed by the air into moisture, which is, as it were, the germ of cosmical change; and this he calls sea. 
And out of it again is produced earth, and sky, and all that they contain. How, again, they are restored and 
ignited, he shows clearly in these words: "The sea is diffused and measured according to the same rule 
which subsisted before it became earth." Similarly also respecting the other elements, the same is to be 
understood. The most renowned of the Stoics teach similar doctrines with him, in treating of the conflagration 
and the government of the world, and both the world and man properly so called, and of the continuance of 
our souls. 

Plato, again, in the seventh book of the Republic, has called "the day here nocturnal," as I suppose, on 
account of "the world-rulers of this darkness; " [2] and the descent of the soul into the body, sleep and death, 
similarly with Heraclitus. And was not this announced, oracularly, of the Saviour, by the Spirit, saying by 
David, "I slept, and slumbered; I awoke: for the LORD will sustain me? " [3] For He not only figuratively calls 
the resurrection of Christ rising from sleep; but to the descent of the Lord into the flesh he also applies the 
figurative term sleep. The Saviour Himself enjoins, "Watch; " [4] as much as to say, "Study how to live, and 
endeavour to separate the soul from the body." 

And the Lord's day Plato prophetically speaks of in the tenth book of the Republic, in these words: "And 
when seven days have passed to each of them in the meadow, on the eighth they are to set out and arrive 
in four days." [5] By the meadow is to be understood the fixed sphere, as being a mild and genial spot, and 
the locality of the pious; and by the seven days each motion of the seven planets, and the whole practical 
art which speeds to the end of rest. But after the wandering orbs the journey leads to heaven, that is, to the 
eighth motion and day. And he says that souls are gone on the fourth day, pointing out the passage through 
the four elements. But the seventh day is recognised as sacred, not by the Hebrews only, but also by the 
Greeks; according to which the whole world of all animals and plants revolve. Hesiod says of it:- 
"The first, and fourth, and seventh day were held sacred." 

And again:- 

"And on the seventh the sun's resplendent orb." And Homer:- 

"And on the seventh then came the sacred day." 

And Homer:- 

"The seventh was sacred." And again:- 

"It was the seventh day, and all things were accomplished." 

And again:- 

"And on the seventh morn we leave the stream of Acheron." 

Callimachus the poet also writes:- 

"It was the seventh morn, and they had all things done." 

And again:- 

"Among good days is the seventh day, and the seventh race." 

And:- 

"The seventh is among the prime, and the seventh is perfect." 

And:- 

"Now all the seven were made in starry heaven. 

In circles shining as the years appear." 

The Elegies of Solon, too, intensely deify the seventh day. 

And how? Is it not similar to Scripture when it says, "Let us remove the righteous man from us, because he is 

troublesome to us?" [1] when Plato, all but predicting the economy of salvation, says in the second book of 

the Republic as follows: "Thus he who is constituted just shall be scourged, shall be stretched on the rack, 

shall be bound, have his eyes put out; and at last, having suffered all evils, shall be crucified." [2] 

And the Socratic Antisthenes, paraphrasing that prophetic utterance, "To whom have ye likened me? saith 

the Lord," [3] says that "God is like no one; wherefore no one can come to the knowledge of Him from an 

image." 

Xenophon too, the Athenian, utters these similar sentiments in the following words: "He who shakes all 

things, and is Himself immoveable, is manifestly one great and powerful. But what He is in form, appears 

not. No more does the sun, who wishes to shine in all directions, deem it right to permit any one to look on 

himself. But if one gaze on him audaciously, he loses his eyesight." 

"What flesh can see with eyes the Heavenly, True, 
Immortal God, whose dwelling is the poles? 
Not even before the bright beams of the sun 
Are men, as being mortal, fit to stand, "- 

the Sibyl had said before. Rightly, then, Xenophanes of Colophon, teaching that God is one and 

incorporeal, adds:- 

"One God there is 'midst gods and men supreme; 

In form, in mind, unlike to mortal men." 

And again:- 

"But men have the idea that gods are born. 

And wear their clothes, and have both voice and shape." 

And again:- 

"But had the oxen or the lions hands. 

Or could with hands depict a work like men. 

Were beasts to draw the semblance of the gods. 

The horses would them like to horses sketch. 

To oxen, oxen, and their bodies make 

Of such a shape as to themselves belongs." 

Let us hear, then, the lyric poet Bacchylides speaking of the divine:- 
"Who to diseases dire [4] never succumb. 
And blameless are; in nought resembling men." 

And also Cleanthes, the Stoic, who writes thus in a poem on the Deity: [5]- 
"If you ask what is the nature of the good, listen- 
That which is regular, just, holy, pious. 
Self-governing, useful, fair, fitting. 
Grave, independent, always beneficial. 
That feels no fear or grief, profitable, painless. 
Helpful, pleasant, safe, friendly. 
Held in esteem, agreeing with itself: honourable. 
Humble, careful, meek, zealous. 
Perennial, blameless, ever-during." 

And the same, tacitly vilifying the idolatry of the multitude, adds:- 
"Base is every one who looks to opinion. 
With the view of deriving any good from it." 

We are not, then, to think of God according to the opinion of the multitude. 
"For I do not think that secretly. 
Imitating the guise of a scoundrel. 
He would go to thy bed as a man," 

says Amphion to Antiope. And Sophocles plainly writes:- 

"His mother Zeus espoused. 

Not in the likeness of gold, nor covered 

With swan's plumage, as the Pleuronian girl 

He impregnated; but an out and out man." 

He further proceeds, and adds:- 

"And quick the adulterer stood on the bridal steps." 

Then he details still more plainly the licentiousness of the fabled Zeus:- 

"But he nor food nor cleansing water touched. 

But heart-stung went to bed, and that whole night Wantoned." 

But let these be resigned to the follies of the theatre. 

Heraclitus plainly says: "But of the word which is eternal men are not able to understand, both before they 
have heard it, and on first hearing it." And the lyrist Melanippides says in song:- 
"Hear me, O Father, Wonder of men. 
Ruler of the ever-living soul." 

And Parmenides the great, as Plato says in the Sophist writes of God thus:- 
"Very much, since unborn and indestructible He is. 
Whole, only-begotten, and immoveable, and unoriginated." 

Hesiod also says:- 

"For He of the immortals all is King and Lord. 

With God [6] none else in might may strive." 

Nay more. Tragedy, drawing away from idols, teaches to look up to heaven. Sophocles, as Hecataeus, 

who composed the histories in the work about Abraham and the Egyptians, says, exclaims plainly on the 

stage:- 

"One in very truth, God is One, 

Who made the heaven and the far-stretching earth. 

The Deep's blue billow, and the might of winds. 

But of us mortals, many erring far 

In heart, as solace for our woes, have raised 

Images of gods-of stone, or else of brass. 

Or figures wrought of gold or ivory; 

And sacrifices and vain festivals 

To these appointing, deem ourselves devout." 

And Euripides on the stage, in tragedy, says:- 

"Dost thou this lofty, boundless Ether see. 
Which holds the earth around in the embrace 
Of humid arms? This reckon Zeus, 
And this regard as God." 

And in the drama of Pirithous, the same writes those lines in tragic vein:- 

"Thee, self-sprung, who on Ether's wheel 

Hast universal nature spun. 

Around whom Light and dusky spangled Night, 

The countless host of stars, too, ceaseless dance." 

For there he says that the creative mind is self-sprung. What follows applies to the universe, in which are the 

opposites of light and darkness. 

AEschylus also, the son of Euphorion, says with very great solemnity of God:- 

"Ether is Zeus, Zeus earth, and Zeus the heaven; 
The universe is Zeus, and all above." 

I am aware that Plato assents to Heraclitus, who writes: "The one thing that is wise alone will not be 

expressed, and means the name of Zeus." And again, "Law is to obey the will of one." And if you wish to 

adduce that saying, "He that hath ears to hear, let him hear," you will find it expressed by the Ephesian[1] to 

the following effect: "Those that hear without understanding are like the deaf. The proverb witnesses against 

them, that when present they are absent." 

But do you want to hear from the Greeks expressly of one first principle? Timaeus the Locrian, in the work on 

Nature, shall testify in the following words: "There is one first principle of all things unoriginated. For were it 

originated, it would be no longer the first principle; but the first principle would be that froth which it 

originated." For this true opinion was derived from what follows: "Hear," it is said, "0 Israel; the LORD thy 

God is one, and Him only shaltthou serve. "[2] 

"Lo[3] He all sure and all unerring is." 

says the Sibyl. 

Homer also manifestly mentions the Father and the Son by a happy hit of divination in the following words:- 

"If cutis, [4] alone as thou art, offers thee violence. 

And there is no escaping disease sent by Zeus, 
Fertile Cyciopes lieed not Aegis-bearing Zeus. "[5] 

And before liim Orplieus said, speal<ing of tlie in liand:- 
"Son of great Zeus, Fatlier of Aegis-bearing Zeus." 

And Xenocrates tlie Clialcedonian, wlio mentions tlie supreme Zeus and tlie inferior Zeus, leaves an 
indication of tlie Fatlier and the Son. Homer, while representing the gods as subject to human passions, 
appears to know the Divine Being, whom Epicurus does not so revere. He says accordingly:- 
"Why, son of Peleus, mortal as thou art. 
With swift feet me pursuest, a god 
Immortal? Hast thou not yet known 
That I am a god?"[6] 

For he shows that the Divinity cannot be captured by a mortal, or apprehended either with feet, or hands, or 

eyes, or by the body at all. "To whom have ye likened the Lord? or to what likeness have ye likened Him?" 

says the Scripture. [7] Has not the artificer made the image? or the goldsmith, melting the gold, has gilded it, 

and what follows. 

The comic poet Epicharmus speaks in the Republic clearly of the Word in the following terms:- 

"The life of men needs calculation and number alone. 

And we live by number and calculation, for these save mortals. "[8] 

He then adds expressly:- 

"Reason governs mortals, and alone preserves manners." 

Then:- 

"There is in man reasoning; and there is a divine 

Reason. [9] Reason is implanted in man to provide for life and sustenance. 

But divine Reason attends the arts in the case of all. 

Teaching them always what it is advantageous to do. 

For it was not man that discovered art, but God brought it; 

And the Reason of man derives its origin from the divine Reason." 

The Spirit also cries by Isaiah: "Wherefore the multitude of sacrifices? saith the LORD. I am full of holocausts 

of rams, and the fat of lambs and the blood of bulls I wish not;" and a little after adds: "Wash you, and be 

clean. Put away wickedness from your souls, "[1 0] and so forth. 

Menander, the comic poet, writes in these very words:- 

"If one by offering sacrifice, a crowd 

Of bulls or kids, O Pamphilus, by Zeus. 

Or such like things; by making works of art. 

Garments of gold or purple, images 

Of ivory or emerald, deems by these 

God can be made propitious, he does err. 

And has an empty mind. For the man must prove 

A man of worth, who neither maids deflowers. 

Nor an adulterer is, nor steals, nor kills 

For love of worldly wealth, O Pamphilus. 

Nay, covet not a needle's thread. For God 

Thee sees, being near beside thee."...[1] 

"I am a God at hand," it is said by Jeremiah, [2] "and not a God afar off. Shall a man do aught in secret 

places, and I shall not see him ?" 

And again Menunder, paraphrasing that Scripture, "Sacrifice a sacrifice of righteousness, and trust in the 

Lord,"[3] thus writes:- 

"And not a needle even that is 

Another's ever covet, dearest friend; 

For God in righteous works delights, and so 

Permits him to increase his worldly wealth. 

Who toils, and ploughs the land both night and day. 

But sacrifice to God, and righteous be. 

Shining not in brigiit robes, but in tiiy iieart; 
And wiien tiiou iiear'st tiie tiiunder, do not flee, 
Being conscious to tiiyself of nougiit amiss. 
Good sir, fortiiee God ever present sees. "[4] 

"Wiii 1st tiiou art yet speal<ing," says tlie Scripture, "I will say, Lo, here I am." [5] 
Again Diphilus, the comic poet, discourses as, follows on the judgment:- 
"Think'st thou, O Niceratus, that the dead. 
Who in all kinds of luxury in life have shared. 
Escape the Deity, as if forgot? 
There is an eye of justice, which sees all. 
For two ways, as we deem, to Hades lead- 
One for the good, the other for the bad. 
But if the earth hides both for ever, then 
Go plunder, steal, rob, and be turbulent. 
But err not. For in Hades judgment is. 
Which God the Lord of all will execute. 
Whose name too dreadful is for me to name. 
Who gives to sinners length of earthly life. 
If any mortal thinks, that day by day. 
While doing ill, he eludes the gods keen sight. 
His thoughts are evil; and when justice has 
The leisure, he shall then detected be 
So thinking. Look, whoe'er you be that say 
That there is not a God. There is, there is. 
If one, by nature evil, evil does. 
Let him redeem the time; for such as he 
Shall by and by due punishment receive. "[6] 

And with this agrees the tragedy[7] in the following lines:- 
"For there shall come, shall come[8] that point of time. 
When Ether, golden-eyed, shall ope its store 
Of treasured fire; and the devouring flame. 
Raging, shall burn all things on earth below. 
And all above."... 

And after a little he adds:- 

"And when the whole world fades. 

And vanished all the abyss of ocean's waves. 

And earth of trees is bare; and wrapt in flames. 

The air no more begets the winged tribes; 

Then He who all destroyed, shall all restore." 

We shall find expressions similar to these also in the Orphic hymns, written as follows: - 
"For having hidden all, brought them again 
To gladsome light, forth from his sacred heart. 
Solicitous. 

And if we live throughout holily and righteously, we are happy here, and shall be happier after our departure 

hence; not possessing happiness for a time, but enabled to rest in eternity. 

"At the same hearth and table as the rest 

Of the immortal gods, we sit all free 

Of human ills, unharmed," 

says the philosophic poetry of Empedocles. And so, according to the Greeks, none is so great as to be 

above judgment, none so insignificant as to escape its notice. 

And the same Orpheus speaks thus:- 
"But to the word divine, looking, attend. 
Keeping aright the heart's receptacle 
Of intellect, and tread the straight path well. 

And only to the world's immortal King 
Direct thy gaze. "[9] 

And again, respecting God, saying that He was invisible, and that He was known to but one, a Chaldean by 

race-meaning either by this Abraham or his son-he speaks as follows:- 

"But one a scion of Chaldean race; 

For he the sun's path knew right well. 

And how the motion of the sphere about 

The earth proceeds, in circle moving 

Equally around its axis, how the winds 

Their chariot guide o'er air and sea." 

Then, as if paraphrasing the expression, "Heaven is my throne, and earth is my footstool, "[10] he adds :- 

"But in great heaven. He is seated firm 

Upon a throne of gold, and neath His feet 

The earth. His right hand round the ocean's bound 

He stretches; and the hills' foundations shake 

To the centre at His wrath, nor can endure 

His mighty strength. He all celestial is. 

And all things finishes upon the earth. 

He the Beginning, Middle is, and End. 

But Thee I dare not speak. In limbs 

And mind I tremble. He rules from on high." 

And so forth. For in these he indicates these prophetic utterances: "If Thou openestthe heaven, trembling 

shall seize the mountains from Thy presence; and they shall melt, as wax melteth before the fire;" [1 1]and in 

Isaiah, "Who hath measured the heaven with a span, and the whole earth with His fist ?[12]Again, when it is 

said :- 

"Ruler of Ether, Hades, Sea, and Land, 

Who with Thy bolts Olympus' strong-built home 

Dost shake. Whom demons dread, and whom the throng 

Of gods do fear. Whom, too, the Fates obey. 

Relentless though they be. O deathless One, 

Our mother's Sire I whose wrath makes all things reel; 

Who mov'st the winds, and shroud'st in clouds the world. 

Broad Ether cleaving with Thy lightning gleams,- 

Thine is the order 'mongat the stars, which run 

As Thine unchangeable behests direct. 

Before Thy burning throne the angels wait. 

Much-working, charged to do all things, for men. 

Thy young Spring shines, all prank'd with purple flowers; 

Thy Winter with its chilling clouds assails; 

Three Autumn noisy Bacchus distributes." 

Then he adds, naming expressly the Almighty God:- 

"Deathless Immortal, capable of being 

To the immortals only uttered! Come, 

Greatest of gods, with strong Necessity. 

Dread, invincible, great, deathless One, 

Whom Ether crowns."... 

By the expression "Sire of our Mother" <greek>mhtro</greek>-<greek>patwr</greek> he not only intimates 
creation out of nothing, but gives occasion to those who introduce emissions of imagining a consort of the 
Deity. And he paraphrases those prophetic Scriptures- that in Isaiah, "I am He that fixes the thunder, and 
creates the wind; whose hands have rounded the host of heaven;"[1] and that in Moses, "Behold, behold 
that I am He, and there is no god beside me: I will kill, and I will make to live; I will smite, and I will heal: and 
there is none that shall deliver out of my hands. "[2] 

"And He, from good, to mortals planteth ill. 
And cruel war, and tearful woes," 

according to Orpheus. 

Such also are the words of the Parian Archilochus. 

"O Zeus, thine is the power of heaven, and thou 
Inflict'st on men things violent and wrong. "[3] 

Again let the Thracian Orpheus sing to us:- 
"His right hand all around to ocean's bound 
He stretches; and beneath His feet is earth." 

These are plainly derived from the following: "The Lord will save the inhabited cities, and grasp the whole 

land in His hand like a nest; "[4] "It is the Lord that made the earth by His power," as saith Jeremiah, "and set 

up the earth by His wisdom. "[5] Further, in addition to these, Phocylides, who calls the angels demons, 

explains in the following words that some of them are good, and others bad (for we also have learned that 

some are apostate) :- 

"Demons there are-some here, some there-set over men; 

Some, on man's entrance [into life], to ward off ill." 

Rightly, then, also Philemon, the comic poet demolishes idolatry in these words:- 

"Fortune is no divinity to us: 

There's no such god. But what befalls by chance 

And of itself to each, is Fortune called." 

And Sophocles the tragedian says:- 

"Not even the gods have all things as they choose. 

Excepting Zeus; for he beginning is and end." 

And Orpheus: - 

"One Might, the great, the flaming heaven, was 
One Deity. All things one Being were; in whom 
All these revolve fire, water, and the earth." 

And so forth. 

Pindar, the lyric poet, as if in Bacchic frenzy, plainly says:- 

"What is God? The All." 

And again:- 

"God, who makes all mortals." 

And when he says,- 

"How little, being a man, dost thou expect 
Wisdom for man? 'Tis hard for mortal mind 
The counsels of the gods to scan; and thou 
Wast of a mortal mother born," 

he drew the thought from the following: "Who hath known the mind of the LORD, or who was His 
counsellor?"[6] Hesiod, too, agrees with what is said above, in what he writes:- 
"No prophet, sprung of men that dwell on earth, 
Can know the mind of Aegis-bearing Zeus." 

Similarly, then, Solon the Athenian, in the Elegies, following Hesiod, writes :- 
"The immortal's mind to men is quite unknown." 

Again Moses, having prophesied that the woman would bring forth in trouble and pain, on account of 

transgression, a poet not undistinguished writes:- 

"Never by day 

From toil and woe shall they have rest, nor yet 

By night from groans. Sad cares the gods to men Shall give." 

Further, when Homer says,- 

"The Sire himself the golden balance held, "[7] 

he intimates that God is just. 

And Menander, the comic poet, in exhibiting God, says:- 

"To each man, on his birth, there is assigned 

A tutelary Demon, as his life's good guide. 

For that the Demon evil is, and harms 

A good life, is not to be thought." 

Then he adds:- 

"A<greek>panta</greek> <greek>d</greek> <greek>agaqon</greek> <greek>einai</greek> 

<greek>ton</greek> <greek>Q?on</greek>," 

meaning either "that every one good is God," or, what is preferable, "that God in all things is good." 

Again, Aeschylus the tragedian, setting forth the power of God, does not shrink from calling Him the Highest, 

in these words:- 

"Place God apart from mortals; and think not 

That He is,, like thyself, corporeal. 

Thou know st Him not. Now He appears as fire. 

Dread force; as water now; and now as gloom; 

And in the beasts is dimly shadowed forth. 

In wind, and cloud, in lightning, thunder, rain; 

And minister to Him the seas and rocks. 

Each fountain and the water's floods and streams. 

The mountains tremble, and the earth, the vast 

Abyss of sea, and towering height of hills. 

When on them looks the Sovereign's awful eye: 

Almighty is the glory of the Most High God. "[1] 

Does he not seem to you to paraphrase that text, "At the presence of the Lord the earth trembles?"[2] In 

addition to these, the most prophetic Apollo is compelled-thus testifying to the glory of God-to say of 

Athene, when the Modes made war against Greece, that she besought and supplicated Zeus for Attica. The 

oracle is as follows:- 

"Pallas cannot Olympian Zeus propitiate. 

Although with many words and sage advice she prays; 

But he will give to the devouring fire many temples of the immortals. 

Who now stand shaking with terror, and bathed in sweat; "[3] 

and so forth. 

Thearidas, in his book On Nature, writes: "There was then one really true beginning [first principle] of all that 

exists-one. For that Being in the beginning is one and alone." 

"Nor is there any other except the Great King," 

says Orpheus. In accordance with whom, the comic poet Diphilus says very sententiously,[4] the 

"Father of all. 

To Him alone incessant reverence pay. 

The inventor and the author of such blessings." 

Rightly therefore Plato "accustoms the best natures to attain to that study which formerly we said was the 
highest, both to see the good and to accomplish that ascent. And this, as appears, is not the throwing of the 
potsherds;[5] but the turning round of the soul from a nocturnal day to that which is a true return to that which 
really is, which we shall assert to be the true philosophy." Such as are partakers of this he judges[6] to 
belong to the golden race, when he says: "Ye are all brethren; and those who are of the golden race are 
most capable of judging most accurately in every respect."[7] 

The Father, then, and Maker of all things is apprehended by all things, agreeably to all, by innate power and 
without teaching,-things inanimate, sympathizing with the animate creation; and of living beings some are. 
already immoral, working in the light of day. But of those that are still mortal, some are in fear, and carried 
still in their mother's womb; and others regulate themselves by their own independent reason. And of men 

all are Greeks and Barbarians. But no race anywhere of tillers of the soil, or nomads, and not even of 
dwellers in cities, can live, without being imbued with the faith of a superior being. [8] Wherefore every 
eastern nation, and every nation touching the western shore; or the north, and each one towards the 
south, [9]-all have one and the same preconception respecting Him who hath appointed government; since 
the most universal of His operations equally pervade all. Much more did the philosophers among the 
Greeks, devoted to investigation, starting from the Barbarian philosophy, attribute providence[10] to the 
"Invisible, and sole, and most powerful, and most skilful and supreme cause of all things most beautiful; 
"-not knowing the inferences from these truths, unless instructed by us, and not even how God is to be 
known naturally; but only, as we have already often said, by a true periphrasis." Rightly therefore the apostle 
says, "Is He the God of the Jews only, and not also of the Greeks ? "-not only saying prophetically that of 
the Greeks believing Greeks would know God;[12] but also intimating that in power the Lord is the God of all, 
and truly Universal King. For they know neither what He is, nor how He is Lord, and Father, and Maker, nor 
the rest of the system of the truth, without being taught by it. Thus also the prophetic utterances have the 
same force as the apostolic word. For Isaiah says, "If ye say. We trust in the LORD our God: now make an 
alliance with my Lord the king of the Assyrians." And he adds: "And now, was it without the LORD that we 
came up to this land to make war against it?"[13] And Jonah, himself a prophet, intimates the same thing in 
what he says: "And the shipmaster came to him, and said to him. Why dost thou snore? Rise, call on thy 
God, that He may save us, and that we may not perish."' For the expression "thy God" he makes as if to one 
who knew Him by way of knowledge; and the expression, "that God may save us," revealed the 
consciousness in the minds of heathens who had applied their mind to the Ruler of all, but had not yet 
believed. And again the same: "And he said to them, I am the servant of the LORD; and I fear the LORD, the 
God of heaven." And again the same: "And he said. Let us by no means perish for the life of this man." And 
Malachi the prophet plainly exhibits God saying, "I will not accept sacrifice at your hands. For from the rising 
of the sun to its going down. My name is glorified among the Gentiles; and in every place sacrifice is offered 
to Me. "[2] And again: "Because I am a great King, saith the LORD omnipotent; and My name is manifest 
among the nations." What name? The Son declaring the Father among the Greeks who have believed. 
Plato in what follows gives an exhibition of free-will: "Virtue owns not a master; and in proportion as each one 
honours or dishonours it, in that proportion he will be a partaker of it. The blame lies in the exercise of free 
choice." But God is blameless. For He is never the author of evil. 
"O warlike Trojans," says the lyric poet, [3] - 
"High ruling Zeus, who beholds all things. 
Is not the cause of great woes to mortals; 
But it is in the power of all men to find 
Justice, holy, pure. 
Companion of order. 
And of wise Themis 
The sons of the blessed are ye 
In finding her as your associate." 

And Pindar expressly introduces also Zeus Soter, the consort of Themis, proclaiming him King, Saviour, 
Just, in the following lines:- 

"First, prudent Themis, of celestial birth. 

On golden steeds, by Ocean's rock. 

The Fates brought to the stair sublime. 

The shining entrance of Olympus, 

Of Saviour Zeus for aye[4] to be the spouse. 

And she, the Hours, gold-diademed, fair-fruited, good, brought forth. "[5] 

He, then, who is not obedient to the truth, and is puffed up with human teaching, is wretched and miserable, 

according to Euripides:- 

"Who these things seeing, yet apprehends not God, 

But mouthing lofty themes, casts far 

Perverse deceits; stubborn in which, the tongue 

Its shafts discharges, about things unseen. 

Devoid of sense." 

Let him who wishes, then, approaching to the true instruction, learn from Parmenides the Eleatic, who 

promises:- 

"Ethereal nature, then, and all the signs 

In Ether thou shall know, and the effects, 

All viewless, of the sacred Sun's clear torch 

And whence produced. The round-eyed Moon's 

Revolving influences and nature thou 

Shall learn; and the ensphering heaven shall know; 

Whence sprung; and how Necessity took it 

And chained so as to keep the starry bounds." 

And Metrodorus, though an Epicurean, spoke thus, divinely inspired: "Remember, O Menestratus, that, 
being a mortal endowed with a circumscribed life, thou hast in thy soul ascended, till thou hast seen endless 
time, and the infinity of things; and what is to be, and what has been;" when with the blessed choir, according 
to Plato, we shall gaze on the blessed sight and vision; we following with Zeus, and others with other deities, 
if we may be permitted so to say, to receive initiation into the most blessed mystery: which we shall 
celebrate, ourselves being perfect and untroubled by the ills which awaited us at the end of our time; and 
introduced to the knowledge of perfect and tranquil visions, and contemplating them in pure sunlight; we 
ourselves pure, and now no longer distinguished by that, which, when carrying it about, we call the body, 
being bound to it like an oyster to its shell. 

The Pythagoreans call heaven the Antichthon[the opposite Earth]. And in this land, it is said by Jeremiah, "I 
will place thee among the children, and give thee the chosen land as inheritance of God Omnipotent; "[6] 
and they who herit it shall reign over the earth. Myriads on myriads of examples[7] rush on my mind which 
might adduce. But for the sake of symmetry the discourse must now stop, in order that we may not exemplify 
the saying of Agatho the tragedian:- 

"Treating our by-work as work. 
And doing our work as by-work." 

It having been, then, as I think, clearly shown in what way it is to be understood that the Greeks were called 
thieves by the Lord, I willingly leave the dogmas of the philosophers. For were we 'to go over their sayings, 
we should gather together directly such a quantity of notes, in showing that the whole of the Hellenic wisdom 
was derived from the Barbarian philosophy. But this speculation, we shall, nevertheless, again touch on, as 
necessity requires, when we collect the opinions current among the Greeks respecting first principles. 
But from what has been said, it tacitly devolves on us to consider in what way the Hellenic books are to be 
perused by the man who is able to pass through the billows in them. Therefore 

"Happy is he who possesses the wealth of the divine mind," as appears according to Empedocles, 

"But wretched he, who cares for dark opinion about the Gods." 

He divinely showed knowledge and ignorance to be the boundaries of happiness and misery. "For it 

behoves philosophers to be acquainted with very many things," according to Heraclitus; 

and truly must 

"He, who seeks to be good, err in many things." 

It is then, now clear to us, from what has been said, that the beneficence of God is eternal, and that, from an 
unbeginning principle, equal natural righteousness reached all, according to the worth of each several 
race,-never having had a beginning. For God did not make a beginning of being Lord and Good, being 
always what He is. Nor will He ever cease to do good, although He bring all things to an end. And each one 
of us is a partaker of His beneficence, as far as He wills. For the difference of the elect is made by the 
intervention of a choice worthy of the soul, and by exercise. 

Thus, then, let our fifth Miscellany of gnostic notes in accordance with the true philosophy be brought to a 
close. 

Book (Hippol., ill. 82, 83, et seqq.) for the rules (1) governing all Christians, and (2) those called "the faithful," 
by way of eminence. So, in our days, not all believers are communicants. 

VII. (The Unknown God, cap. xii. p. 464, note 

Must we retain "too superstitious," even in the Revised Version? (Which see ad loc.) Bunsen's rendering of 
<greek>deisidaimonia</greek>, by demonfear,[1] is not English; but it suggests the common view of 
scholars, upon the passage, and leads me to suppose that the learned and venerable company of revisers 
could not agree on any English that would answer. That St. Paul paid the Athenians a compliment, as 
devout in their way, i.e.. Godfearing towards their divinities, will not be denied. Clement seems to have so 
understood it, and hence his constant effort to show that we must recognise, in dealing with Gentiles, 
whatever of elementary good God has permitted to exist among them. May we not admit this principle, at 
least so far as to believe that Divine Providence led the Athenians to set up the very inscription which was to 
prompt Christ's apostle to an ingenious interpretation, and to an equally ingenious use of it, so avoiding a 
direct conflict with their laws? This they had charged on him (Acts xvii. 18), as before on Socrates. 

VIM. (Xenocrates and Democritus, cap. xiii. p. 465, note 3.) 

My grave and studious reader will forgive me, here, for a reference to Stromata of a widely different sort. 
Dulce est desipere, etc. One sometimes finds instruction and relief amid the intense nonsense of "agnostic" 
and other "philosophies" of our days, in turning to a healthful intellect which "answers fools according to their 
folly." I confess myself an occasional reader of the vastly entertaining and suggestive Noctes of Christopher 
North, which may be excused by the famous example of a Father of the Church, who delighted in 
Aristophanes. [2] To illustrate this passage of Clement, then, let me refer to Professor Wilson's intense 
sympathy with animals. See the real eloquence of his reference to the dogs of Homer and of Sir Walter 
Scott. [3] "The Ettrick Shepherd" somewhere wondered, whether some dogs are not gifted with souls; and, in 
the passage referred to, it is asked, whether the dog of Ulysses could have been destitute of an immortal 
spirit. On another occasion, Christopher breaks out with something like this: "Let me prefer the man who 
thinks so, to the miserable atheist whose creed is dust." He looks upon his dog "Fro," and continues (while 
the noble animal seems listening), "Yes, better a thousand times, O Fro, to believe that 'my faithful dog shall 
bear me company,' than that the soul of a Newton perishes at death," etc. How often have I regaled myself 
with the wholesome tonic of such dogloving sport, after turning with disgust from some Godhating and 
mandestroying argument of "modern science," falsely so called. 

IX. (Plato's Prophecy, cap. xiv. p. 470, note 2.) 

My references at this point are worthy of being enlarged upon. I subjoin the following as additional. On this 
sublime passage, Jones of Nayland remarks, [1] "The greatest moral philosopher of the Greeks declared, 
with a kind of prescience, that, if a man perfectly just were to come upon earth, he would be impoverished 
and scourged, and bound as a criminal; and, when he had suffered all manner of indignities, would be put to 
the shameful death of (suspension or) crucifixion." "Several of the Fathers," he adds, "have taken notice of 
this extraordinary passage in Plato, looking upon it as a prediction of the sufferings of the JUST ONE, Jesus 
Christ." He refers us to Grotius (De Veritate, iv. sec. 12) and to Meric Casaubon (On Credulity, p. 135). The 
passage from Plato (Rep., ii. 5) impressed the mind of Cicero. (See his Rep., ill. 17.) 

BOOK VI. 

CHAP. I. PLAN. [1] 

THE sixth and also the seventh Miscellany of gnostic notes, in accordance with the true philosophy, having 
delineated as well as possible the ethical argument conveyed in them, and having exhibited what the 
Gnostic is in his life, proceed to show the philosophers that he is by no means impious, as they suppose, 
but that he alone is truly pious, by a compendious exhibition of the Gnostic's form of religion, as far as it is 
possible, without danger, to commit it to writing in a book of reference. For the Lord enjoined "to labour for 
the meat which endureth to eternity. "[2] And the prophet says," Blessed is he that soweth into all waters, 
whose ox and ass tread, "[3] [that is,] the people, from the Law and from the Gentiles, gathered into one faith. 
"Now the weak eateth herbs," according to the noble apostle. [4] The Instructor, divided by us into three 
books, has already exhibited the training and nurture up from the state of childhood, that is, the course of life 
which from elementary instruction grows by faith; and in the case of those enrolled in the number of men, 
prepares beforehand the soul, endued with virtue, for the reception of gnostic knowledge. The Greeks, then, 
clearly learning, from what shall be said by us in these pages, that in profanely persecuting the Godloving 
man, they themselves act impiously; then, as the notes advance, in accordance with the style of the 
Miscellanies, we must solve the difficulties raised both by Greeks and Barbarians with respect to the 
coming of the Lord. 

In a meadow the flowers blooming variously, and in a park the plantations of fruittrees, are not separated 
according to their species from those of other kinds. If some, culling varieties, have Composed learned 
collections. Meadows, and Helicons, and Honeycombs, and Robes; then, with the things which come to 
recollection by haphazard, and are expurgated neither in order nor expression, but purposely scattered, the 
form of the Miscellanies is promiscuously variegated like a meadow. And such being the case, my notes 
shall serve as kindling sparks; and in the case of him, who is fit for knowledge, if he chance to fall in with 
them, research made with exertion will turn out to his benefit and advantage. For it is fight that labour should 
precede not only food but also, much more knowledge, in the case of those that are advancing to the 
eternal and blessed salvation by the "strait and narrow way," which is truly the Lord's. 
Our knowledge, and our spiritual garden, is the Saviour Himself; into whom we are planted, being 
transferred and transplanted, from our old life, into the good land. And transplanting contributes to 
fruitfulness. The Lord, then, into whom we have been transplanted, is the Light i and the true Knowledge. 
Now knowledge is otherwise spoken of in a twofold sense: that, commonly so called, which appears in all 
men (similarly also comprehension and apprehension), universally, in the knowledge of individual objects; 
in which not only the rational powers, but equally the irrational, share, which I would never term knowledge, 
inasmuch as the apprehension of things through the senses comes naturally. But that which par excellence 
is termed knowledge, bears the impress of judgment and reason, in the exercise of which there will be 
rational cognitions alone, applying purely to objects of thought, and resulting from the bare energy of the 
soul. "He is a good man," says David, [5] "who pities" (those ruined through error), "and lends" (from the 
communication of the word of truth) not at haphazard, for "he will dispense his words in judgment:" with 
profound calculation, "he hath dispersed, he hath given to the poor." 

CHAP. II.THE SUBJECT OF PLAGIARISMS RESUMED. THE GREEKS PLAGIARIZED FROM 
ONE ANOTHER. 

Before handling the point proposed, we must, by way of preface, add to the close of the fifth book what is 
wanting. For since we have shown that the symbolical style was ancient, and was employed not only by our 
prophets, but also by the majority of the ancient Greeks, and by not a few of the rest of the Gentile 
Barbarians, it was requisite to proceed to the mysteries of the initiated. I postpone the elucidation of these till 
we advance to the confutation of what is said by the Greeks on first principles; for we shall show that the 
mysteries belong to the same branch of speculation. And having proved that the declaration of Hellenic 
thought is illuminated all round by the truth, bestowed on us in the Scriptures, taking it according to the 
sense, we have proved, not to say what is invidious, that the theft of the truth passed to them. 

Come, and let us adduce the Greeks as witnesses against tiiemselves to tiie tiieft. For, inasmucii as tiiey 
pilfer from one another, they establish the fact that they are thieves; and although against their will, they are 
detected, clandestinely appropriating to those of their own race the truth which belongs to us. For if they do 
not keep their hands from each other, they will hardly do it from our authors. I shall say nothing of philosophic 
dogmas, since the very persons who are the authors of the divisions into sects, confess in writing, so as not 
to be convicted of ingratitude, that they have received from Socrates the most important of their dogmas. But 
after availing myself of a few testimonies of men most talked of, and of repute among the Greeks, and 
exposing their plagiarizing style, and selecting them from various periods, I shall turn to what follows. 
Orpheus, then, having composed the line:- 
"Since nothing else is more shameless and wretched than woman," 

Homer plainly says:- 

"Since nothing else is more dreadful and shameless than a woman. "[1] 

And Musaeus having written :- 

"Since art is greatly superior to strength," 

Homer says:- 

"By art rather than strength is the woodcutter greatly superior."[2] 

Again, Musaeus having composed the lines:- 
"And as the fruitful field produceth leaves. 
And on the ash trees some fade, others grow. 
So whirls the race of man its leaf," [3] 

Homer transcribes:- 

"Some of the leaves the wind strews on the ground. 

The budding wood bears some; in time of spring. 

They come. So springs one race of men, and one departs. "[4] 

Again, Homer having said:- 

"It is unholy to exult over dead men, "[5] 

Archilochus and Cratinus write, the former:- 
"It is not noble at dead men to sneer;" 

and Cratinus in the Lacones:- 
"For men 'tis dreadful to exult 
Much o'er the stalwart dead." 

Again, Archilochus, transferring that Homeric line:- 
"I erred, nor say I nay:- instead of many"[6] 

writes thus:- 

"I erred, and this mischief hath somehow seized another." 

As certainly also that line:- 
"Evenhanded[7] war the slayer slays. "[8] 

He also, altering, has given forth thus:- 

"I will do it. 

For Mars to men in truth is evenhanded."[7] 

Also, translating the following:- 

"The issues of victory among men depend on the gods, "[9] 

he openly encourages youth, in the following iambic:- 
"Victory's issues on the gods depend." 

Again, Homer having said:- 

"With feet unwashed sleeping on the ground," [10] 

Euripides writes in Erechteus:- 

"Upon the plain spread with no couch they sleep Nor m the streams of water lave their feet." 

Archilochus having likewise said:- 

"But one with this and one with that His heart delights?" 

in correspondence with the Homeric line:- 

"For one in these deeds, one in those delights, "[11] 

Euripides says in OEneus:- 

"But one in these ways, one in those, has more delight." 

And I have heard Aeschylus saying:- 

"He who is happy ought to stay at home; 

There should he also stay, who speeds not well." 

And Euripides, too, shouting the like on the stage:- 
"Happy the man who, prosperous, stays at home." 

Menander, too, on comedy, saying:- 

"He ought at home to stay, and free remain. Or be no longer rightly happy." 

Again, Theognis having said:- 

"The exile has no comrade dear and true," 

Euripides has written:- 

"Far from the poor flies every friend." 

And Epicharmus, saying:- 

"Daughter, woe worth the day 

Thee who art old I marry to a youth; "[1] 

and adding:- 

"For the young husband takes some other girl. And for another husband longs the wife," 

Euripides[2] writes:- 
"Tis bad to yoke an old wife to a youth; 
For he desires to share another's bed. 
And she, by him deserted, mischief plots." 

Euripides having, besides, said in the Medea:- 
"For no good do a bad man's gifts," 

Sophocles in Ajax Flagellifer utters this iambic:- 
"For foes' gifts are no gifts, nor any boon. "[3] 

Solon having written:- 

"For surfeit insolence begets. 

When store of wealth attends." 

Theognis writes in the same way:- 

"For surfeit insolence begets. 

When store of wealth attends the bad." 

Whence also Thucydides, in the Histories, says:- "Many men, to whom in a great degree, and in a short 
time, unlookedfor prosperity comes, are wont to turn to insolence." And Philistus[4] likewise imitates the 
same sentiment, expressing himself thus:- "And the many things which turn out prosperously to men, in 
accordance with reason, have an incredibly dangerous s tendency to misfortune. For those who meet with 

unlooked success beyond their expectations, are for tiie most part wont to turn to insolence." Again, 

Euripides iiaving written:- 

"For ciiildren sprung of parents wiio iiave led 

A hard and toilsome life, superior are;" 

Critias writes: "For I begin with a man's origin: how far the best and strongest in body will he be, if his father 
exercises himself, and eats in a hardy way, anti subjects his body to toilsome labour; and if the mother of the 
future child be strong in body, and give herself exercise." 

Again, Homer having said of the Hephaestusmade shield:- 
"Upon it earth and heaven and sea he made. 
And Ocean's rivers' mighty strength portrayed," 

Pherecydes of Syros says:- "Zas makes a cloak large and beautiful, and works on it earth and Ogenus, 
and the palace of Ogenus." 

And Homer having said:- 

"Shame, which greatly hurts a man or helps, "[6] 

Euripides writes in Erechtheus:- 

"Of shame I find it hard to judge; 

'Tis needed.' 'Tis at times a great mischief." 

Take, by way of parallel, such plagiarisms as the following, from those who flourished together, and were 
rivals of each other. From the Orestes of Euripides:- 
"Dear charm of sleep, aid in disease." 

From the Eriphyle of Sophocies:- 

"Hie thee to sleep, healer of that disease." 

And from the Antigone of Sophocles:- 

"Bastardy is opprobrious in name; but the nature is equal;"[2] 

And from the Aleuades of Sophocles:- 
"Each good thing has its nature equal." 

Again, in the Otimenus[3] of Euripides:- 
"For him who toils, God helps;" 

And in the Minos of Sophocles; 

"To those who act not, fortune is no ally;" 

And from the Alexander of Euripides:- 

"But time will show; and learning, by that test, I shall know whether thou art good or bad;" 

And from the Hipponos of Sophocles:- 
"Besides, conceal thou nought; since Time, 
That sees all, hears all, all things will unfold." 

But let us similarly run over the following; for Eumelus having composed the line, 
"Of Memory and Olympian Zeus the daughters nine," 

Solon thus begins the elegy:- 

"Of Memory and Olympian Zeus the children bright." 

Again, Euripides, paraphrasing the Homeric line:- 

"What, whence art thou? Thy city and thy parents, where?"[1] 

employs the following iambics in Aegeus:- 
"What country shall we say that thou hast left 

To roam in exile, wiiattiiy land-tiie bound 
Of tiiine own native soil? Who thee begat? 
And of what father dost thou call thyself the son?" 

And what? Theognis[2] having said:- 
"Wine largely drunk is bad; but if one use 
It with discretion, 'tis not bad, but good,"- 

does not Panyasis write? 

"Above the gods' best gift to men ranks wine. 

In measure drunk; but in excess the worst." 

Hesiod, too, saying:- 

"But for the fire to thee I'll give a plague, [3] 

For all men to delight themselves withal, "- 

Euripides writes:- 

"And for the fire 

Another fire greater and unconquerable. 

Sprung up in the shape of women"[4] 

And in addition, Homer, saying:- 

"There is no satiating the greedy paunch. 

Baneful, which many plagues has caused to men. "[3] 

Euripides says :- 

"Dire need and baneful paunch me overcome; 

From which all evils come." 

Besides, Callias the comic poet having written:- 
"With madmen, all men must be mad, they say,"- 

Menander, in the Poloumenoi, expresses himself similarly, saying:- 
"The presence of wisdom is not always suitable: 
One sometimes must with others play[6] the fool." 

And Antimachus of Teos having said:- 
"From gifts, to mortals many ills arise, "- 

Augias composed the line:- 

"For gifts men's mind and acts deceive." 

And Hesiod having said:- 

"Than a good wife, no man a better thing 

Ere gained; than a bad wife, a worse, "- 

Simonides said:- 

"A better prize than a good wife no man 

Ere gained, than a bad one nought worse." 

Again, Epicharmas having said :- 

"As destined Ion to live, and yet not long. 

Think of thyself. "- 

Euripides writes:- 

"Why? seeing the wealth we have uncertain is. 
Why don't we live as free from care, as pleasant 
As we may?" 

Similarly also, the comic poet Diphilus having said:- 

"The life of men is prone to ciiange,"- 

Posidippus says:- 

"No man of mortal mould his life has passed 
From suffering free. Nor to the end again 
Has continued prosperous." 

Similarly[7] speaks to thee Plato, writing of man as a creature subject to change. Again, Euripides having 

said:- 

"Oh life to mortal men of trouble full. 

How slippery in everything art thou I 

Now grow'st thou, and thou now decay'st away. 

And there is set no limit, no, not one. 

For mortals of their course to make an end. 

Except when Death's remorseless final end 

Comes, sent from Zeus,"- 

Diphilus writes:- 

"There is no life which has not its own ills. 
Pains, cares, thefts, and anxieties, disease; 
And Death, as a physician, coming, gives 
Rest to their victims in his quiet sleep."[5] 

Furthermore, Euripides having said:- 

"Many are fortune's shapes. 

And many things contrary to expectation the gods perform, "- 

The tragic poet Theodectes similarly writes:- 
"The instability of mortals' fates." 

And Bacchylides having said :- 

"To few[9] alone of mortals is it given 

To reach hoary age, being prosperous all the while, 

And not meet with calamities, "- 

Moschion, the comic poet, writes:- 
"But he of all men is most blest. 
Who leads throughout an equal life." 

And you will find that, Theognis having said:- 
"For no advantage to a mall grown old 
A young wife is, who will not, as a ship 
The helm, obey,"- 

Aristophanes, the comic poet, writes:- 
"An old man to a young wife suits but ill." 

For Anacreon, having written:- 
"Luxurious love I sing. 
With flowery garlands graced. 
He is of gods the king. 
He mortal men subdues?- 

Euripides writes :- 

"For love not only men attacks. 

And women; but disturbs 

The souls of gods above, and to the sea 

Descends." 

But not to protract the discourse further, in our anxiety to show the propensity of the Greeks to plagiarism in 

expressions and dogmas, allow us to adduce the express testimony of Hippias, the sophist of Elea, who 
discourses on the point in hand, and speaks thus: "Of these things some perchance are said by Orpheus, 
some briefly by Musaeus; some in one place, others in other places; some by Hesiod, some by Homer, 
some by the rest of the poets; and some in prose compositions, some by Greeks, some by Barbarians. 
And I from all these, placing together the things of most importance and of kindred character, will make the 
present discourse new and varied." 

And in order that we may see that philosophy and history, and even rhetoric, are not free of a like reproach, 
it is right to adduce a few instances from them. For Alcmaeon of Crotona having said, "It is easier to guard 
against a man who is an enemy than a friend," Sophocles wrote in the Antigone :- 
"For what sore more grievous than a bad friend?" 

And Xenophon said: "No man can injure enemies in any way other than by appearing to be a friend." 

And Euripides having said in Telephus:- 
"Shall we Greeks be slaves to Barbarians? "- 

Thrasymachus, in the oration for the Larissaeans, says: "Shall we be slaves to Archelaus-G reeks to a 
Barbarian?" 

And Orpheus having said:- 

"Water is the change for soul, and death for water; 

From water is earth, and what comes from earth is again water. 

And from that, soul, which changes the whole ether;" 

and Heraclitus, putting together the expressions from these lines, writes thus:- 

"It is death for souls to become water, and death for water to become earth; and from earth comes water, 

and from water soul." 

And Athamas the Pythagorean having said, "Thus was produced the beginning of the universe; and there 

are four roots-fire, water, air, earth: for from these is the origination of what is produced, "-Empedodes of 

Agrigentum wrote :- 

"The four roots of all things first do thou hear- 

Fire, water, earth, and ether's boundless height: 

For of these all that was, is, shall be, comes." 

And Plato having said, "Wherefore also the gods, knowing men, release sooner from life those they value 
most," 

Menander wrote:- 

"Whom the gods love, dies young." 

And Euripides having written in the OEnomaus:- 
"We judge of things obscure from what we see;" 

and in the Phoenix:- 

"By signs the obscure is fairly grasped?- 

Hyperides says, "But we must investigate things unseen by learning from signs and probabilities." And 

Isocrates having said, "We must conjecture the future by the past," Andocides does not shrink from saying, 

"For we must make use of what has happened previously as signs in reference to what is to be." Besides, 

Theognis having said :- 

"The evil of counterfeit silver and gold is not intolerable, 

O Cyrnus, and to a wise man is notdifficult of detection; But if the mind of a friend is hidden in his breast. 

If he is false, [1] and has a treacherous heart within. 

This is the basest thing for mortals, caused by God, 

And of all things the hardest to detect,"- 

Euripides writes :- 

"Oh Zeus, why hast thou given to men clear tests 

Of spurious gold, while on the body grows 

No mark sufficing to discover clear 
Tiie wicl<ed man?" 

Hyperides iiimself also says, "There is no feature of the mind impressed on the countenance Of men." 

Again, Stasinus having composed the line:- 

"Fool, who, having slain the father, leaves the children, "- 

Xenophon[2] says, "For I seem to myself to have acted in like manner, as if one who killed the father should 
spare his children." And Sophocles having written in the Antigone:- 
"Mother and father being in Hades now. 
No brother ever can to me spring forth?"- 

Herodotus says, "Mother and father being no more, I shall not have another brother." In addition to these, 

Theopompus having written:- 

"Twice children are old men in very truth;" 

And before him Sophocles in Peleus:- 
"Peleus, the son of Aeacus, I, sole housekeeper. 
Guide, old as he is now, and train again. 
For the aged man is once again a child, "- 

Antipho the orator says, "For the nursing of the old is like the nursing of children." Also the philosopher Plato 
says, "The old man then, as seems, will be twice a child." Further, Thucydides having said, "We alone bore 
the brunt at Marathon, "-Demosthenes said, "By those who bore the brunt at Marathon." Nor will I omit the 
following. Cratinus having said "The preparation perchance you know," 

Andocides the orator says, "The preparation, gentlemen of the jury, and the eagerness of our enemies, 

almost all of you know." Similarly also Nicias, in the speech on the deposit, against Ly-sias, says, "The 

preparation and the eagerness of the adversaries, ye see, O gentlemen of the jury." After him Aeschines 

says, "You see the preparation, O men of Athens, and the line of battle." Again, Demosthenes having said, 

"What zeal and what canvassing, O men of Athens, have been employed in this contest, I think almost all of 

you are aware;" and Philinus similarly, "What zeal, what forming of the line of battle, gentlemen of the jury, 

have taken place in this contest, I think not one of you is ignorant." Isocrates, again, having said, "As if she 

were related to his wealth, not him," Lysias says in the Orphics, "And he was plainly related not to the 

persons, but to the money." Since Homer also having written:- 

"O friend, if in this war, by taking flight. 

We should from age and death exemption win, 

I would not fight among the first myself. 

Nor would I send thee to the glorious fray; 

But now-for myriad fates of death attend 

In any case, which man may not escape 

Or shun-come on. To some one we shall bring 

Renown, or some one shall to us," 

Theopompus writes, "For if, by avoiding the present danger, we were to pass the rest of our time in security, 
to show love of life would not be wonderful. But now, so many fatalities are incident to life, that death in battle 
seems preferable." And what? Child the sophist having uttered the apophthegm, "Become surety, and 
mischief is at hand," did not Epicharmus utter the same sentiment in other terms, when he said, "Suretyship 
is the daughter of mischief, and loss that of suretyship?"[4] Further, Hippocrates the physician having written, 
"You must look to time, and locality, and age, and disease," Euripides says in Hexameters :[5]- 
"Those who the healing art would practise well. 
Must study people's modes of life, and note 
The soil, and the diseases so consider." 

Homer again, having written:- 

"I say no mortal man can doom escape, "- 

Archinus says, "All men are bound to die either sooner or later;" and Demosthenes, "To all men death is the 
end of life, though one should keep himself shut up in a coop." 

And Herodotus, again, having said, in iiis discourse about Glaucus tiie Spartan, tiiat tiie Pytiiian said, "In tiie 
case of tiie Deity, to say and to do are equivalent," Aristophanes said :- 
"For to think and to do are equivalent." 

And before him, Parmenides of Elea said:- 
"For thinking and being are the same." 

And Plato having said, "And we shall show, not absurdly perhaps, that the beginning of love is sight; and 
hope diminishes the passion, memory nourishes it, and intercourse preserves it;" does not Philemon the 
comic poet write :- 
"First all see, then admire; 
Then gaze, then come to hope; 
And thus arises love?" 

Further, Demosthenes having said, "For to all of us death is a debt," and so forth, Phanocles writes in Loves, 

or The Beautiful:- 

"But from the Fates' unbroken thread escape 

Is none for those that feed on earth." 

You will also find that Plato having said, "For the first sprout of each plant, having got a fair start, according to 

the virtue of its own nature, is most powerful in inducing the appropriate end;" the historian writes, "Further, it 

is not natural for one of the wild plants to become cultivated, after they have passed the earlier period of 

growth;" and the following of Empedocles:- 

"For I already have been boy and girl. 

And bush, and bird, and mute fish in the sea,"- 

Euripides transcribes in Chrysippus:- 

"But nothing dies 

Of things that are; but being dissolved. 

One from the other. 

Shows another form." 

And Plato having said, in the Republic, that women were common, Euripides writes in the Protesilaus:- 
"For common, then, is woman's bed." 

Further, Euripides having written :- 

"For to the temperate enough sufficient is "- 

Epicurus expressly says, "Sufficiency is the greatest riches of all." 

Again, Aristophanes having written :- 
"Life thou securely shalt enjoy, being just 
And free from turmoil, and from fear live well,"- 

Epicurus says, "The greatest fruit of righteousness is tranquillity." 

Let these species, then, of Greek plagiarism of sentiments, being such, stand as sufficient for a clear 

specimen to him who is capable of perceiving. 

And not only have they been detected pirating and paraphrasing thoughts and expressions, as will be 

shown; but they will also be convicted of the possession of what is entirely stolen. For stealing entirely what 

is the production of others they have published it as their own; as Eugamon of Cyrene did the entire book on 

the Thesprotians from Musaeus, and Pisander of Camirus the Heraclea of Pisinus of Lindus, and Panyasis 

of Halicarnassus, the capture of OEchalia from Cleophilus of Samos. 

You will also find that Homer, the great poet, took from Orpheus, from the Disappearance of Dionysus, those 

words and what follows verbatim:- 

"As a man trains a luxuriant shoot of olive. "[1] 

And in the Theogony, it is said by Orpheus of Kronos:- 
"He lay, his thick neck bent aside; and him 

All-conquering Sleep had seized." 

These Homer transferrred to the Cyclops. [2] And Hesiod writes of Melampous:- 
"Gladly to hear, what the immortals have assigned 
To men, the brave from cowards clearly marks;" 

and so forth, taking it word for word from the poet Musaeus. 

And Aristophanes the comic poet has, in the first of the Thesmophoriazusoe, transferred the words from the 
Empiprameni of Cratinus. And Plato the comic poet, and Aristophanes in Doedalus, steal from one another. 
Cocalus, composed by Araros,[3] the son of Aristophanes, was by the comic poet Philemon altered, and 
made into the comedy called Hypobolimoens. 

Eumelus and Acusilaus the historiographers changed the contents of Hesiod into prose, and published 
them as their own. Gorgias of Leontium and Eudemus of Naxus, the historians, stole from Melesagoras. 
And, besides, there is Bion of Proconnesus, who epitomized and transcribed the writings of the ancient 
Cadmus, and Archilochus, and Aristotle, and Leandrus, and Hellanicus, and Hecataeus, and Androtion, and 
Philochorus. Dieuchidas of Megara transferred the beginning of his treatise from the Deucalion of 
Hellanicus. I pass over in silence Heraclitus of Ephesus, who took a very great deal from Orpheus. 
From Pythagoras Plato derived the immortality of the soul; and he from the Egyptians. And many of the 
Platonists composed books, in which they show that the Stoics, as we said in the beginning, and Aristotle, 
took the most and principal of their dogmas from Plato. Epicurus also pilfered his leading dogmas from 
Democritus. Let these things then be so. For life would fail me, were I to undertake to go over the subject in 
detail, to expose the selfish plagiarism of the Greeks, and how they claim the discovery of the best of their 
doctrines, which they have received from us. 

CHAP. III. -PLAGIARISM BY THE GREEKS OF THE MIRACLES RELATED IN THE SACRED 
BOOKS OF THE HEBREWS. 

And now they are convicted not only of borrowing doctrines from the Barbarians, but also of relating as 
prodigies of Hellenic mythology the marvels found in our records, wrought through divine power from 
above, by those who led holy lives, while devoting attention to us. And we shall ask at them whether those 
things which they relate are true or false. But they will not say that they are false; for they will not with their will 
condemn themselves of the very great silliness of composing falsehoods, but of necessity admit them to be 
true. And how will the prodigies enacted by Moses and the other prophets any longer appear to them 
incredible? For the Almighty God, in His care for all men, turns some to salvation by commands, some by 
threats, some by miraculous signs, some by gentle promises. 

Well, the Greeks, when once a drought had wasted Greece for a protracted period, and a dearth of the fruits 
of the earth ensued, it is said, those that survived of them, having, because of the famine, come as 
suppliants to Delphi, asked the Pythian priestess how they should be released from the calamity. She 
announced that the only help in their distress was, that they should avail themselves of the prayers of 
Aeacus. Prevailed on by them, Aeacus, ascending the Hellenic hill, and stretching out pure[4] hands to 
heaven, and invoking the commons God, besought him to pity wasted Greece. And as he prayed, thunder 
sounded, out of the usual course of things, and the whole surrounding atmosphere was covered with clouds. 
And impetuous and continued rains, bursting down, filled the whole region. The result was a copious and 
rich fertility wrought by the husbandry of the prayers of Aeacus. 

"And Samuel called on the LORD," it is said, "and the LORD gave forth His voice, and rain in the day of 
harvest."[6] Do you see that "He who sendeth His rain on the just and on the unjust"[1] by the subject powers 
is the one God? And the whole of our Scripture is full of instances of God, in reference to the prayers of the 
just, hearing and performing each one of their petitions. 

Again, the Greeks relate, that in the case of a failure once of the Etesian winds, Aristaeus once sacrificed in 
Ceus to Isthmian Zeus. For there was great devastation, everything being burnt up with the heat in 
consequence of the winds which had been wont to refresh the productions of the earth, not blowing, and he 
easily called them back. 
And at Delphi, on the expedition of Xerxes against Greece, the Pythian priestess having made answer:- 

"O Delphians, pray the winds, and it will be better,"- 

they having erected an altar and performed sacrifice to the winds, had them as their helpers. For, blowing 
violently around Cape Sepias, they shivered the whole preparations of the Persian expedition. 
Empedocles of Agrigentum was called "Checker of Winds." Accordingly it is said, that when, on a time, a 

wind blew from the mountain of Agrigentum, iieavy and pestiferous for tiie iniiabitants, and tiie cause also of 
barrenness to their wives, he made the wind to cease. Wherefore he himself writes in the lines:- 

"Thou Shalt the might of the unwearied winds make still, 
Which rushing to the earth spoil mortals' crops. 
And at thy will bring back the avenging blasts." 

And they say that he was followed by some that used divinations, and some that had been long vexed by 
sore diseases. [2] They plainly, then, believed in the performance of cures, and signs and wonders, from our 
Scriptures. For if certain powers move the winds and dispense showers, let them hear the psalmist: "How 
amiable are; thy tabernacles, O LORD of hosts!"[3] This is the Lord of powers, and principalities, and 
authorities, of whom Moses speaks; so that we may be with Him. "And ye shall circumcise your hard heart, 
and shall not harden your neck any more. For He is Lord of lords and God of gods, the great God and 
strong, "[4] unit so forth. And Isaiah says, "Lift your eyes to the height, and see who hath produced all these 
things."[5] 

And some say that plagues, and hail-storms, and tempests, and the like, are wont to take place, not alone in 
consequence of material disturbance, but also through anger of demons and bad angels. For instance, they 
say that the Magi at Cleone, watching the phenomena of the skies, when the clouds are about to discharge 
hail, avert the threatening of wrath by incantations and sacrifices. And if at any time there is the want of an 
animal, they are satisfied with bleeding their own finger for a sacrifice. The prophetess Diotima, by the 
Athenians offering sacrifice previous to the pestilence, effected a delay of the plague for ten years. The 
sacrifices, too, of Epimenides of Crete, put off the Persian war for an equal period. And it is considered to be 
all the same whether we call these spirits gods or angels. And those skilled in the matter of consecrating 
statues, in many of the temples have erected tombs of the dead, calling the souls of these Daemons, and 
teaching them to be wor-shipped by men; as having, in consequence of the purity of their life, by the divine 
foreknowledge, received the power of wandering about the space around the earth in order to minister to 
men. For they knew that some souls were by nature kept in the body. But of these, as the work proceeds, in 
the treatise on the angels, we shall discourse. 

Democritus, who predicted many things from observation of celestial phenomena, was called "Wisdom" 
(<greek>Sofia</greek>). On his meeting a cordial reception from his brother Damasus, he predicted that 
there would be much rain, judging from certain stars. Some, accordingly, convinced by him, gathered their 
crops; for being in summer-time, they were stir on the threshing-floor. But others lost all, unexpected and 
heavy showers having burst down. 

How then shall the Greeks any longer disbelieve the divine appearance on Mount Sinai, when the fire 
burned, consuming none of the things that grew on the mount; and the sound of trampets issued forth, 
breathed without instruments? For that which is called the descent on the mount of God is the advent of 
divine power, pervading the whole world, and proclaiming "the light that is inaccessible. "[6] 
For such is the allegory, according to the Scripture. But the fire was seen, as Aristobulus[7] says, while the 
whole multitude, amounting to not less than a million, besides those under age, were congregated around 
the mountain, the circuit of the mount not being less than five days' journey. Over the whole place of the 
vision the burning fire was seen by them all encamped as it were around; so that the descent was not local. 
For God is everywhere. 

Now the compilers of narratives say that in the island of Britain s there is a cave situated under a mountain, 
and a chasm on its summit; and that, accordingly, when the wind falls into the cave, and rushes into the 
bosom of the cleft, a sound is heard like cymbals clashing musically. And often in the woods, when the 
leaves are moved by a sudden gust of wind, a sound is emitted like the song of birds. 
Those also who composed the Persies relate that in the uplands, in the country of the Magi, three mountains 
are situated on an extended plain, and that those who travel through the locality, on coming to the first 
mountain, hear a confused sound as of several myriads shouting, as if in battle array; and on reaching the 
middle one, they hear a clamour louder and more distinct; and at the end hear people singing a paean, as if 
victorious. And the cause, in my opinion, of the whole sound, is the smoothness and cavernous character of 
the localities; and the air, entering in, being sent back and going to the same point, sounds with 
considerable force. Let these things be so. But it is possible for God Almighty, [1] even without a medium, to 
produce a voice and vision through the ear, showing that His greatness has a natural order beyond what is 
customary, in order to the conversion of the hitherto unbelieving soul, and the reception of the 
commandment given. But there being a cloud and a lofty mountain, how is it not possible to hear a different 
sound, the wind moving by the active cause? Wherefore also the prophet says, "Ye heard the voice of 
words, and saw no similitude. "[2] You see how the Lord's voice, the Word, without shape, the power of the 
Word, the luminous word of the Lord, the truth from heaven, from above, coming to the assembly of the 
Church, wrought by the luminous immediate ministry. 

CHAP. IV. --THE GREEKS DREW MANY OF THEIR PHILOSOPHICAL TENETS FROM THE 
EGYPTIAN AND INDIAN GYMNOSOPHISTS. 

We shall find another testimony in confirmation, in the fact that the best of the philosophers, having 
appropriated their most excellent dogmas from us, boast, as it were, of certain of the tenets which pertain to 
each sect being culled from other Barbarians, chiefly from the Egyptians-both other tenets, and that 
especially of the transmigration of the soul. For the Egyptians pursue a philosophy of their own. This is 
principally shown by their sacred ceremonial. For first advances the Singer, bearing some one of the 
symbols of music. For they say that he must learn two of the books of Hermes, the one of which contains the 
hymns of the gods, the second the regulations for the king's life. And after the Singer advances the 
Astrologer,[3] with a horologe in his hand, and a palm, the symbols of astrology. He must have the 
astrological books of Hermes, which are four in number, always in his mouth. Of these, one is about the 
order of the fixed stars that are visible, and another about the conjunctions and luminous appearances of 
the sun and moon; and the rest respecting their risings. Next in order advances the sacred Scribe, with 
wings on his head, and in his hand a book and rule, in which were writing ink and the reed, with which they 
write. And he must be acquainted with what are called hieroglyphics, and know about cosmography and 
geography, the position of the sun and moon, and about the five planets; also the description of Egypt, and 
the chart of the Nile; and the description of the equipment of the priests and of the places consecrated to 
them, and about the measures and the things in use in the sacred rites. Then the Stole-keeper follows those 
previously mentioned, with the cubit of justice and the cup for libations. He is acquainted with all points 
called Paedeutic(relating to training) and Moschophatic(sacrificial). There are also ten books which relate 
to the honour paid by them to their gods, and containing the Egyptian worship; as that relating to sacrifices, 
first-fruits, hymns, prayers, processions, festivals, and the like. And behind all walks the Prophet, with the 
water-vase carried openly in his arms; who is followed by those who carry the issue of loaves. He, as being 
the governor of the temple, learns the ten books called "Hieratic;" and they contain all about the laws, and 
the gods, and the whole of the training of the priests. For the Prophet is, among the Egyptians, also over the 
distribution of the revenues. There are then forty-two books of Hermes indispensably necessary; of which 
the six-and-thirty containing the whole philosophy of the Egyptians are learned by the forementioned 
personages; and the other six, which are medical, by the Pastophoroi(image-bearers),-treating of the 
structure of the body, and of diseases, and instruments, and medicines, and about the eyes, and the last 
about women. [4] Such are the customs of the Egyptians, to speak briefly. 

The philosophy of the Indians, too, has been celebrated. Alexander of Macedon, having taken ten of the 
Indian Gymnosophists, that seemed the best and most sententious, proposed to them problems, 
threatening to put to death him that did not answer to the purpose; ordering one, who was the eldest of them, 
to decide. 

The first, then, being asked whether he thought that the living were more in number than the dead, said. The 
living; for that the dead were not. The second, on being asked Whether the sea or the land maintained 
larger beasts, said. The land; for the sea was part of it. And the third being asked which was the most 
cunning of animals? The one, which has not hitherto been known, man. And the fourth being interrogated. 
For what reason they had made Sabba, who was their prince, revolt, answered. Because they wished him to 
live well rather than die ill. And the fifth being asked. Whether he thought that day or night was first, said. One 
day. For puzzling questions must have puzzling answers. And the sixth being posed with the query. How 
shall one be loved most? By being most powerful; in order that he may not be timid. And the seventh being 
asked. How any one of men could become God? said. If he do what it is impossible for man to do. And the 
eighth being asked. Which is the stronger, life or death? said. Life, which bears such ills. And the ninth being 
interrogated. Up to what point it is good for a man to live? said. Till he does not think that to die is better than 
to live. And on Alexander ordering the tenth to say something, for he was judge, he said, "One spake worse 
than another." And on Alexander saying. Shall you not, then, die first, having given such a judgment? he 
said. And how, O king, wilt thou prove true, after saying that thou wouldest kill first the first man that answered 
very badly? 

And that the Greeks are called pilferers of all manner of writing, is, as I think, sufficiently demonstrated by 
abundant proofs. [1] 

CHAP, v.- THE GREEKS HAD SOME KNOWLEDGE OF THE TRUE GOD. 

And that the men of highest repute among the Greeks knew God, not by positive knowledge, but by indirect 
expression, [2] Peter says in the Preaching: "Know then that there is one God, who made the beginning of all 
things, and holds the power of the end; and is the Invisible, who sees all things; incapable of being 
contained, who contains all things; needing nothing, whom all things need, and by whom they are; 

incomprehensible, everlasting, unmade, who made all things by the 'Word of His power,' that is, according 
to the gnostic scripture. His Son. "[3] 

Then he adds: "Worship this God not as the Greeks, "-signifying plainly, that the excellent among the 
Greeks worshipped the same God as we, but that they had not learned by perfect knowledge that which 
was delivered by the Son. "Do not then worship," he did not say, the God whom the Greeks worship, but "as 
the Greeks,"- changing the manner of the worship of God, not announcing another God. What, then, the 
expression "not as the Greeks" means, Peter himself shall explain, as he adds: "Since they are carried 
away by ignorance, and know not God" (as we do, according to the perfect knowledge); "hut giving shape 
to the things[4] of which He gave them the power for use-stocks and stones, brass and iron, gold and 
silver-matter;-and setting up the things which are slaves for use and possession, worship them. [5] And 
what God hath given to them forfood-the fowls of the air, and the fish of the sea, and the creeping things of 
the earth, and the wild beasts with the four-footed cattle of the field, weasels and mice, cats and dogs and 
apes, and their own proper food-they sacrifice as sacrifices to mortals; and offering dead things to the 
dead, as to gods, are unthankful to God, denying His existence by these things." And that it is said, that we 
and the Greeks know the same God, though not in the same way, he will infer thus: "Neither worship as the 
Jews; for they, thinking that they only know God, do not know Him, adoring as they do angels and 
archangels, the month and the moon. And if the moon be not visible, they do not hold the Sabbath, which is 
called the first;[6] nor do they hold the new moon, nor the feast of unleavened bread, nor the feast, nor the 
great day. "[7] Then he gives the finishing stroke to the question: "So that do ye also, learning holily and 
righteously what we deliver to you; keep them, worshipping God in a new way, by Christ." For we find in the 
Scriptures, as the Lord says: "Behold, I make with you a new covenant, not as I made with your fathers in 
Mount Horeb."[8] He made a new covenant with us; for what belonged to the Greeks and Jews is old. But 
we, who worship Him in a new way, in the third form, are Christians. For clearly, as I think, he showed that the 
one and only God was known by the Greeks in a Gentile way, by the Jews Judaically, and in a new and 
spiritual way by us. 

And further, that the same God that furnished both the Covenants was the giver of Greek philosophy to the 
Greeks, by which the Almighty is glorified among the Greeks, he shows. And it is clear from this. 
Accordingly, then, from the Hellenic training, and also from that of the law are gathered into the one race of 
the saved people those who accept faith: not that the three peoples are separated by time, so that one 
might suppose three natures, but trained in different Covenants of the one Lord, by the word of the one Lord. 
For that, as God wished to save the Jews by giving to them prophets, so also by raising up prophets of their 
own in their own tongue, as they were able to receive God's beneficence. He distinguished the most 
excellent of the Greeks from the common herd, in addition to "Peter's Preaching," the Apostle Paul will show, 
saying: "Take also the Hellenic books, read the Sibyl, how it is shown that God is one, and how the future is 
indicated. And taking Hystaspes, read, and you will find much more luminously and distinctly the Son of God 
described, and how many kings shall draw up their forces against Christ, hating Him and those that bear His 
name, and His faithful ones, and His patience, and His coming." Then in one word he asks us, "Whose is 
the world, and all that is in the world ? Are they not God's ? "[1] Wherefore Peter says, that the Lord said to 
the apostles: "If any one of Israel then, wishes to repent, and by my name to believe in God, his sins shall be 
forgiven him, after twelve years. Go forth into the world, that no one may say. We have not heard." 

CHAP. VI. --THE GOSPEL WAS PREACHED TO JEWS AND GENTILES IN HADES. [2] 

But as the proclamation [of the Gospel] has come now at the fit time, so also at the fit time were the Law and 
the Prophets given to the Barbarians, and Philosophy to the Greeks, to fit their ears for the Gospel. 
"Therefore," says the Lord who delivered Israel, "in an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of 
salvation have I helped thee. And I have given thee for a Covenant to the nations; that thou mightest inhabit 
the earth, and receive the inheritance of the wilderness; saying to those that are in bonds. Come forth; and to 
those that are in darkness. Show yourselves." For if the "prisoners" are the Jews, of whom the Lord said, 
"Come forth, ye that will, from your bonds," -meaning the voluntary bound, and who have taken on them "the 
burdens grievous to be borne"[3] by human injunction-it is plain that "those in darkness" are they who have 
the ruling faculty of the soul buried in idolatry. 

For to those who were righteous according to the law, faith was wanting. Wherefore also the Lord, in healing 
them, said, "Thy faith hath saved thee. "[4] But to those that were righteous according to philosophy, not only 
faith in the Lord, but also the abandonment of idolatry, were necessary. Straightway, on the revelation of the 
truth, they also repented of their previous conduct. 

Wherefore the Lord preached the Gospel to those in Hades. Accordingly the Scripture says, "Hades says 
to Destruction, We have not seen His form, but we have heard His voice. "[5] It is not plainly the place, which, 
the words above say, heard the voice, but those who have been put in Hades, and have abandoned 
themselves to destruction, as persons who have thrown themselves voluntarily from a ship into the sea. 

They, then, are those that hear the divine power and voice. For who in his senses can suppose the souls of 
the righteous and those of sinners in the same condemnation, charging Providence with injustice? 
But how? Do not [the Scriptures] show that, the Lord preached[6] the Gospel to those that perished in the 
flood, or rather had been chained, and to those kept "in ward and guard"?[7] And it has been shown also, [8] 
in the second book of the Stromata, that the apostles, following the Lord, preached the Gospel to those in 
Hades. For it was requisite, in my opinion, that as here, so also there, the best of the disciples should be 
imitators of the Master; so that He should bring to repentance those belonging to the Hebrews, and they the 
Gentiles; that is, those who had lived in righteousness according to the Law and Philosophy, who had 
ended life not perfectly, but sinfully. For it was suitable to the divine administration, that those possessed of 
greater worth in righteousness, and whose life had been pre-eminent, on repenting of their transgressions, 
though found in another place, yet being confessedly of the number of the people of God Almighty, should 
be saved, each one according to his individual knowledge. 

And, as I think, the Saviour also exerts His might because it is His work to save; which accordingly He also 
did by drawing to salvation those who became willing, by the preaching [of the Gospel], to believe on Him, 
wherever they were. If, then, the Lord descended to Hades for no other end but to preach the Gospel, as He 
did descend; it was either to preach the Gospel to all or to the Hebrews only. If, accordingly, to all, then all 
who believe shall be saved, although they may be of the Gentiles, on making their profession there; since 
God's punishments are saving and disciplinary, leading to conversion, and choosing rather the repentance 
thorn the death of a sinner;[1] and especially since souls, although darkened by passions, when released 
from their bodies, are able to perceive more clearly, because of their being no longer obstructed by the 
paltry flesh. 

If, then. He preached only to the Jews, who wanted the knowledge and faith of the Saviour, it is plain that, 
since God is no respecter of persons, the apostles also, as here, so there preached the Gospel to those of 
the heathen who were ready for conversion. And it is well said by the Shepherd, "They went down with them 
therefore into the water, and again ascended. But these descended alive, and again ascended alive. But 
those who had fallen asleep, descended dead, but ascended alive. "[2] Further the Gospel[3] says, "that 
many bodies of those that slept arose," -plainly as having been translated to a better state. [4] There took 
place, then, a universal movement and translation through the economy of the Saviour.[5] 
One righteous man, then, differs not, as righteous, from another righteous man, whether he be of the Law or a 
Greek. For God is not only Lord of the Jews, but of all men, and more nearly the Father of those who know 
Him. For if to live well and according to the law is to live, also to live rationally according to the law is to live; 
and those who lived rightly before the Law were classed under faith, [6] and judged to be righteous,-it is 
evident that those, too, who were outside of the Law, having lived rightly, in consequence of the peculiar' 
nature of the voice, [7] though they are in Hades and in ward, [8] on hearing the voice of the Lord, whether that 
of His own person or that acting through His apostles, with all speed turned and believed. For we remember 
that the Lord is "the power of God, "[9] and power can never be weak. 

So I think it is demonstrated that the God being good, and the Lord powerful, they save with a righteousness 
and equality which extend to all that turn to Him, whether here or elsewhere. For it is not here alone that the 
active power of God is beforehand, but it is everywhere and is always at work. Accordingly, in the Preaching 
of Peter, the Lord says to the disciples after the resurrection, "I have chosen you twelve disciples, judging 
you worthy of me," whom the Lord wished to be apostles, having judged them faithful, sending them into the 
world to the men on the earth, that they may know that there is one God, showing clearly what would take 
place by the faith of Christ; that they who heard and believed should be saved; and that those who believed 
not, after having heard, should bear witness, not having the excuse to allege. We have not heard. 
What then? Did not the same dispensation obtain in Hades, so that even there, all the souls, on hearing the 
proclamation, might either exhibit repentance, or confess that their punishment was just, because they 
believed not? And it were the exercise of no ordinary arbitrariness, for those who had departed before the 
advent of the Lord (not having the Gospel preached to them, and having afforded no ground from 
themselves, in consequence of believing or not) to obtain either salvation or punishment. For it is not right 
that these should be condemned without trial, and that those alone who lived after the advent should have 
the advantage of the divine righteousness. But to all rational souls it was said from above, "Whatever one of 
you has done in ignorance, without clearly knowing God, if, on becoming conscious, he repent, all his sins 
will be forgiven him. "[10] "For, behold," it is said, "I have set before your face death and life, that ye may 
choose life. "[1 1] " God says that He set, not that He made both, in order to the comparison of choice. And in 
another Scripture He says, "If ye hear Me, and be willing, ye shall eat the good of the land. But if ye hear Me 
not, and are not willing, the sword shall devour you: for the mouth of the LORD hath spoken these 
things."[12] 

Again, David expressly (or rather the Lord in the person of the saint, and the same from the foundation of the 
world is each one who at different periods is saved, and shall be saved by faith) says, "My heart was glad, 
and my tongue rejoiced, and my flesh shall still rest in hope. For Thou shalt not leave my soul in hell, nor wilt 

Thou give Thine holy one to see corruption. Thou hast made l<nown to me the paths of life, Thou wilt make 
me full of joy in Thy presence. "[13] As, then, the people was precious to the Lord, so also is the entire holy 
people; he also who is converted from the Gentiles, who was prophesied under the name of proselyte, 
along with the Jew. For rightly the Scripture says, that "the ox and the bear shall come together."[14] For the 
Jew is designated by the ox, from the animal under the yoke being reckoned clean, according to the law; for 
the ox both parts the hoof and chews the cud. And the Gentile is designated by the bear, which is an unclean 
and wild beast. And this animal brings forth a shapeless lump of flesh, which it shapes into the likeness of a 
beast solely by its tongue. For he who is convened from among the Gentiles is formed from a beastlike life 
to gentleness by the word; and, when once tamed, is made clean, just as the ox. For example, the prophet 
says, "The sirens, and the daughters of the sparrows, and all the beasts of the field, shall bless me."[1] Of 
the number of unclean animals, the wild beasts of the field are known to be, that is, of the world; since those 
who are wild in respect of faith, and polluted in life, and not purified by the righteousness which is according 
to the law, are called wild beasts. But changed from wild beasts by the faith of the Lord, they become men of 
God, advancing from the wish to change to the fact. For some the Lord exhorts, and to those who have 
already made the attempt he stretches forth His hand, and draws them up. "For the Lord dreads not the face 
of any one, nor will He regard greatness; for He hath made small and great, and cares alike for all. "[2] And 
David says, "For the heathen are fixed in the destruction they have caused; their foot is taken in the snare 
which they hid." s "But the LORD was a refuge to the poor, a help in season also in affliction. "[4] Those, then, 
that were in affliction had the Gospel seasonably proclaimed. And therefore it said, "Declare among the 
heathen his pursuits, "[5] that they may not be judged unjustly. 

If, then. He preached the Gospel to those in the flesh that they might not be condemned unjustly, how is it 
conceivable that He did not for the same cause preach the Gospel to those who had departed this life 
before His advent? "For the righteous LORD loveth righteousness: His countenance beholdeth 
uprightness. "[6] "But he that loveth wickedness hateth his own soul. "[7] 

If, then, in the deluge all sinful flesh perished, punishment having been inflicted on them for correction, we 
must first believe that the will of God, which is disciplinary and beneficent, [8] saves those who turn to Him. 
Then, too, the more subtle substance, the soul, could never receive any injury from the grosser element of 
water, its subtle and simple nature rendering it impalpable, called as it is incorporeal. But whatever is gross, 
made so in consequence of sin, this is cast away along with the carnal spirit which lusts against the soul. [9] 
Now also Valentinus, the Coryphaeus of those who herald community, in his book on The Intercourse of 
Friends, writes in these words: "Many of the things that are written, though in common hooks, are found 
written in the church of God. For those sayings which proceed from the heart are vain. For the law written in 
the heart is the People[10] of the Beloved -loved and loving Him." For whether it be the Jewish writings or 
those of the philosophers that he calls "the Common Books," he makes the truth common. And Isidore," at 
once son and disciple to Basilides, in the first hook of the Expositions of the Prophet Parchor, writes also in 
these words: "The Attics say that certain things were intimated to Socrates, in consequence of a daemon 
attending on him. And Aristotle says that all men are provided with daemons, that attend on them during the 
time they are in the body,-having taken this piece of prophetic instruction and transferred it to his own books, 
without acknowledging whence he had abstracted this statement." And again, in the second book of his 
work, he thus writes: "And let no one think that what we say is peculiar to the elect, was said before by any 
philosophers. For it is not a discovery of theirs. For having appropriated it from our prophets, they attributed 
it to him who is wise according to them." Again, in the same: "For to me it appears that those who profess to 
philosophize, do so that they may learn what is the winged oak,"' and the variegated robe on it, all of which 
Pherecydes has employed as theological allegories, having taken them from the prophecy of Chum." 

CHAP. VII. -WHAT TRUE PHILOSOPHY IS, AND WHENCE SO CALLED. 

As we have long ago pointed out, what we propose as our subject is not the discipline which obtains in each 
sect, but that which is really philosophy, strictly systematic Wisdom, which furnishes acquaintance with the 
things which pertain to life. And we define Wisdom to be certain knowledge, being a sure and irrefragable 
apprehension of things divine and human, comprehending the present, past, and future, which the Lord hath 
taught us, both by His advent and by the prophets. And it is irrefragable by reason, inasmuch as it has been 
communicated. And so it is wholly true according to [God's] intention, as being known through means of the 
Son. And in one aspect it is eternal, and in another it becomes useful in time. Partly it is one and the same, 
partly many and indifferent-partly without any movement of passion, partly with passionate desire-partly 
perfect, partly incomplete. 

This wisdom, then-rectitude of soul and of reason, and purity of life-is the object of the desire of philosophy, 
which is kindly and lovingly disposed towards wisdom, and does everything to attain it. 
Now those are called philosophers, among us, who love Wisdom, the Creator and Teacher of all things, that 
is, the knowledge of the Son of God; and among the Greeks, those who undertake arguments on virtue. 

Philosophy, then, consists of such dogmas found in each sect (I mean those of philosophy) as cannot be 
impugned, with a corresponding life, collected into one selection; and these, stolen from the Barbarian 
God-given grace, have been adorned by Greek speech. For some they have borrowed, and others they 
have misunderstood. And in the case of others, what they have spoken, in consequence of being moved, 
they have not yet perfectly worked out; and others by human conjecture and reasoning, in which also they 
stumble. And they think that they have hit the truth perfectly; but as we understand them, only partially. They 
know, then, nothing more than this world. And it is just like geometry, which treats of measures and 
magnitudes and forms, by delineation on plane-surfaces; and just as painting appears to take in the whole 
field of view in the scenes represented. But it gives a false description of the view, according to the rules of 
the art, employing the signs that result from the incidents of the lines of vision. By this means, the higher and 
lower points in the view, and those between, are preserved; and some objects seem to appear in the 
foreground, and others in the background, and others to appear in some other way, on the smooth and level 
surface. So also the philosophers copy the truth, after the manner of painting. And always in the case of 
each one of them, their self-love is the cause of all their mistakes. Wherefore one ought not, in the desire for 
the glory that terminates in men, to be animated by self-love; but loving God, to become really holy with 
wisdom. If, then, one treats what is particular as universal, and regards that, which serves, as the Lord, he 
misses the truth, not understanding what was spoken by David by way of confession: "I have eaten earth 
[ashes] like bread. "[1] Now, self-love and self-conceit are, in his view, earth and error. But if so, science and 
knowledge are derived from instruction. And if there is instruction, you must seek for the master. Cleanthes 
claims Zeno, and Metrodorus Epicurus, and Theophrastus Aristotle, and Plato Socrates. But if I Come to 
Pythagoras, and Pherecydes, and Thales, and the first wise men, I come to a stand in my search for their 
teacher. Should you say the Egyptians, the Indians, the Babylonians, and the Magi themselves, I will not 
stop from asking their teacher. And I lead you up to the first generation of men; and from that point I begin to 
investigate Who is their teacher. No one of men; for they had not yet learned. Nor yet any of the angels: for in 
the way that angels, in virtue of being angels, speak, men do not hear; nor, as we have ears, have they a 
tongue to correspond; nor would any one attribute to the angels organs of speech, lips I mean, and the parts 
contiguous, throat, and windpipe, and chest, breath and air to vibrate. And God is far from calling aloud in 
the unapproachable sanctity, separated as He is from even the archangels. 

And we also have already heard that angels learned the truth, and their rulers overthem;[1] for they had a 
beginning. It remains, then, for us, ascending to seek their teacher. And since the unoriginated Being is one, 
the Omnipotent God; one, too, is the First-begotten, "by whom all things were made, and without whom not 
one thing ever was made. "[3] "For one, in truth, is God, who formed the beginning of all things;" pointing out 
"the first-begotten Son," Peter writes, accurately comprehending the statement, "In the beginning God made 
the heaven and the earth. "[4] And He is called Wisdom by all the prophets. This is He who is the Teacher of 
all created beings, the Fellow-counsellor of God, who foreknew all things; and He from above, from the first 
foundation of the world, "in many ways and many times, "[5] trains and perfects; whence it is rightly said, "Call 
no man your teacher on earth. "[6] 

You see whence the true philosophy has its handles; though the Law be the image and shadow of the truth: 
for the Law is the shadow of the truth. But the self-love of the Greeks proclaims certain men as their teachers. 
As, then, the whole family runs back to God the Creator;[7] so also all the teaching of good things, which 
justifies, does to the Lord, and leads and contributes to this. 

But if from any creature they received in any way whatever the seeds of the Truth, they did not nourish them; 
but committing them to a barren and reinless soil, they choked them with weeds, as the Pharisees revolted 
from the Law, by introducing human teachings,-the cause of these being not the Teacher, but those who 
choose to disobey. But those of them who believed the Lord's advent and the plain teaching of the 
Scriptures, attain to the knowledge of the law; as also those addicted to philosophy, by the teaching of the 
Lord, are introduced into the knowledge of the true philosophy: "For the oracles of the Lord are pure oracles, 
melted in the fire, tried in the earth, [1] purified seven times. "[2] Just as silver often purified, so is the just man 
brought to the test, becoming the Lord's coin and receiving the royal image. Or, since Solomon also calls 
the "tongue of the righteous man gold that has been subjected to fire, "[3] intimating that the doctrine which 
has been proved, and is wise, is to be praised and received, whenever it is amply tried by the earth: that is, 
when the gnostic soul is in manifold ways sanctified, through withdrawal from earthy fires. And the body in 
which it dwells is purified, being appropriated to the pureness of a holy temple. But the first purification which 
takes place in the body, the soul being first, is abstinence from evil things, which some consider perfection, 
and is, in truth, the perfection of the common believer-Jew and Greek. But in the case of the Gnostic, after 
that which is reckoned perfection in others, his righteousness advances to activity in well-doing. And in 
whomsoever the increased force[4] of righteousness advances to the doing of good, in his case perfection 
abides in the fixed habit of well-doing after the likeness of God. For those who are the seed of Abraham, and 
besides servants of God, are "the called;" and the sons of Jacob are the elect-they who have tripped up 
the energy of wickedness. 

If; then, we assert that Christ Himself is Wisdom, and that it was His working which showed itself in the 
prophets, by which the gnostic tradition may be learned, as He Himself taught the apostles during His 
presence; then it follows that the grinds, which is the knowledge and apprehension of things present, future, 
and past, which is sure and reliable, as being imparted and revealed by the Son of God, is wisdom. 
And if, too, the end of the wise man is contemplation, that of those who are still philosophers aims at it, but 
never attains it, unless by the process of learning it receives the prophetic utterance which has been made 
known, by which it grasps both the present, the future, and the past-how they are, were, and shall be. 
And the gnosis itself is that which has descended by transmission to a few, having been imparted unwritten 
by the apostles. Hence, then, knowledge or wisdom ought to be exercised up to the eternal and 
unchangeable habit of contemplation. 

CHAP. VIII. -PHILOSOPHY IS KNOWLEDGE GIVEN BY GOD. 

For Paul too, in the Epistles, plainly does not disparage philosophy; but deems it unworthy of the man who 
has attained to the elevation of the Gnostic, any more to go back to the Hellenic "philosophy," figuratively 
calling it "the rudiments of this world, "[5] as being most rudimentary, and a preparatory training for the truth. 
Wherefore also, writing to the Hebrews, who were declining again from faith to the law, he says," Have ye 
not need again of one to teach you which are the first principles of the oracles of God, and are become such 
as have need of milk, and not of strong meat?"[6] So also to the Colossians, who were Greek converts, 
"Beware lest any man spoil you by philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments 
of this world, and not after Christ,"[7]-enticing them again to return to philosophy, the elementary doctrine. 
And should one say that it was through human understanding that philosophy was discovered by the 
Greeks, still I find the Scriptures saying that understanding is sent by God. The psalmist, accordingly, 
considers understanding as the greatest free gift, and beseeches, saying," I am Thy servant; give me 
understanding. "s And does not David, while asking the abundant experience of knowledge, write, "Teach 
me gentleness, and discipline, and knowledge: for I have believed in Thy commandments?"[9] He 
confessed the covenants to be of the highest authority, and that they were given to the more excellent. 
Accordingly the psalm again says of God, "He hath not done thus to any nation; and He hath not shown His 
judgments to them. "[10] The expression "He hath not done so" shows that He hath done, but not "thus." The 
"thus," then, is put comparatively, with reference to pre-eminence, which obtains in our case. The prophet 
might have said simply, "He hath not done," without the "thus." 

Further, Peter in the Acts says, "Of a truth, I perceive that God is no respecter of persons; but in every nation 
he that feareth Him, and worketh righteousness, is accepted by Him."[1 1] 

The absence of respect of persons in God is not then in time, but from eternity. Nor had His beneficence a 
beginning; nor any more is it limited to places or persons. For His beneficence is not confined to parts. 
"Open ye the gates of righteousness," it is said; "entering into them, I will confess to the LORD. This is the 
gate of the LORD. The righteous shall enter by it."[1] Explaining the prophet's saying, Barnabas adds, 
"There being many gates open, that which is in righteousness is the gate which is in Christ, by which all who 
enter are blessed." Bordering on the same meaning is also the following prophetic utterance: "The LORD is 
on many waters;"[2] not the different covenants alone, but the modes of teaching, those among the Greek 
and those among the Barbarians, conducing to righteousness. And already clearly David, bearing 
testimony to the truth, sings, "Let sinners be turned into Hades, and all the nations that forget God. "[3] They 
forget, plainly. Him whom they formerly remembered, and dismiss Him whom they knew previous to 
forgetting Him. There was then a dim knowledge of God also among the nations. So much for those points. 
Now the Gnostic must be erudite. And since the Greeks say that Protagoras having led the way, the 
opposing of one argument by another was invented, it is fitting that something be said with reference to 
arguments of this sort. For Scripture says, "He that says much, shall also hear in his turn. "[4] And who shall 
understand a parable of the Lord, but the wise, the intelligent, and he that loves his Lord? Let such a man be 
faithful; let him be capable of uttering his knowledge; let him be wise in the discrimination of words; let him be 
dexterous in action; let him be pure. "The greater he seems to be, the more humble should he be," says 
Clement in the Epistle to the Corinthians,-"such an one as is capable of complying with the precept, 'And 
some pluck from the fire, and on others have compassion, making a difference, '"[5] 
The pruning-hook is made, certainly, principally for pruning; but with it we separate twigs that have got 
intertwined, cut the thorns which grow along with the vines, which it is not very easy to reach. And all these 
things have a reference to pruning. Again, man is made principally for the knowledge of God; but he also 
measures land, practises agriculture, and philosophizes; of which pursuits, one conduces to life, another to 
living well, a third to the study ofthe things which are capable of demonstration. Further, let those who say 
that philosophy took its rise from the devil know this, that the Scripture says that "the devil is transformed into 
an angel of light."[6] When about to do what? Plainly, when about to prophesy. But if he prophesies as an 
angel of light, he will speak what is true. And if he prophesies what is angelical, and of the light, then he 

prophesies what is beneficial when he is transformed according to the lil<eness of the operation, though he 
be different with respect to the matter of apostasy. For how could he deceive any one, without drawing the 
lover of knowledge into fellowship, and so drawing him afterwards into falsehood? Especially he will be 
found to know the truth, if not so as to comprehend it, yet so as not to be unacquainted with it. 
Philosophy is not then false, though the thief and the liar speak truth, through a transformation of operation. 
Nor is sentence of condemnation to be pronounced ignorantly against what is said, on account of him who 
says it (which also is to be kept in view, in the case of those who are now alleged to prophesy); but what is 
said must be looked at, to see if it keep by the truth. 

And in general terms, we shall not err in alleging that all things necessary and profitable for life came to us 
from God, and that philosophy more especially was given to the Greeks, as a covenant peculiar to 
them-being, as it is, a stepping-stone to the philosophy which is according to Christ-although those who 
applied themselves to the philosophy of the Greeks shut their ears voluntarily to the truth, despising the 
voice of Barbarians, or also dreading the danger suspended over the believer, by the laws of the state. 
And as in the Barbarian philosophy, so also in the Hellenic, "tares were sown" by the proper husbandman 
of the tares; whence also heresies grew up among us along with the productive wheat; and those who in the 
Hellenic philosophy preach the impiety and voluptuousness of Epicurus, and whatever other tenets are 
disseminated contrary to right reason, exist among the Greeks as spurious fruits of the divinely bestowed 
husbandry. This voluptuous and selfish philosophy the apostle calls "the wisdom of this world;" in 
consequence of its teaching the things of this world and about it alone, and its consequent subjection, as far 
as respects ascendancy, to those who rule here. Wherefore also this fragmentary philosophy is very 
elementary, while truly perfect science deals with intellectual objects, which are beyond the sphere of the 
world, and with the objects still more spiritual than those which "eye saw not, and ear heard not, nor did it 
enter into the heart of men," till the Teacher told the account of them to us; unveiling the holy of holies; and in 
ascending order, things still holier than these, to those who are truly and not spuriously heirs of the Lord's 
adoption. For we now dare aver (for here is the faith that is characterized by knowledge[1]) that such an one 
knows all things, and comprehends all things in the exercise of sure apprehension, respecting matters 
difficult for us, and really pertaining to the true gnosis[2] such as were James, Peter, John, Paul, and the rest 
of the apostles. For prophecy is full of knowledge (gnosis), inasmuch as it was given by the Lord, and again 
explained by the Lord to the apostles. And is not knowledge (gnosis) an attribute of the rational soul, which 
trains itself for this, that by knowledge it may become entitled to immortality? For both are powers of the soul 
both knowledge and impulse. And impulse is found to be a movement after an assent. For he who has an 
impulse towards an action, first receives the knowledge of the action, and secondly the impulse. Let us 
further devote our attention to this. For since learning is older than action; (for naturally, he who does what he 
wishes to do learns it first; and knowledge comes from learning, and impulse follows knowledge; after which 
comes action;) knowledge turns out the beginning and author of all rational action. So that rightly the peculiar 
nature of the rational soul is characterized by this alone; for in reality impulse, like knowledge, is excited by 
existing objects. And knowledge (gnosis) is essentially a contemplation of existences on the part of the 
soul, either of a certain thing or of certain things, and when perfected, of all together. Although some say that 
the wise man is persuaded that there are some things incomprehensible, in such wise as to have 
respecting them a kind of comprehension, inasmuch as he comprehends that things incomprehensible are 
incomprehensible; which is common, and pertains to those who are capable of perceiving little. For such a 
man affirms that there are some things incomprehensible. 

But that Gnostic of whom I speak, himself comprehends what seems to be incomprehensible to others; 
believing that nothing is incomprehensible to the Son of God, whence nothing incapable of being taught. For 
He who suffered out of His love for us, would have suppressed no element of knowledge requisite for our 
instruction. Accordingly this faith becomes sure demonstration; since truth follows what has been delivered 
by God. But if one desires extensive knowledge, "he knows things ancient, and conjectures things future; he 
understands knotty sayings, and the solutions of enigmas. The disciple of wisdom foreknows signs and 
omens, and the issues of seasons and of times. "[3] 

CHAP. IX. -THE GNOSTIC FREE OF ALL PERTURBATIONS OF THE SOUL. 

The Gnostic is such, that he is subject only to the affections that exist for the maintenance of the body, such 
as hunger, thirst, and the like. But in the case of the Saviour, it were ludicrous [to suppose] that the body, as 
a body, demanded the necessary aids in order to its duration. For He ate, not for the sake of the body, 
which was kept together by a holy energy, but in order that it might not enter into the minds of those who were 
with Him to entertain a different opinion of Him; in like manner as certainly some afterwards supposed that 
He appeared in a phantasmal shape (<greek>dokhsei</greek>). But He was entirely impassible 
(<greek>apaqhg</greek>); inaccessible to any movement of feeling-either pleasure or pain. While the 
apostles, having most gnostically mastered, through the Lord's teaching, angel and fear, and lust, were not 

liable even to such of the movements of feeling, as seem good, courage, zeal, joy, desire, through a steady 
condition of mind, not changing a whit; but ever continuing unvarying in a state of training after the 
resurrection of the Lord. 

And should it be granted that the affections specified above, when produced rationally, are good, yet they 
are nevertheless inadmissible in the case of the perfect man, who is incapable of exercising courage: for 
neither does he meet what inspires fear, as he regards none of the things that occur in life as to be dreaded; 
nor can aught dislodge him from this-the love he has towards God. Nor does he need cheerfulness of mind; 
for he does not fall into pain, being persuaded that all things happen well. Nor is he angry; for there is 
nothing to move him to anger, seeing he ever loves God, and is entirely turned towards Him alone, and 
therefore hates none of God's creatures. No more does he envy; for nothing is wanting to him, that is 
requisite to assimilation, in order that he may be excellent and good. Nor does he consequently love any 
one with this common affection, but loves the Creator in the creatures. Nor, consequently, does he fall into 
any desire and eagerness; nor does he want, as far as respects his soul, aught appertaining to others, now 
that he associates through love with the Beloved One, to whom he is allied by free choice, and by the habit 
which results from training, approaches closer to Him, and is blessed through the abundance of good 
things. So that on these accounts he is compelled to become like his Teacher in impassibility. For the Word 
of God is intellectual, according as the image of mind is seen 'in man alone. Thus also the good man is 
godlike in form and semblance as respects his soul. And, on the other hand, God is like man. For the 
distinctive form of each one is the mind by which we are characterized. Consequently, also, those who sin 
against man are unholy and impious. For it were ridiculous to say that the gnostic and perfect man must not 
eradicate anger and courage, inasmuch as without these he will not struggle against circumstances, or 
abide what is terrible. But if we take from him desire; he will be quite overwhelmed by troubles, and therefore 
depart from this life very basely. Unless possessed of it, as some suppose, he will not conceive a desire for 
what is like the excellent and the good. If, then, all alliance with what is good is accompanied with desire, 
how, it is said, does he remain impassible who desires what is excellent? 

But these people know not, as appears, the divinity of love. For love is not desire on the part of him who 
loves; but is a relation of affection, restoring the Gnostic to the unity of the faith,-independent of time and 
place. But he who by love is already in the midst of that in which he is destined to be, and has anticipated 
hope by knowledge, does not desire anything, having, as far as possible, the very thing desired. 
Accordingly, as to be expected, he continues in the exercise of gnostic love, in the one unvarying state. 
Nor will he, therefore, eagerly desire to be assimilated to what is beautiful, possessing, as he does, beauty 
by love. What more need of courage and of desire to him, who has obtained the affinity to the impassible 
God which arises from love, and by love has enrolled himself among the friends of God? 
We must therefore rescue the gnostic and perfect man from all passion of the soul. For knowledge (gnosis) 
produces practice, and practice habit or disposition; and such a state as this produces impassibility, not 
moderation of passion. And the complete eradication of desire reaps as its fruit impassibility. But the 
Gnostic does not share either in those affections that are commonly celebrated as good, that is, the good 
things of the affections which are allied to the passions: such, I mean, as gladness, which is allied to 
pleasure; and dejection, for this is conjoined with pain; and caution, for it is subject to fear. Nor yet does he 
share in high spirit, for it takes its place alongside of wrath; although some say that these are no longer evil, 
but already good. For it is impossible that he who has been once made perfect by love, and feasts eternally 
and insatiably on the boundless joy of contemplation, should delight in small and grovelling things. For what 
rational cause remains any more to the man who has gained "the light inaccessible, "[2] for revering to the 
good things of the world? Although not yet true as to time and place, yet by that gnostic love through which 
the inheritance and perfect restitution follow, the giver of the reward makes good by deeds what the Gnostic, 
by gnostic choice, had grasped by anticipation through love. 

For by going away to the Lord, for the love he bears Him, though his tabernacle be visible on earth, he does 
not withdraw himself from life. For that is not permitted to him. But he has withdrawn his soul from the 
passions. For that is granted to him. And on the other hand he lives, having put to death his lusts, and no 
longer makes use of the body, but allows it the use of necessaries, that he may not give cause for 
dissolution. 

How, then, has he any more need of fortitude, who is not in the midst of dangers, being not present, but 
already wholly with the object of love? And what necessity for self-restraint to him who has not need of it? For 
to have such desires, as require self-restraint in order to their control, is characteristic of one who is not yet 
pure, but subject to passion. Now, fortitude is assumed by reason of fear and cowardice. For it were no 
longer seemly that the friend of God, whom "God hath fore-ordained before the foundation of the world"[3] to 
be enrolled in the highest "adoption," should fall into pleasures or fears, and be occupied in the repression 
of the passions. For I venture to assert, that as he is predestinated through what he shall do, and what he 
shall obtain, so also has he predestinated himself by reason of what he knew and whom he loved; not 
having the future indistinct, as the multitude live, conjecturing it, but having grasped by gnostic faith what is 

hidden from others. And through love, the future is for him already present. For he has believed, through 
prophecy and the advent, on God who lies not. And what he believes he possesses, and keeps hold of the 
promise. And He who hath promised is truth. And through the trustworthiness of Him who has promised, he 
has firmly laid hold of the end of the promise by knowledge. And he, who knows the sure comprehension of 
the future which there is in the circumstances, in which he is placed, by love goes to meet the future. So he, 
that is persuaded that he will obtain the things that are really good, will not pray to obtain what is here, but 
that he may always cling to the faith which hits the mark and succeeds. And besides, he will pray that as 
many as possible may become like him, to the glory of God, which is perfected through knowledge. For he 
who is made like the Saviour is also devoted to saving; performing unerringly the commandments as far as 
the human nature may admit of the image. And this is to worship God by deeds and knowledge of the true 
righteousness. The Lord will not wait for the voice of this man in prayer. "Ask," He says, "and I will do it; think, 
and I will give."[1] 

For, in fine, it is impossible that the immutable should assume firmness and consistency in the mutable. But 
the ruling faculty being in perpetual change, and therefore unstable, the force of habit is not maintained. For 
how can he who is perpetually changed by external occurrences mad accidents, ever possess habit and 
disposition, and in a word, grasp of scientific knowledge (<greek>episthmh</greek>)? Further, also, the 
philosophers regard the virtues as habits, dispositions, and sciences. And as knowledge (gnosis) is not 
born with men, but is acquired, [2] and the acquiring of it in its elements demands application, and training, 
and progress; and then from incessant practice it passes into a habit; so, when perfected in the mystic habit, 
it abides, being infallible through love. For not only has he apprehended the first Cause, and the Cause 
produced by it, and is sure about them, possessing firmly firm and irrefragable and immoveable reasons; 
but also respecting what is good and what is evil, and respecting all production, and to speak 
comprehensively, respecting all about Which the Lord has spoken, he has learned, from the truth itself, the 
most exact truth from the foundation of the world to the end. Not preferring to the truth itself what appears 
plausible, or, according to Hellenic reasoning, necessary; but what has been spoken by the Lord he 
accepts as clear and evident, though concealed from others; and he has already received the knowledge 
of all things. And the oracles we possess give their utterances respecting what exists, as it is; and 
respecting what is future, as it shall be; and respecting what is past, as it was. 

In scientific matters, as being alone possessed of scientific knowledge, he will hold the pre-eminence, and 
will discourse on the discussion respecting the good, ever intent on intellectual objects, tracing out his 
procedure in human affairs from the archetypes above; as navigators direct the ship according to the star; 
prepared to hold himself in readiness for every suitable action; accustomed to despise all difficulties and 
dangers when it is necessary to undergo them; never doing anything precipitate or incongruous either to 
himself or the common weal; fore-seeing; and inflexible by pleasures both of waking hours and of dreams. 
For, accustomed to spare living and frugality, he is moderate, active, mad grave; requiring few necessaries 
for life; occupying himself with nothing superfluous. But desiring not even these things as chief, but by reason 
of fellowship in life, as necessary for his sojourn in life, as far as necessary. 

CHAP. X.-THE GNOSTIC AVAILS HIMSELF OF THE HELP OF ALL HUMAN KNOWLEDGE. 

For to him knowledge (gnosis) is the principal thing. Consequently, therefore, he applies to the subjects that 
are a training for knowledge, taking from each branch of study its contribution to the truth. Prosecuting, then, 
the proportion of harmonies in music; and in arithmetic noting the increasing and decreasing of numbers, 
and their relations to one another, and how the most of things fall under some proportion of numbers; 
studying geometry, which is abstract essence, he perceives a continuous distance, and an immutable 
essence which is different from these bodies. And by astronomy, again, raised from the earth in his mind, he 
is elevated along with heaven, and will revolve with its revolution; studying ever divine things, and their 
harmony with each other; from which Abraham starting, ascended to the knowledge of Him who created 
them. Further, the Gnostic will avail himself of dialectics, fixing on the distinction of genera into species, and 
will master[3] the distinction of existences, till he come to what are primary and simple. 
But the multitude are frightened at the Hellenic philosophy, as children are at masks, being afraid lest it lead 
them astray. But if the faith (for I cannot call it knowledge) which they possess be such as to be dissolved by 
plausible speech, let it be by all means dissolved, [4] and let them confess that they will not retain the truth. 
For truth is immoveable; but false opinion dissolves. We choose, for instance, one purple by comparison 
with another purple. So that, if one confesses that he has not a heart that has been made right, he has not the 
table of the money-changers or the test of words. [5] And how can he be any longer a money-changer, who 
is not able to prove and distinguish spurious coin, even offhand? 

Now David cried, "The righteous shall not be shaken for ever;"[6] neither, consequently, by deceptive 
speech nor by erring pleasure. Whence he shall never be shaken from his own heritage. "He shall not be 
afraid of evil tidings; "[1] consequently neither of unfounded calumny, nor of the false opinion around him. No 

more will he dread cunning words, who is capable of distinguishing them, or of answering rightly to 
questions asked. Such a bulwark are dialectics, that truth cannot be trampled under foot by the Sophists. 
"For it behoves those who praise in the holy name of the Lord," according to the prophet, "to rejoice in heart, 
seeking, the Lord. Seek then Him, and be strong. Seek His face continually in every way. "[2] "For, having 
spoken at sundry times and in divers manners, "[3] it is not in one way only that He is known. 
It is, then, not by availing himself of these as virtues that our Gnostic will be deeply learned. But by using 
them as helps in distinguishing what is common and what is peculiar, he will admit the truth. For the cause of 
all error and false opinion, is inability to distinguish in what respect things are common, and in what respects 
they differ. For unless, in things that are distinct, one closely watch speech, he will inadvertently confound 
what is common and what is peculiar And where this takes place, he must of necessity fall into pathless 
tracts and error. 

The distinction of names and things also in the Scriptures themselves produces great light in men's souls. 
For it is necessary to understand expressions which signify several things, and several expressions when 
they signify one thing. The result of which is accurate answering. But it is necessary to avoid the great futility 
which occupies itself in irrelevant matters; since the Gnostic avails himself of branches of learning as 
auxiliary preparatory exercises, in order to the accurate communication of the truth, as far as attainable and 
with as little distraction as possible, and for defence against reasonings that plot for the extinction of the truth. 
He will not then be deficient in what contributes to proficiency in the curriculum of studies and the Hellenic 
philosophy; but not principally, but necessarily, secondarily, and on account of circumstances. For what 
those labouring in heresies use wickedly, the Gnostic will use tightly. 

Therefore the truth that appears in the Hellenic philosophy, being partial, the real truth, like the sun glancing 
on the colours both white and black, shows what like each of them is. So also it exposes all sophistical 
plausibility. Rightly, then, was it proclaimed also by the Greeks:- 

"Truth the queen is the beginning of great virtue. "[4] 

CHAP. XI. -THE MYSTICAL MEANINGS IN THE PROPORTIONS OF NUMBERS, 
GEOMETRICAL RATIOS, AND MUSIC. 

As then in astronomy we have Abraham as an instance, so also in arithmetic we have the same Abraham. 
"For, hearing that Lotwastal<en captive, and having numbered his own servants, born in his house, 318 
(<greel<>tih</greel<>[5])," he defeats a very great number of the enemy. 

They say, then, that the character representing 300 is, as to shape, the type of the Lord's sign, [6] and that the 
lota and the Eta indicate the Saviour's name; that it was indicated, accordingly, that Abraham's domestics 
were in salvation, who having fled to the Sign and the Name became lords of the captives, and of the very 
many unbelieving nations that followed them. 

Now the number 300 is, 3 by 1 00. Ten is allowed to be the perfect number. And 8 is the first cube, which is 
equality in all the dimensions -length, breadth; depth. "The days of men shall be," it is said, "120 
(<greek>rk</greek>) years. "[7] And the sum is made up of the numbers from rto 15 added together.[8] And 
the moon at 1 5 days is full. 

On another principle, 1 20 is a triangular[9] number, and consists of the equality[1 0] of the number 64, [which 
consists of eight of the odd numbers beginning with unity], [12] the addition of which (1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15) in 
succession generate squares;[12] and of the inequality of the number 56, consisting of seven of the even 
numbers beginning with 2 (2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14), which produce the numbers that are not squares[1 3] 
Again, according to another way of indicating, the number 120 consists of four numbers-of one triangle, 15; 
of another, a square, 25; of a third, a pentagon, 35; and of a fourth, a hexagon, 45. The 5 is taken according 
to the same ratio in each mode. For in triangular numbers, from the unity 5 comes 1 5; and in squares, 25; and 
of those in succession, proportionally. Now 25, which is the number 5 from unity, is said to be the symbol of 
the Levitical tribe. And the number 35 depends also on the arithmetic, geometric, and harmonic scale of 
doubles-6, 8, 9, 12; the addition of which makes 35. In these days, the Jews say that seven months' children 
are formed. And the number 45 depends on the scale of triples-6, 9, 12, 18-the addition of which makes 45; 
and similarly, in these days they say that nine months' children are formed. 

Such, then, is the style of the example in arithmetic. And let the testimony of geometry be the tabernacle that 
was constructed, and the ark that was fashioned, -constructed in most regular proportions, and through 
divine ideas, by the gift of understanding, which leads us from things of sense to intellectual objects, or 
rather from these to holy things, and to the holy of holies. For the squares of wood indicate that the square 
form, producing fight angles, pervades all, and points out security. And the length of the structure was three 
hundred cubits, and the breadth fifty, and the height thirty; and above, the ark ends in a cubit, narrowing to a 
cubit from the broad base like a pyramid, the symbol of those who are purified and tested by fire. And this 
geometrical proportion has a place, for the transport of those holy abodes, whose differences are indicated 
by the differences of the numbers set down below. 

And the numbers introduced are sixfold, as three hundred is six times fifty; and tenfold, as three hundred is 
ten times thirty; and containing one and two-thirds (<greek>epidimoiroi</greek>), for fifty is one and 
two-thirds of thirty. 

Now there are some who say that three hundred cubits are the symbol of the Lord's sign;[1] and fifty, of hope 
and of the remission given at Pentecost; and thirty, or as in some, twelve, they say points out the preaching 
[of the Gospel]; because the LOrd preached in His thirtieth year; and the apostles were twelve. And the 
structure's terminating in a cubit is the symbol of the advancement of the righteous to oneness and to "the 
unity of the faith."[2] 

And the table which was in the temple was six cubits;[3] and its four feet were about a cubit and a half. 
They add, then, the twelve cubits, agreeably to the revolution of the twelve months, in the annual circle, 
during which the earth produces and matures all things; adapting itself to the four seasons. And the table, in 
my opinion, exhibits the image of the earth, supported as it is on four feet, summer, autumn, spring, winter, by 
which the year travels. Wherefore also it is said that the table has "wavy chains;"[4] either because the 
universe revolves in the circuits of the times, or perhaps it indicated the earth surrounded with ocean's tide. 
Further, as an example of music, let us adduce David, playing at once and prophesying, melodiously 
praising God. Now the Enarmonic s suits best the Dorian harmony, and the Diatonic the Phrygian, as 
Aristoxenus says. The harmony, therefore, of the Barbarian psaltery, which exhibited gravity of strain, being 

the most ancient, most certainly became a model for Terpander, for the Dorian harmony, who sings the 
praise of Zeus thus:- 

"O Zeus, of all things the Beginning, Rule, of, all; 
O Zeus, I send thee this beginning of hymns." 

The lyre, according to its primary signification, may by the psalmist be used figuratively for the Lord; 
according to its secondary, for those who continually strike the chords of their souls under the direction of the 
Choir-master, the Lord. And if the people saved be called the lyre, it will be understood to be in 
consequence of their giving glory musically, through the inspiration of the Word and the knowledge of God, 
being struck by the Word so as to produce faith. You may take music in another way, as the ecclesiastical 
symphony at once of the law and the prophets, and the apostles along with the Gospel, and the harmony 
which obtained in each prophet, in the transitions of the persons. 

But, as seems, the most of those who are inscribed with the Name, [6] like the companions of Ulysses, 
handle the word unskilfully, passing by not the Sirens, but the rhythm and the melody, stopping their ears 
with ignorance; since they know that, after lending their ears to Hellenic studies, they will never subsequently 
be able to retrace their steps. 

But he who culls what is useful for the advantage of the catechumens, and especially when they are Greeks 
(and the earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof[7]), must not abstain from erudition, like irrational 
animals; but he must collect as many aids as possible for his hearers. But he must by no means linger over 
these studies, except solely for the advantage accruing from them; so that, on grasping and obtaining this, 
he may be able to take his departure home to the true philosophy, which is a strong cable for the soul, 
providing security from everything. 

Music is then to be handled for the sake of the embellishment and composure of manners. For instance, at a 
banquet we pledge each other while the music is playing;[8] soothing by song the eagerness of our 
desires, and glorifying God for the copious gift of human enjoyments, for His perpetual supply of the food 
necessary for the growth of the body and of the soul. But we must reject superfluous music, which enervates 
men's souls, and leads to variety, -now mournful, and then licentious and voluptuous, and then frenzied and 
frantic. 

The same holds also of astronomy. For treating of the description of the celestial objects, about the form of 
the universe, and the revolution of the heavens, and the motion of the stars, leading the soul nearer to the 
creative power, it teaches to quickness in perceiving the seasons of the year, the changes of the air, and the 
appearance of the stars; since also navigation and husbandry derive from this much benefit, as architecture 
and building from geometry. This branch of learning, too, makes the soul in the highest degree observant, 
capable of perceiving the true and detecting the false, of discovering correspondences and proportions, so 
as to hunt out for similarity in things dissimilar; and conducts us to the discovery of length without breadth, 
and superficial extent without thickness, and an indivisible point, and transports to intellectual objects from 
those of sense. 

The studies of philosophy, therefore, and philosophy itself, are aids in treating of the truth. For instance, the 
cloak was once a fleece; then it was shorn, and became warp and woof; and then it was woven. Accordingly 
the soul must be prepared and variously exercised, if it would become in the highest degree good. For 
there is the scientific and the practical element in truth; and the latter flows from the speculative; and there is 
need of great practice, and exercise, and experience. 

But in speculation, one element relates to one's neighbours and another to one's self. Wherefore also 
training ought to be so moulded as to be adapted to both. He, then, who has acquired a competent 
acquaintance with the subjects which embrace the principles which conduce to scientific knowledge 
(gnosis), may stop and remain for the future in quiet, directing his actions in I conformity with his theory. 
But for the benefit of one's neighbours, in the case of those who have proclivities for writing, and those who 
set themselves to deliver the word, both is other culture beneficial, and the reading of the Scriptures of the 
Lord is necessary, in order to the demonstration of what is said, and especially if those who hear are 
accessions from Hellenic culture. 

Such David describes the Church: "The queen stood on thy right hand, enveloped in a golden robe, 
variegated; "[1] and with Hellenic and superabundant accomplishments, "clothed variegated with 
gold-fringed garments. "[2] And the Truth says by the Lord, "For who had known Thy counsel, hadst Thou not 
given wisdom, and sent Thy Holy Spirit from the Highest; and so the ways of those on earth were corrected, 
and men learned Thy decrees, and were saved by wisdom?" For the Gnostic knows things ancient by the 
Scripture, and conjectures things future: he understands the involutions of words and the solutions of 
enigmas. He knows beforehand signs and wonders, and the issues of seasons and periods, as we have 
said already. Seest thou the fountain of instructions that takes its rise from wisdom? But to those who object. 
What use is there in knowing the causes of the manner of the sun's motion, for example, and the rest of the 

heavenly bodies, or in iiaving studied tiie tiieorems of geometry or logic, and each of the other branches of 
study?-for these are of no service in the discharge of duties, and the Hellenic philosophy is human wisdom, 
for it is incapable of teachings the truth-the following remarks are to be made. First, that they stumble in 
reference to the highest of things-namely, the mind's free choice. "For they," it is said, "who keep holy holy 
things, shall be made holy; and those who have been taught will find an answer."[4] For the Gnostic alone 
will do holily, in accordance with reason all that has to be done, as he hath learned through the Lord's 
teaching, received through men. 

Again, on the other hand, we may hear: "For in His hand, that is, in His power and wisdom, are both we and 
our words, and all wisdom and skill in works; for God loves nothing but the man that dwells with wisdom. "[5] 
And again, they have not read what is said by Solomon; for, treating of the construction of the temple, he 
says expressly, "And it was Wisdom as artificer that framed it; and Thy providence, O Father, governs 
throughout."[6] And how irrational, to regard philosophy as inferior to architecture and shipbuilding! And the 
Lord fed the multitude of those that reclined on the grass opposite to Tiberias with the two fishes and the five 
barley loaves, indicating the preparatory training of the Greeks and Jews previous to the divine grain, which 
is the food cultivated by the law. For barley is sooner ripe for the harvest than wheat; and the fishes signified 
the Hellenic philosophy that was produced and moved in the midst of the Gentile billow, given, as they were, 
for copious food to those lying on the ground, increasing no more, like the fragments of the loaves, but 
having partaken of the Lord's blessing, and breathed into them the resurrection of Godhead[1] through the 
power of the Word. But if you are curious, understand one of the fishes to mean the curriculum of study, and 
the other the philosophy which supervenes. The gatherings' point out the word of the Lord. 

"And the choir of mute fishes rushed to it," 

says the Tragic Muse somewhere. 

"I must decrease," said the prophet John, [3] and the Word of the Lord alone, in which the law terminates, 

"increase." Understand now for me the mystery of the truth, granting pardon if I shrink from advancing further 

in the treatment of it, by announcing this alone: "All things were made by Him, and without Him was not even 

one thing. "[4] Certainly He is called "the chief corner stone; in whom the whole building, fitly joined together, 

groweth into an holy temple of God, "[5] according to the divine apostle. 

I pass over in silence at present the parable which says in the Gospel: "The kingdom of heaven is like a 

man who cast a net into the sea and out of the multitude of the fishes caught, makes a selection of the better 

ones. "[6] 

And now the wisdom which we possess announces the four virtues[7] in such a way as to show that the 

sources of them were communicated by the Hebrews to the Greeks. This may be learned from the 

following: "And if one loves justice, its toils are virtues. For temperance and prudence teach justice and 

fortitude; and than these there is nothing more useful in life to men." 

Above all, this ought to be known, that by nature we are adapted for virtue; not so as to be possessed of it 

from our birth, but so as to be adapted for acquiring it. 

CHAP. XII. -HUMAN NATURE POSSESSES AN ADAPTATION FOR PERFECTION; THE 
GNOSTIC ALONE ATTAINS IT. 

By which consideration s is solved the question propounded to us by the heretics. Whether Adam was 
created perfect or imperfect? Well, if imperfect, how could the work of a perfect God-above all, that work 
being man-be imperfect? And if perfect, how did he transgress the commandments? For they shall hear 
from us that he was not perfect in his creation, but adapted to the reception of virtue. For it is of great 
importance in regard to virtue to be made fit for its attainment. And it is intended that we should be saved by 
ourselves. This, then, is the nature of the soul, to move of itself. Then, as we are rational, and philosophy 
being rational, we have some affinity with it. Now an aptitude is a movement towards virtue, not virtue itself. 
All, then, as I said, are naturally constituted for the acquisition of virtue. 

But one man applies less, one more, to learning and training. Wherefore also some have been competent 
to attain to perfect virtue, and others have attained to a kind of it. And some, on the other hand, through 
negligence, although in other respects of good dispositions, have turned to the opposite. Now much more is 
that knowledge which excels all branches of culture in greatness and in truth, most difficult to acquire, and is 
attained with much toil. "But, as seems, they know not the mysteries of God. For God created man for 
immortality, and made him an image of His own nature;"[9] according to which nature of Him who knows all, 
he who is a Gnostic, and righteous, and holy with prudence, hastes to reach the measure of perfect 
manhood. For not only are actions and thoughts, but words also, pure in the case of the Gnostic: "Thou hast 
proved mine heart; Thou hast visited me by night," it is said; "Thou hast subjected me to the fire, and 
unrighteousness was not found in me: so that my mouth shall not speak the works of men. "[10] 

And why do I say the works of men? He recognises sin itself, which is not brought forward in order to 
repentance (for this is common to all believers); but what sin is. Nor does he condemn this or that sin, but 
simply all sin; nor is it what one has done ill that he brings up, but what ought not to be done. Whence also 
repentance is twofold: that which is common, on account of having transgressed; and that which, from 
learning the nature of sin, persuades, in the first instance, to keep from sinning, the result of which is not 
sinning. 

Let them not then say, that he who does wrong and sins transgresses through the agency of demons; for 
then he would be guiltless. But by choosing the same things as demons, by sinning; being unstable, and 
light, and fickle in his desires, like a demon, he becomes a demoniac man. Now he who is bad, having 
become, through evil, sinful by nature, becomes depraved, having what he has chosen; and being sinful, 
sins also in his actions. And again, the good man does right. Wherefore we call not only the virtues, but also 
right actions, good. And of things that are good we know that some are desirable for themselves, as 
knowledge; for we hunt for nothing from it when we have it, but only [seek] that it be with us, and that we be in 
uninterrupted contemplation, and strive to reach it for its own sake. But other things are desirable for other 
considerations, such as faith, for escape from punishment, and the advantage arising from reward, which 
accrue from it. For, in the case of many, fear is the cause of their not sinning; and the promise is the means of 
pursuing obedience, by which comes salvation. Knowledge, then, desirable as it is for its own sake, is the 
most perfect good; and consequently the things which follow by means of it are good. And punishment is the 
cause of correction to him who is punished; and to those who are able to see before them he becomes an 
example, to prevent them failing into the like. 

Let us then receive knowledge, not desiring its results, but embracing itself for the sake of knowing. For the 
first advantage is the habit of knowledge (<greek>gnpstikh</greek>), which furnishes harmless pleasures 
and exultation both for the present and the future. And exultation is said to be gladness, being a reflection of 
the virtue which is according to truth, through a kind of exhilaration and relaxation of soul. And the acts which 
partake of knowledge are good and fair actions. For abundance in the actions that are according to virtue, 
is the true riches, and destitution in decorous[1] desires is poverty. For the use and enjoyment of 
necessaries are not injurious in quality, but in quantity, when in excess. Wherefore the Gnostic circumscribes 
his desires in reference both to possession and to enjoyment, not exceeding the limit of necessity. 
Therefore, regarding life in this world as necessary for the increase of science (<greek>episthmh</greek>) 
and the acquisition of knowledge (<greek>gnpsid</greek>), he will value highest, not living, but living well. 
He will therefore prefer neither children, nor marriage, nor parents, to love for God, and righteousness in life. 
To such an one, his wife, after conception, is as a sister, and is judged as if of the same father; then only 
recollecting her husband, when she looks on the children; as being destined to become a sister in reality 
after putting off the flesh, which separates and limits the knowledge of those who are spiritual by the peculiar 
characteristics of the sexes. For souls, themselves by themselves, are equal. Souls are neither male nor 
female, when they no longer marry nor are given in marriage. And is not woman translated into man, when 
she is become equally unfeminine, and manly, and perfect? Such, then, was the laughter of Sarah[2] when 
she received the good news of the birth of a son; not, in my opinion, that she disbelieved the angel, but that 
she felt ashamed of the intercourse by means of which she was destined to become the mother of a son. 
And did not Abraham, when he was in danger on account of Sarah's beauty, with the king of Egypt, properly 
call her sister, being of the same father, but not of the same mother?[3] 

To those, then, who have repented and not firmly believed, God grants their requests through their 
supplications. But to those who live sinlessly and gnostically. He gives, when they have but merely 
entertained the thought. For example, to Anna, on her merely conceiving the thought, conception was 
vouchsafed of the child Samuel. [4] "Ask," says the Scripture, "and I will do. Think, and I will give." For we 
have heard that God knows the heart, not judging [5] the soul from [external] movement, as we men; nor yet 
from the event. For it is ridiculous to think so. Nor was it as the architect praises the work when accomplished 
that God, on making the light and then seeing it, called it good. But He, knowing before He made it what it 
would be, praised that [which was made. He having potentially made good, from the first by His purpose 
that had no beginning, what was destined to be good actually. Now that which has future He already said 
beforehand was good, the phrase concealing the truth by hyperbaton. Therefore the Gnostic prays in 
thought during every hour, being by love allied to God. And first he will ask forgiveness of sins; and after, that 
he may sin no more; and further, the power of well-doing and of comprehending the whole creation and 
administration by the Lord, that, becoming pure in heart through the knowledge, which is by the Son of God, 
he may be initiated into the beatific vision face to face, having heard the Scripture which says, "Fasting with 
prayer is a good thing. "[6] 

Now fastings signify abstinence from all evils whatsoever, both in action and in word, and in thought itself. As 
appears, then, righteousness is quadrangular;[7] on all sides equal and like in word, in deed, in abstinence 
from evils, in beneficence, in gnostic perfection; nowhere, and in no respect halting, so that he does not 
appear unjust and unequal. As one, then, is righteous, so certainly is he a believer. But as he is a believer. 

he is not yet also righteous-l mean according to tiie rigiiteousness of progress and perfection, according to 
wiiicii tiie Gnostic is called righteous. 

For instance, on Abraham becoming a believer, it was reckoned to him for righteousness, he having 
advanced to the greater and more perfect degree of faith. For he who merely abstains from evil conduct is 
not just, unless he also attain besides beneficence and knowledge; and for this reason some things are to 
be abstained from, others are to be done. "By the armour of righteousness on the right hand and on the 
left,"[1] the apostle says, the righteous man is sent on to the inheritance above, -by some [arms] defended, 
by others putting forth his might. For the defence of his panoply alone, and abstinence from sins, are not 
sufficient for perfection, unless he assume in addition the work of righteousness-activity in doing good. 
Then our dexterous man and Gnostic is revealed in righteousness already even here, as Moses, glorified 
in the face of the soul, [2] as we have formerly said, the body bears the stamp of the righteous soul. For as 
the mordant of the dyeing process, remaining in the wool, produces in it a certain quality and diversity from 
other wool; so also in the soul the pain is gone, but the good remains; and the sweet is left, but the base is 
wiped away. For these are two qualities characteristic of each soul, by which is known that which is glorified, 
and that which is condemned. 

And as in the case of Moses, from his righteous conduct, and from his uninterrupted intercourse with God, 
who spoke to him, a kind of glorified hue settled on his face; so also a divine power of goodness clinging to 
the righteous soul in contemplation and in prophecy, and in the exercise of the function of governing, 
impresses on it something, as it were, of intellectual radiance, like the solar ray, as a visible sign of 
righteousness, uniting the soul with light, through unbroken love, which is God-bearing and God-borne. 
Thence assimilation to God the Saviour arises to the Gnostic, as far as permitted to human nature, he being 
made perfect "as the Father who is in heaven. "[3] 

It is He Himself who says, "Little children, a little while I am still with you. "[4] Since also God Himself remains 
blessed and immortal, neither molested nor molesting another;[5] not in consequence of being by nature 
good, but in proving Himself actually, both Father and good, continues immutably in the self-same 
goodness. For what is the use of good that does not act and do good? 

CHAP. XIII. -DEGREES OF GLORY IN HEAVEN CORRESPONDING WITH THE DIGNITIES 
OF THE CHURCH BELOW. 

He, then, who has first moderated his passions and trained himself for impassibility, and developed to the 
beneficence of gnostic perfection, is here equal to the angels. Luminous already, and like the sun shining in 
the exercise of beneficence, he speeds by righteous knowledge through the love of God to the sacred 
abode, like as the apostles. Not that they became apostles through being chosen for some distinguished 
peculiarity of nature, since also Judas was chosen along with them. But they were capable of becoming 
apostles on being chosen by Him who foresees even ultimate issues. Matthias, accordingly, who was not 
chosen along with them, on showing himself worthy of becoming an apostle, is substituted for Judas. 
Those, then, also now, who have exercised themselves in the Lord's commandments, and lived perfectly 
and gnostically according to the Gospel, may be enrolled in the chosen body of the apostles. Such an one 
is in reality a presbyter of the Church, and a true minister (deacon) of the will of God, if he do and teach what 
is the Lord's; not as being ordained[7] by men, nor regarded righteous because a presbyter, but enrolled in 
the presbyterate s because righteous. And although here upon earth he be not honoured with the chief 
seat,[9] he will sit down on the four-and-twenty thrones, [10] judging the people, as John says in the 
Apocalypse. 

For, in truth, the covenant of salvation, reaching down to us from the foundation of the world, through different 
generations and times, is one, though conceived as different in respect of gift. For it follows that there is one 
unchangeable gift of salvation given by one God, through one Lord, benefiting in many ways. For which 
cause the middle wall[1 1] which separated the Greek from the Jew is taken away, in order that there might 
be a peculiar people. And so both meet in the one unity of faith; and the selection out of both is one. And the 
chosen of the chosen are those who by reason of perfect knowledge are called [as the best] from the 
Church itself, and honoured with the most august glory-the judges and rulers-four-and-twenty (the grace 
being doubled)equally from Jews and Greeks. Since, according to my opinion, the grades[1] here in the 
Church, of bishops, presbyters, deacons, are imitations of the angelic glory, and of that economy which, the 
Scriptures say, awaits those who, following the footsteps of the apostles, have lived in perfection of 
righteousness according to the Gospel. For these taken up in the clouds, the apostle[2] writes, will first 
minister [as deacons], then be classed in the presbyterate, by promotion in glory (for glory differs[3] from 
glory) till they grow into "a perfect man. "[4] 

CHAP. XIV.-DEGREES OF GLORY IN HEAVEN. 

Such, according to David, "rest in tiie iioly iiill of God, "[5] in tiie Ciiurcii far on iiigii, in wiiicii are gatiiered tiie 
piiilosopiiers of God, "wiio are Israelites indeed, who are pure in heart, in whom there is no guile; "[6] who 
do not remain in the seventh seat, the place of rest, but are promoted, through the active beneficence of the 
divine likeness, to the heritage of beneficence which is the eighth grade; devoting themselves to the pure 
vision[7] of insatiable contemplation. 

"And other sheep there are also," saith the Lord, "which are not of this fold "[8]-deemed worthy of another 
fold and mansion, in proportion to their faith. "But My sheep hear My voice, "[9] understanding gnostically the 
commandments. And this is to be taken in a magnanimous and worthy acceptation, along with also the 
recompense and accompaniment of works. So that when we hear, "Thy faith hath saved thee, [10] we do not 
understand Him to say absolutely that those who have believed in any way whatever shall be saved, 
unless also works follow. But it was to the Jews alone that He spoke this utterance, who kept the law and 
lived blamelessly, who wanted only faith in the Lord. No one, then, can be a believer and at the same time 
be licentious; but though he quit the flesh, he must put off the passions, so as to be capable of reaching his 
own mansion. 

Now to know is more than to believe, as to be dignified with the highest honour after being saved is a 
greater thing than being saved. Accordingly the believer, through great discipline, divesting himself of the 
passions, passes to the mansion which is better than the former one, viz., to the greatest torment, taking with 
him the characteristic of repentance from the sins he has committed after baptism. He is tortured then still 
more-not yet or not quite attaining what he sees others to have acquired. Besides, he is also ashamed of 
his transgressions. The greatest torments, indeed, are assigned to the believer. For God's righteousness is 
good, and His goodness is righteous. And though the punishments cease in the course of the completion of 
the expiation and purification of each one, yet those have very great and permanent grief who[1 1] are found 
worthy of the other fold, on account of not being along with those that have been glorified through 
righteousness. 

For instance, Solomon, calling the Gnostic, wise, speaks thus of those who admire the dignity of his 
mansion: "For they shall see the end of the wise, and to what a degree the Lord has established him. "[12] 
And of his glory they will say, "This was he whom we once held up to derision, and made a byword of 
reproach; fools that we were! We thought his life madness, and his end dishonourable. How is he reckoned 
among the sons of God, and his inheritance among the saints ?"[13] 

Not only then the believer, but even the heathen, is judged most righteously. For since God knew in virtue of 
His prescience that he would not believe. He nevertheless, in order that he might receive his own perfection 
gave him philosophy, but gave it him previous to faith. And He gave the sun, and the moon, and the stars to 
be worshipped; "which God," the Law says, [14] made for the nations, that they might not become altogether 
atheistical, and so utterly perish. But they, also in the instance of this commandment, having become devoid 
of sense, and addicting themselves to graven images, are judged unless they repent; some of them 
because, though able, they would not believe God; and others because, though willing, they did not take the 
necessary pains to become believers. There were also, however, those who, from the worship of the 
heavenly bodies, did not return to the Maker of them. For this was the sway given to the nations to rise up to 
God, by means of the worship of the heavenly bodies. But those who would not abide by those heavenly 
bodies assigned to them, but fell away from them to stocks and stones, "were counted," it is said, "as 
chaff-dust and as a drop from a jar,"[15] beyond salvation, cast away from the body. 
As, then, to be simply saved is the result of medium[1] actions, but to be saved tightly and becomingly[2] is 
right action, so also all action of the Gnostic may be called tight action; that of the simple believer, 
intermediate action, not yet perfected according to reason, not yet made right according to knowledge; but 
that of every heathen again is sinful. For it is not simply doing well, but doing actions with a certain aim, and 
acting according to reason, that the Scriptures exhibit as requisite. [3] 

As, then, lyres ought not to be touched by those who are destitute of skill in playing the lyre, nor flutes by 
those who are unskilled in flute-playing, neither are those to put their hand to affairs who have not 
knowledge, and know not how to use them in the whole[4] of life. 

The struggle for freedom, then, is waged not alone by the athletes of battles in wars, but also in banquets, 
and in bed, and in the tribunals, by those who are anointed by the word, who are ashamed to become the 
captives of pleasures. 

"I would never part with virtue for unrighteous gain." But plainly, unrighteous gain is pleasure and pain, toil 
and fear; and, to speak comprehensively, the passions of the soul, the present of which is delightful, the 
future vexatious. "For what is the profit," it is said, "if you gain the world and lose the soul ?"[5] It is clear, then, 
that those who do not perform good actions, do not know what is for their own advantage. And if so, neither 
are they capable of praying aright, so as to receive from God good things; nor, should they receive them, 
will they be sensible of the boon; nor, should they enjoy them, will they enjoy worthily what they know not; 
both from their want of knowledge how to use the good things given them, and from their excessive stupidity, 
being ignorant of the way to avail themselves of the divine gifts. 

Now stupidity is tiie cause of ignorance. And it appears to me tiiat it is tiie vaunt of a boastful soul, though of 
one with a good conscience, to exclaim against what happens through circumstances:- 

"Therefore let them do what they may;[6] 

For it shall be well with me; and Right 

Shall be my ally, and I shall not be caught doing evil." 

But such a good conscience preserves sanctity towards God and justice towards men; keeping the soul 
pure with grave thoughts, and pure, words, and just deeds. By thus receiving the Lord's power, the soul 
studies to be God; regarding nothing bad but ignorance, and action contrary to fight reason. And giving 
thanks always for all things to God, by righteous heating and divine reading, by true investigation, by holy 
oblation, by blessed prayer; lauding, hymning, blessing, praising, such a soul is never at any time 
separated from God. [7] Rightly then is it said, "And they who trust in Him shall understand the truth, and 
those faithful in love shall abide by Him. "[8] You see what statements Wisdom makes about the Gnostics. 
Conformably, therefore, there are various abodes, according to the worth of those who have believed. [9] To 
the point Solomon says, "For there shall be given to him the choice grace of faith, and a more pleasant lot in 
the temple of the Lord."[1 0] For the comparative shows that there are lower parts in the temple of God, which 
is the whole Church. And the superlative remains to be conceived, where the Lord is. These chosen 
abodes, which are three, are indicated by the numbers in the Gospel-the thirty, the sixty, the hundred. [1 1] 
And the perfect inheritance belongs to those who attain to "a perfect man," according to the image of the 
Lord. And the likeness is not, as some imagine, that of the human form; for this consideration is impious. Nor 
is the likeness to the first cause that which consists in virtue. For this utterance is also impious, being that of 
those who have imagined that virtue in man and in the sovereign God is the same. "Thou hast supposed 
iniquity, '[1] He says, "[in imagining] that I will be like to thee. "[12] But "it is enough for the disciple to become 
as the Master,"[13] saith the Master. To the likeness of God, then, he that is introduced into adoption and the 
friendship of God, to the just inheritance of the lords and gods is brought; if he be perfected, according to the 
Gospel, as the Lord Himself taught. 

CHAP. XV. -DIFFERENT DEGREES OF KNOWLEDGE. 

The Gnostic, then, is impressed with the closest likeness, that is, with the mind of the Master; which He being 
possessed of, commanded and recommended to His disciples and to the prudent. Comprehending this, as 
He who taught wished, and receiving it in its grand sense, he teaches worthily "on the housetops"[14] those 
capable of being built to a lofty height; and begins the doing of what is spoken, in accordance with the 
example of life. For He enjoined what is possible. And, in truth, the kingly man and Christian ought to be ruler 
and leader. For we are commanded to be lords over not only the wild beasts without us, but also over the 
wild passions within ourselves. 

Through the knowledge, then, as appears, of a bad and good life is the Gnostic saved, understanding and 
executing "more than the scribes and Pharisees. "[1] "Exert thyself, and prosper, and reign" writes David, 
"because of truth, and meekness, and righteousness; and thy right hand shall guide thee marvellously, "[2] 
that is, the Lord. "Who then is the wise ? and he shall understand these things. Prudent? and he shall know 
them. For the ways of the LORD are right,"[3] says the prophet, showing that the Gnostic alone is able to 
understand and explain the things spoken by the Spirit obscurely. "And he who understands in that time 
shall hold his peace, "[4] says the Scripture, plainly in the way of declaring them to the unworthy. For the Lord 
says, "He that hath ears to hear, let him hear,"[5] declaring that hearing and understanding belong not to all. 
To the point David writes: "Dark water is in the clouds of the skies. At the gleam before Him the clouds 
passed, hail and coals of fire;"[6] showing that the holy words are hidden. He intimates that transparent and 
resplendent to the Gnostics, like the innocuous hail, they are sent down from God; but that they are dark to 
the multitude, like extinguished coals out of the fire, which, unless kindled and set on fire, will not give forth 
fire or light. "The Lord, therefore," it is said, "gives me the tongue of instruction, so as to know in season 
when it is requisite to speak a word;"[7] not in the way of testimony alone, but also in the way of question and 
answer. "And the instruction of the Lord opens my mouth. "[8] It is the prerogative of the Gnostic, then, to know 
how to make use of speech, and when, and how, and to whom. And already the apostle, by saying, "After 
the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ,"[9] makes the asseveration that the Hellenic teaching is 
elementary, and that of Christ perfect, as we have already intimated before. 

"Now the wild olive is inserted into the fatness of the olive, "[10] and is indeed of the same species as the 
cultivated olives. For the graft uses as soil the tree in which it is engrafted. Now all the plants sprouted forth 
simultaneously in consequence of the divine order. Wherefore also, though the wild olive be wild, it crowns 
the Olympic victors. And the elm teaches the vine to be fruitful, by leading it up to a height. Now we see that 
wild trees attract more nutriment, because they cannot ripen. The wild trees, therefore, have less power of 

secretion than those that are cultivated. And the cause of their wildness is the want of the power of secretion. 
The engrafted olive accordingly receives more nutriment from its growing in the wild one; and it gets 
accustomed, as it were, to secrete the nutriment, becoming thus assimilated" to the fatness of the cultivated 
tree. 

So also the philosopher, resembling the wild olive, in having much that is undigested, on account of his 
devotion to the search, his propensity to follow, and his eagerness to seize the fatness of the truth; if he get 
besides the divine power, through faith, by being transplanted into the good and mild knowledge, like the 
wild olive, engrafted in the truly fair and merciful Word, he both assimilates the nutriment that is supplied, and 
becomes a fair and good olive tree. For engrafting makes worthless shoots noble, and compels the barren 
to be fruitful by the art of culture and by gnostic skill. 

Different modes of engrafting illustrative of different kinds of conversion. 

They say that engrafting is effected in four modes: one, that in which the graft must be fitted in between the 
wood and the bark; resembling the way in which we instruct plain people belonging to the Gentiles, who 
receive the word superficially. Another is, when the wood is cleft, and there is inserted in it the cultivated 
branch. And this applies to the case of those who have studied philosophy; for on cutting through their 
dogmas, the acknowledgment of the truth is produced in them. So also in the case of the Jews, by opening 
up the Old Testament, the new and noble plant of the olive is inserted. The third mode of engrafting applies 
to rustics and heretics, who are brought by force to the truth. For after smoothing off both suckers with a sharp 
pruning-hook, till the pith is laid bare, but not wounded, they are bound together. And the fourth is that form of 
engrafting called budding. For a bud (eye) is cut out of a trunk of a good sort, a circle being drawn round in 
the bark along with it, of the size of the palm. Then the trunk is stripped, to suit the eye, over an equal 
circumference. And so the graft is inserted, tied round, and daubed with clay, the bud being kept uninjured 
and unstained. This is the style of gnostic teaching, which is capable of looking into things themselves. This 
mode is, in truth, of most service in the case of cultivated trees. And "the engrafting into the good olive" 
mentioned by the apostle, may be [engrafting into] Christ Himself; the uncultivated and unbelieving nature 
being transplanted into Christ-that is, in the case of those who believe in Christ. But it is better [to understand 
it] of the engrafting of each one's faith in the soul itself. For also the Holy Spirit is thus somehow transplanted 
by distribution, according to the circumscribed capacity of each one, but without being circumscribed. 

Knowledge and love. 

Now, discoursing on knowledge, Solomon speaks thus: "For wisdom is resplendent and fadeless, and is 
easily beheld by those who love her. She is beforehand in making herself known to those who desire her. 
He that rises early for her shall not toil wearily. For to think about her is the perfection of good sense. And he 
that keeps vigils for her shall quickly be relieved of anxiety. For she goes about, herself seeking those 
worthy of her (for knowledge belongs not to all); and in all ways she benignly shows herself to them. "[2] Now 
the paths are the conduct of life, and the variety that exists in the covenants. Presently he adds: "And in 
every thought she meets them, "[3] being variously contemplated, that is, by all discipline. Then he subjoins, 
adducing love, which perfects by syllogistic reasoning and true propositions, drawing thus a most 
convincing and true inference, "For the beginning of her is the truest desire of instruction," that is, of 
knowledge; "prudence is the love of instruction, and love is the keeping of its laws; and attention to its laws 
is the confirmation of immortality; and immortality causes nearness to God. The desire of wisdom leads, 
then, to the kingdom. "[4] 

For he teaches, as I think, that true instruction is desire for knowledge; and the practical exercise of 
instruction produces love of knowledge. And love is the keeping of the commandments which lead to 
knowledge. And the keeping of them is the establishment of the commandments, from which immortality 
results. "And immortality brings us near to God." 

True knowledge found in the teaching of Christ alone. 

If, then, the love of knowledge produces immortality, and leads the kingly man near to God the King, 
knowledge ought to be sought till it is found. Now seeking is an effort at grasping, and finds the subject by 
means of certain signs. And discovery is the end and cessation of inquiry, which has now its object in its 
gasp. And this is knowledge. And this discovery, properly so called, is knowledge, which is the 
apprehension of the object of search. And they say that a proof is either the antecedent, or the coincident, or 
the consequent. The discovery, then, of what is sought respecting God, is the teaching through the Son; and 
the proof of our Saviour being the very Son of God is the prophecies which preceded His coming, 
announcing Him; and the testimonies regarding Him which attended His birth in the world; in addition, His 

powers proclaimed and openly shown after His ascension. 

The proof of the truth being with us, is the fact of the Son of God Himself having taught us. For if in every 

inquiry these universals are found, a person and a subject, that which is truly the truth is shown to be in our 

hands alone. For the Son of God is the person of the truth which is exhibited; and the subject is the power of 

faith, which prevails over the opposition of every one whatever, and the assault of the whole world. 

But since this is confessedly established by eternal facts and reasons, and each one who thinks that there 

is no Providence has already been seen to deserve punishment and not contradiction, and is truly an 

atheist, it is our aim to discover what doing, and in what manner living, we shall reach the knowledge of the 

sovereign God, and how, honouring the Divinity, we may become authors of our own salvation. Knowing and 

learning, not from the Sophists, but from God Himself, what is well-pleasing to Him, we endeavour to do what 

is just and holy. Now it is well-pleasing to Him that we should be saved; and salvation is effected through 

both well-doing and knowledge, of both of which the Lord is the teacher. 

If, then, according to Plato, it is only possible to learn the truth either from God or from the progeny of God, 

with reason we, selecting testimonies from the divine oracles, boast of learning the truth by the Son of God, 

prophesied at first, and then explained. 

Philosophy and heresies, aids in discovering the truth. 

But the things which co-operate in the discovery of truth are not to be rejected. Philosophy, accordingly, 
which proclaims a Providence, and the recompense of a life of felicity, and the punishment, on the other 
hand, of a life of misery, teaches theology comprehensively; but it does not preserve accuracy and 
particular points; for neither respecting the Son of God, nor respecting the economy of Providence, does it 
treat similarly with us; for it did not know the worship of God. 

Wherefore also the heresies of the Barbarian philosophy, although they speak of one God, though they sing 
the praises of Christ, speak without accuracy, not in accordance with truth; for they discover another God, 
and receive Christ not as the prophecies deliver. But their false dogmas, while they oppose the conduct that 
is according to the truth, are against us. For instance, Paul circumcised Timothy because of the Jews who 
believed, in order that those who had received their training from the law might not revolt from the faith 
through his breaking such points of the law as were understood more cam ally, knowing right well that 
circumcision does not justify; for he professed that "all things were for all" by conformity, preserving those of 
the dogmas that were essential, "that he might gain all."[1] And Daniel, under the king of the Persians, wore 
"the chain, "[2] though he despised not the afflictions of the people. 

The liars, then, in reality are not those who for the sake of the scheme of salvation conform, nor those who 
err in minute points, but those who are wrong in essentials, and reject the Lord and as far as in them lies 
deprive the Lord of the true teaching; who do not quote or deliver the Scriptures in a manner worthy of God 
and of the Lord;[3] for the deposit rendered to God, according to the teaching of the Lord by His apostles, is 
the understanding and the practice of the godly tradition. "And what ye hear in the ear "-that is, in a hidden 
manner, and in a mystery (for such things are figuratively said to be spoken in the ear)-"proclaim," He says, 
"on the housetops," understanding them sublimely, and delivering them in a lofty strain, and according to the 
canon of the truth explaining the Scriptures; for neither prophecy nor the Saviour Himself announced the 
divine mysteries simply so as to be easily apprehended by all and sundry, but express them in parables. 
The apostles accordingly say of the Lord, that "He spake all things in parables, and without a parable 
spake He nothing unto them;"[4] and if "all things were made by Him, and without Him was not anything 
made that was made, "[5] consequently also prophecy and the law were by Him, and were spoken by Him 
in parables. "But all things are right," says the Scripture, [6] "before those who understand," that is, those who 
receive and observe, according to the ecclesiastical rule, the exposition of the Scriptures explained by Him; 
and the ecclesiastical rule is the concord and harmony of the law and the prophets in the covenant 
delivered at the coming of the Lord. Knowledge is then followed by practical wisdom, and practical wisdom 
by self-control: for it may be said that practical wisdom is divine knowledge, and exists in those who are 
deified; but that self-control is mortal, and subsists in those who philosophize, and are not yet wise. But if 
virtue is divine, so is also the knowledge of it; while self-control is a sort of imperfect wisdom which aspires 
after wisdom, and exerts itself laboriously, and is not contemplative. As certainly righteousness, being 
human, is, as being a common thing, subordinate to holiness, which subsists through the divine 
righteousness;[7] for the righteousness of the perfect man does not rest on civil contracts, or on the 
prohibition of law, but flows from his own spontaneous action and his love to God. 

Reasons for the meaning of Scripture being veiled. 

For many reasons, then, the Scriptures hide the sense. First, that we may become inquisitive, and be ever 
on the watch for the discovery of the words of salvation. Then it was not suitable for all to understand, so that 

they might not receive harm in consequence of tailing in another sense the things declared for salvation by 
the Holy Spirit. Wherefore the holy mysteries of the prophecies are veiled in the parables-preserved for 
chosen men, selected to knowledge in consequence of their faith; for the style of the Scriptures is parabolic. 
Wherefore also the Lord, who was not of the world, came as one who was of the world to men. For He was 
clothed with all virtue; and it was His aim to lead man, the foster-child of the world, up to the objects of 
intellect, and to the most essential truths by knowledge, from one world to another. 
Wherefore also He employed metaphorical description; for such is the parable,-a narration based on 
some subject which is not the principal subject, but similar to the principal subject, and leading him who 
understands to what is the true and principal thing; or, as some say, a mode of speech presenting with 
vigour, by means of other circumstances, what is the principal subject. 

And now also the whole economy which prophesied of the Lord appears indeed a parable to those who 
know not the truth, when one speaks and the rest hear that the Son of God-of Him who made the 
universe-assumed flesh, and was conceived in the virgin's womb (as His material body was produced), 
and subsequently, as was the case, suffered and rose again, being "to the Jews a stumbling-block, and to 
the Greeks foolishness," as the apostle says. 

But on the Scriptures being opened up, and declaring the truth to those who have ears, they proclaim the 
very suffering endured by the flesh, which the Lord assumed, to be "the power and wisdom of God." And 
finally, the parabolic style of Scripture being of the greatest antiquity, as we have shown, abounded most, as 
was to be expected, in the prophets, in order that the Holy Spirit might show that the philosophers among the 
Greeks, and the wise men among the Barbarians besides, were ignorant of the future coming of the Lord, 
and of the mystic teaching that was to be delivered by Him. Rightly then, prophecy, in proclaiming the Lord, 
in order not to seem to some to blaspheme while speaking what was beyond the ideas of the multitude 
embodied its declarations in expressions capable of leading to other conceptions. Now all the prophets 
who foretold the Lord's coming, and the holy mysteries accompanying it, were persecuted and killed. As 
also the Lord Himself, in explaining the Scriptures to them, and His disciples who preached the word like 
Him, and subsequently to His life, used parables. [1] Whence also Peter, in his Preaching, speaking of the 
apostles, says: "But we, unrolling the books of the prophets which we possess, who name Jesus Christ, 
partly in parables, partly in enigmas, partly expressly and in so many words, find His coming and death, and 
cross, and all the rest of the tortures which the Jews inflicted on Him, and His resurrection and assumption to 
heaven previous to the capture[2] of Jerusalem. As it is written. These things are all that He behoves to 
suffer, and what should be after Him. Recognising them, therefore, we have believed in God in 
consequence of what is written respecting Him." 

And after a little again he draws the inference that the Scriptures owed their origin to the divine providence, 
asserting as follows: "For we know that God enjoined these things, and we say nothing apart from the 
Scriptures." 

Now the Hebrew dialect, like all the rest, has certain properties, consisting in a mode of speech which 
exhibits the national character. Dialect is accordingly defined as a style of speech produced by the national 
character. But prophecy is not marked by those dialects. For in the Hellenic writings, what are called 
changes of figures purposely produce onscurations, deduced after the style of our prophecies. But this is 
effected through the voluntary departure from direct speech which takes place in metrical or offhand diction. 
A figure, then, is a form of speech transferred from what is literal to what is not literal, for the sake of the 
composition, and on account of a diction useful in speech. 

But prophecy does not employ figurative forms in the expressions for the sake of beauty of diction. But from 
the fact that truth appertains not to all, it is veiled in manifold ways, causing the light to arise only on those 
who are initiated into knowledge, who seek the truth through love. The proverb, according to the Barbarian 
philosophy, is called a mode of prophecy, and the parable is so called, and the enigma in addition. Further 
also, they are called "wisdom;" and again, as something different from it, "instruction and words of 
prudence," and "turnings of words," and "true righteousness and again, "teaching to direct judgment," and 
"subtlety to the simple," which is the result of training, "and perception and thought," with which the young 
catechumen is imbued. [3] "He who bears these prophets, being wise, will be wiser. And the intelligent man 
will acquire rule, and will understand a parable and a dark saying, the words and enigmas of the wise. "[4] 
And if it was the case that the Hellenic dialects received their appellation from Hellen, the son of Zeus, 
surnamed Deucalion, from the chronology which we have already exhibited, it is comparatively easy to 
perceive by how many generations the dialects that obtained among the Greeks are posterior to the 
language of the Hebrews. 

But as the work advances, we shall in each section, noting the figures of speech mentioned above by the 
prophet,[5] exhibit the gnostic mode of life, showing it systematically according to the rule of the truth. 
Did not the Power also, that appeared to Hermas in the Vision, in the form of the Church, give for 
transcription the book which she wished to be made known to the elect ? And this, he says, he transcribed to 
the letter, without finding how to complete the syllables. [6] And this signified that the Scripture is clear to all. 

when taken according to the bare reading; and that this is the faith which occupies the place of the 
rudiments. Wherefore also the figurative expression is employed, "reading according to the letter;" while we 
understand that the gnostic unfolding of the Scriptures, when faith has already reached an advanced state, 
is likened to reading according to the syllables. 

Further, Esaias the prophet is ordered to take "a new book, and write in it"[7] certain things: the Spirit 
prophesying that through the exposition of the Scriptures there would come afterwards the sacred 
knowledge, which at that period was still unwritten, because not yet known. For it was spoken from the 
beginning to those only who understand. Now that the Saviour has taught the apostles, the unwritten 
rendering' of the written [Scripture] has been handed down also to us, inscribed by the power of God on 
hearts new, according to the renovation of the book. Thus those of highest repute among the Greeks, 
dedicate the fruit of the pomegranate to Hermes, who they say is speech, on account of its interpretation. 
For speech conceals much. Rightly, therefore, Jesus the son of Nave saw Moses, when taken up [to 
heaven], double, -one Moses with the angels, and one on the mountains, honoured with burial in their 
ravines. And Jesus saw this spectacle below, being elevated by the Spirit, along also with Caleb. But both 
do not see similarly But the one descended with greater speed, as if the weight he carried was great; while 
the other, on descending after him, subsequently related the glory which he beheld, being able to perceive 
more than the other as having grown purer; the narrative, in my opinion, showing that knowledge is not the 
privilege of all. Since some look at the body of the Scriptures, the expressions and the names as to the 
body of Moses; while others see through to the thoughts and what it is signified by the names, seeking the 
Moses that is with the angels. 

Many also of those who called to the Lord said, "Son of David, have mercy on me. "[2] A few, too, knew Him 
as the Son of God; as Peter, whom also He pronounced blessed, "for flesh and blood revealed not the truth 
to him, but His Father in heaven," 3-showing that the Gnostic recognises the Son of the Omnipotent, not by 
His flesh conceived in the womb, but by the Father's own power. That it is therefore not only to those who 
read simply that the acquisition of the truth is so difficult, but that not even to those whose prerogative the 
knowledge of the truth is, is the contemplation of it vouch-safed all at once, the history of Moses teaches, 
until, accustomed to gaze, at the Hebrews on the glory of Moses, and the prophets of Israel on the visions of 
angels, so we also become able to look the splendours of truth in the face. 

CHAP. XVI. -GNOSTIC EXPOSITION OF THE DECALOGUE. 

Let the Decalogue be set forth cursorily by us as a specimen for gnostic exposition. 

The number "ten." 

That ten is a sacred number, it is superfluous to say now. And if the tables that were written were the work of 

God, they will be found to exhibit physical creation. For by the "finger of God" is understood the power of 

God, by which the creation of heaven and earth is accomplished; of both of which the tables will be 

understood to be symbols. For the writing and handiwork of God put on the table is the creation of the world. 

And the Decalogue, viewed as an image of heaven, embraces sun and moon, stars, clouds, light, wind, 

water, air, darkness, fire. This is the physical Decalogue of the heaven. 

And the representation of the earth contains men, cattle, reptiles, wild beasts; and of the inhabitants of the 

water, fishes and whales; and again, of the winged tribes, those that are carnivorous, and those that rise mild 

food; and of plants likewise, both fruit-bearing and barren. 

This is the physical Decalogue of the earth. 

And the ark which held them[4] will then be the knowledge of divine and human things and wisdom. [5] 

And perhaps the two tables themselves may be the prophecy of the two covenants. They were accordingly 

mystically renewed, as ignorance along with sin abounded. The commandments are written, then, doubly, 

as appears, for twofold spirits, the ruling and the subject. 

"For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh. "[6] 

And there is a ten in man himself: the five senses, and the power of speech, and that of reproduction; and the 

eighth is the spiritual principle communicated at his creation; and the ninth the ruling faculty of the soul; and 

tenth, there is the distinctive characteristic of the Holy Spirit, which comes to him through faith. 

Besides, in addition to these ten human parts, the law appear to give its injunctions[7] to sight, and hearing, 

and Smell, and touch, and taste, and to the organs subservient to these, which are double-the hands and 

the feet. For such is the formation of man. And the soul is introduced, and previous to it the ruling faculty, by 

which we re. on, not produced in procreation; so that without it there is made up the number ten, of the 

faculties by which all the activity of man is carried out. For in order, straightway on man's entering existence, 

his life begins with sensations. We accordingly assert that rational and ruling power is the cause of the 

constitution of the living creature; also that this, the irrational part, is animated, and is a part of it. Now the vital 

force, in which is comprehended the power of nutrition and growth, and generally of motion, is assigned to 
the carnal spirit, which has great susceptibility of motion, and passes in all directions through the senses 
and the rest of the body, and through the body is the primary subject of sensations. But the power of choice, 
in which investigation, and study, and knowledge, reside, belongs to the ruling faculty. But all the faculties 
are placed in relation to one-the ruling faculty: it is through that man lives, and lives in a certain way. 
Through the corporeal spirit, then, man perceives, desires, rejoices, is angry, is nourished, grows. It is by it, 
too, that thoughts and conceptions advance to actions. And when it masters the desires, the ruling faculty 
reigns. 

The commandment, then, "Thou shalt not lust," says, thou shalt not serve the carnal spirit, but shall rule over 
it; "For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit,"[1] and excites to disorderly conduct against nature; "and the Spirit 
against the flesh" exercises sway, in order that the conduct of the man may be according to nature. 
Is not man, then, rightly said "to have been made in the image of God?"-not in the form of his [corporeal] 
structure; but inasmuch as God creates all things by the Word (<greek>logw</greek>and the man who has 
become a Gnostic performs good actions by the faculty of reason (<greek>tw</greek> 
<greek>logikp</greek>), properly therefore the two tables are also said to mean the commandments that 
were given to the twofold spirits, -those communicated before the law to that which was created, and to the 
ruling faculty; and the movements of the senses are both copied in the mind, and manifested in the activity 
which proceeds from the body. For apprehension results from both combined. Again, as sensation is 
related to the world of sense, so is thought to that of intellect. And actions are twofold-those of thought, those 
of act. 

The First Commandment. 

The first commandment of the Decalogue shows that there is one only Sovereign God who led the people 
from the land of Egypt through the desert to their fatherland; that they might apprehend His power, as they 
were able, by means of the divine works, and withdraw from the idolatry of created things, putting all their 
hope in the true God. 

The Second Commandment. 

The second word[3] intimated that men ought not to take and confer the august power of God (which is the 
name, for this alone were many even yet capable of learning), and transfer His title to things created and 
vain, which human artificers have made, among which" He that is" is not ranked. For in His uncreated 
identity, "He that is" is absolutely alone. 

The Fourth Commandment. 

And the fourth[4] word is that which intimates that the world was created by God, and that He gave us the 
seventh day as a rest, on account of the trouble that there is in life. For God is incapable of weariness, and 
suffering, and want. But we who bear flesh need rest. The seventh day, therefore, is proclaimed a 
rest-abstraction from ills-preparing for the Primal Day, [5] our true rest; which, in truth, is the first creation of 
light, in which all things are viewed and possessed. From this day the first wisdom and knowledge illuminate 
us. For the light of truth-a light true, casting no shadow, is the Spirit of God indivisibly divided to all, who are 
sanctified by faith, holding the place of a luminary, in order to the knowledge of real existences. By following 
Him, therefore, through our whole life, we become impossible; and this is to rest.[6] 

Wherefore Solomon also says, that before heaven, and earth, and all existences. Wisdom had arisen in the 
Almighty; the participation of which -that which is by power, I mean, not that by essence-teaches a man to 
know by apprehension things divine and human. Having reached this point, we must mention these things 
by the way; since the discourse has turned on the seventh and the eighth. For the eighth may possibly turn 
out to be properly the seventh, and the seventh manifestly the sixth, and the latter properly the Sabbath, and 
the seventh a day of work. For the creation of the world was concluded in six days. For the motion of the sun 
from solstice to solstice is completed in six months-in the course of which, at one time the leaves fall, and at 
another plants bud and seeds come to maturity. And they say that the embryo is perfected exactly in the 
sixth month, that is, in one hundred and eighty days in addition to the two and a half, as Polybus the 
physician relates in his book On the Eighth Month, and Aristotle the philosopher in his book On Nature. 
Hence the Pythagoreans, as I think, reckon six the perfect number, from the creation of the world, according 
to the prophet, and call it Meseuthys[1] and Marriage, from its being the middle of the even numbers, that is, 
often and two. For it is manifestly at an equal distance from both. 

And as marriage generates from male and female, so six is generated from the odd number three, which is 
called the masculine number, and the even number two, which is considered the feminine. For twice three 

are six. 

Such, again, is tiie number of tiie most general motions, according to wiiicii all origination takes place-up, 
down, to the right, to the left, forward, backward. Rightly, then, they reckon the number seven motherless and 
childless, interpreting the Sabbath, and figuratively expressing the nature of the rest, in which "they neither 
marry nor are given in marriage any more. "[2] For neither by taking from one number and adding to another 
of those within ten is seven produced; nor when added to any number within the ten does it make up any of 
them. 

And they called eight a cube, counting the fixed sphere along with the seven revolving ones, by which is 
produced "the great year," as a kind of period of recompense of what has been promised. 
Thus the Lord, who ascended the mountain, the fourth, [3] becomes the sixth, and is illuminated all round with 
spiritual light, by laying bare the power proceeding from Him, as far as those selected to see were able to 
behold it, by the Seventh, the Voice, proclaimed to be the Son of God; in order that they, persuaded 
respecting Him, might have rest; while He by His birth, which was indicated by the sixth conspicuously 
marked, becoming the eighth, might appear to be God in a body of flesh, by displaying His power, being 
numbered indeed as a man, but being concealed as to who He was. For six is reckoned in the order of 
numbers, but the succession of the letters acknowledges the character which is not written. In this case, in 
the numbers themselves, each unit is preserved in its order up to seven and eight. But in the number of the 
characters, Zeta becomes six and Eta seven. 

And the character[4] having somehow slipped into writing, should we follow it out thus, the seven became 
six, and the eight seven. 

Wherefore also man is said to have been made on the sixth day, who became faithful to Him who is the sign 
(<greek>tp</greek> <greek>epishmw</greek>[5]), so as straightway to receive the rest of the Lord's 
inheritance. Some such thing also is indicated by the sixth hour in the scheme of salvation, in which man was 
perfected. Further, of the eight, the intermediates are seven; and of the seven, the intervals are shown to be 
six. For that is another ground, in which seven glorifies eight, and "the heavens declare to the heavens the 
glory of God. "[6] 

The sensible types of these, then, are the sounds we pronounce. Thus the Lord Himself is called "Alpha 
and Omega, the beginning and the end, "[7] " by whom all things were made, and without whom not even 
one thing was made. "[8] God's resting is not, then, as some conceive, that God ceased from doing. For, 
being good, if He should ever cease from doing good, then would He cease from being God, which it is 
sacrilege even to say. The resting is, therefore, the ordering that the order of created things should be 
preserved inviolate, and that each of the creatures should cease from the ancient disorder. For the 
creations on the different days followed in a most important succession; so that all things brought into 
existence might have honour from priority, created together in thought, but not being of equal worth. Nor was 
the creation of each signified by the voice, inasmuch as the creative work is said to have made them at 
once. For something must needs have been named first. Wherefore those things were announced first, from 
which came those that were second, all things being originated together from one essence by one power. 
For the will of God was one, in one identity. And how could creation take place in time, seeing time was born 
along with things which exist. 

And now the whole world of creatures born alive, and things that grow, revolves in sevens. The first-born 
princes of the angels, who have the greatest power, are seven. [9] The mathematicians also say that the 
planets, which perform their course around the earth, are seven; by which the Chaldeans think that all which 
concerns mortal life is effected through sympathy, in consequence of which they also undertake to tell things 
respecting the future. 

And of the fixed stars, the Pleiades are seven. And the Bears, by the help of which agriculture and 
navigation are carried through, consist of seven stars. And in periods of seven days the moon undergoes 
its changes. In the first week she becomes half moon; in the second, full moon; and in the third, in her wane, 
again half moon; and in the fourth she disappears. Further, as Seleucus the mathematician lays down, she 
has seven phases. First, from being invisible she becomes crescent-shaped, then half moon, then gibbous 
and full; and in her wane again gibbous, and in like manner half moon and crescent-shaped. 

"On a seven-stringed lyre we shall sing new hymns," 

writes a poet of note, teaching us that the ancient lyre was seven-toned. The organs of the senses situated 
on our face are also seven-two eyes, two passages of hearing, two nostrils, and the seventh the mouth. 
And that the changes in the periods of life take place by sevens, the Elegies of Solan teach thus :- 

"The child, while still an infant, in seven years. 
Produces and puts forth its fence of teeth; 
And when God seven years more completes. 

He shows of puberty's approach the signs; 

And in the third, the beard on growing cheel< 

With down o'erspreads the bloom of changing sl<in; 

And in the fourth septenniad, at his best 

In strength, of manliness he shows the signs; 

And in the fifth, of marriage, now mature. 

And of posterity, the man bethinks; 

Nor does he yet desire vain works to see. 

The seventh and eighth septenniads see him now 

In mind and speech mature, till fifty years; 

And in the ninth he still has vigour left. 

But strength and body are for virtue great 

Less than of yore; when, seven years more, God brings 

To end, then not too soon may he submit to die." 

Again, in diseases the seventh day is that of the crisis; and the fourteenth, in which nature struggles against 
the causes of the diseases. And a myriad such instances are adduced by Hermippus of Berytus, in his 
book On the Number Seven, regarding it as holy.[1] And the blessed David delivers clearly to those who 
know the mystic account of seven and eight, praising thus: "Our years were exercised like a spider. The 
days of our years in them are seventy years; but if in strength, eighty years. And that will be to reign. "[2] That, 
then, we may be taught that the world was originated, and not suppose that God made it in time, prophecy 
adds: "This is the book of the generation: also of the things in them, when they were created in the day that 
God made heaven and earth. "[3] For the expression "when they were created" intimates an indefinite and 
dateless production. But the expression "in the day that God made," that is, in and by which God made "all 
things," and "without which not even one thing was made," points out the activity exerted by the Son. As 
David says, "This is the day which the Lord hath made; let us be glad and rejoice in it; "[4] that is, in 
consequence of the knowledge[5] imparted by Him, let us celebrate the divine festival; for the Word that 
throws light on things hidden, and by whom each created thing came into life and being, is called day. 
And, in fine, the Decalogue, by the letter lota, [6] signifies the blessed name, presenting Jesus, who is the 
Word. 

The Fifth Commandment. 

Now the fifth in order is the command on the honour of father and mother. And it clearly announces God as 
Father and Lord. Wherefore also it calls those who know Him sons and gods. The Creator of the universe is 
their Lord and Father; and the mother is not, as some say, the essence from which we sprang, nor, as others 
teach, the Church, but the divine knowledge and wisdom, as Solomon says, when he terms wisdom "the 
motherof the just," and says that it is desirable for its own sake. And the knowledge of all, again, that is 
lovely and venerable, proceeds from God through the Son. 

The Seventh Commandment. 

This is followed by the command respecting adultery. Now it is adultery, if one, abandoning the 
ecclesiastical and true knowledge, and the persuasion respecting God, accedes to false and incongruous 
opinion, either by deifying any created object, or by making an idol of anything that exists not, so as to 
overstep, or rather step from, knowledge. And to the Gnostic false opinion is foreign, as the true belongs to 
him, and is allied with him. Wherefore the noble apostle calls one of the kinds of fornication, idolatry, [7] in 
following the prophet, who says: "[My people] hath committed fornication with stock and stone. They have 
said to the stock. Thou art my father; and to the stone. Thou hast begotten me. "[8] 

The Sixth Commandment. 

Then follows the command about murder. Now murder is a sure destruction. He, then, that wishes to 
extirpate the true doctrine of God and of immortality, in order to introduce, falsehood, alleging either that the 
universe is not under Providence, or that the world is uncrested, or affirming anything against true doctrine, is 
most pernicious. 

The Eight Commandment. 

And after this is the command respecting theft. As, then, he that steals what is another's, doing great wrong. 

rightly incurs ills suitable to his deserts; so also does he, who arrogates to himself divine works by the art of 
the statuary or the painter, and pronounces himself to be the maker of animals and plants. Likewise those, 
too, who mimic the true philosophy are thieves. Whether one be a husbandman or the father of a child, he is 
an agent in depositing seeds. But it is God who, ministering the growth and perfection of all things, brings the 
things produced to what is in accordance with their nature. But the most, in common also with the 
philosophers, attribute growth and changes to the stars as the primary cause, robbing the Father of the 
universe, as far as in them lies, of His tireless might. 

The Father of the universe, as far as in lies, of His tireless might, e elements, however, and the stars-that is, 
the administrative powers-are ordained for the accomplishment of what is essential to the administration, 
and are influenced and moved by what is commanded to them, in the way in which the Word of the Lord 
leads, since it is the nature of the divine power to work all things secretly. He, accordingly, who alleges that 
he has conceived or made anything which pertains to creation, will suffer the punishment of his impious 
audacity. 

The Tenth Commandment. [1] 

And the tenth is the command respecting all lusts. As, then, he who entertains unbecoming desires is called 
to account; in the same way he is not allowed to desire things false, or to suppose that, of created objects, 
those that are animate have power of themselves, and that in-animate things can at all save or hurt. And 
should one say that an antidote cannot heal or hemlock kill, he is unwittingly deceived. For none of these 
operates except one makes use of the plant and the drug; just as the axe does not without one to cut with it, 
or a saw without one sawing with it. And as they do not work by themselves, but have certain physical 
qualities which accomplish their proper work by the exertion of the artisan; so also, by the universal 
providence of God, through the medium of secondary causes, the operative power is propagated in 
succession to individual objects. 

CHAP. XVII. -PHILOSOPHY CONVEYS ONLY AN IMPERFECT KNOWLEDGE OF GOD. 

But, as appears, the philosophers of the Greeks, while naming God, do not know Him. But their 
philosophical speculations, according to Empedocles, "as passing over the tongue of the multitude, are 
poured out of mouths that know little of the whole." For as art changes the light of the sun into fire by passing 
it through a glass vessel full of water, so also philosophy, catching a spark from the divine Scripture, is 
visible in a few. Also, as all animals breathe the same air, some in one way, others in another, and to a 
different purpose; so also a considerable number of people occupy themselves with the truth, or rather with 
discourse concerning the truth. For they do not say aught respecting God, but expound Him by attributing 
their own affections to God. For they spend life in seeking the probable, not the true. But truth is not taught by 
imitation, but by instruction. For it is not that we may seem good[2] that we believe in Christ, as it is not alone 
for the purpose of being seen, while in the sun, that we pass into the sun. But in the one case for the purpose 
of being warmed; and in the other, we are compelled to be Christians in order to be excellent and good. For 
the kingdom belongs pre-eminently to the violent,[3] who, from investigation, and study, and discipline, reap 
this fruit, that they become kings. 

He, then, who imitates opinion shows also preconception. When then one, having got an inkling of the 
subject, kindles it within in his soul by desire and study, he sets everything in motion afterwards in order to 
know it. For that which one does not apprehend, neither does he desire it, nor does he embrace the 
advantage flowing from it. Subsequently, therefore, the Gnostic at last imitates the Lord, as far as allowed to 
men, having received a sort of quality akin to the Lord Himself, in order to assimilation to God. But those who 
are not proficient in knowledge cannot judge the truth by rule. It is not therefore possible to share in the 
gnostic contemplations, unless we empty ourselves of our previous notions. For the truth in regard to every 
object of intellect and of sense is thus simply universally declared. For instance, we may distinguish the truth 
of painting from that which is vulgar, and decorous music from licentious. There is, then, also a truth of 
philosophy as distinct from the other philosophies, and a true beauty as distinct from the spurious. It is not 
then the partial truths, of which truth is predicated, but the truth itself, that we are to investigate, not seeking to 
learn names. For what is to be investigated respecting God is not one thing, but ten thousand. There is a 
difference between declaring God, and declaring things about God. And to speak generally, in everything 
the accidents are to be distinguished from the essence. 

Suffice it for me to say, that the Lord of all is God; and I say the Lord of all absolutely, nothing being left by 
way of exception. 

Since, then, the forms of truth are two-the names and the things-some discourse of names, occupying 
themselves with the beauties of words: such are the philosophers among the Greeks. But we who are 
Barbarians have the things. Now it was not in vain that the Lord chose to make use of a mean form of body; 

so that no one praising tiie grace and admiring tiie beauty migiit turn iiis bacl< on wiiat was said, and 
attending to wiiat ouglit to be abandoned, miglit be cut off from wliat is intellectual. We must therefore 
occupy ourselves not with the expression, but the meaning. 

To those, then, who are not gifted[1] with the power of apprehension, and are not inclined to knowledge, the 
word is not entrusted; since also the ravens imitate human voices, having no understanding of the thing 
which they say. And intellectual apprehension depends on faith. Thus also Homer said :- 

"Father of men and gods, "[2]- 

knowing not who the Father is, or how He is Father. 

And as to him who has hands it is natural to grasp, and to him who has sound eyes to see the light; so it is 

the natural prerogative of him who has received faith to apprehend knowledge, if he desires, on "the 

foundation" laid, to work, and build up "gold, silver, precious stones. "[3] 

Accordingly he does not profess to wish to participate, but begins to do so. Nor does it belong to him to 

intend, but to be regal, and illuminated, and gnostic. Nor does it appertain to him to wish to grasp things in 

name, but in fact. 

For God, being good, on account of the principal part of the whole creation, seeing He wishes to save it, 

was induced to make the rest also; conferring on them at the beginning this first boon, that of existence. For 

that to be is far better than not to be, will be admitted by every one. Then, according to the capabilities of 

their nature, each one was and is made, advancing to that which is better. 

So there is no absurdity in philosophy having been given by Divine Providence as a preparatory discipline 

for the perfection which is by Christ; unless philosophy is ashamed at learning from Barbarian knowledge 

how to advance to truth. [4] But if "the very hairs are numbered, and the most insignificant motions," how shall 

not philosophy be taken into account ? For to Samson power was given in his hair, in order that he might 

perceive that the worthless arts that refer to the things in this life, which lie and remain on the ground after the 

departure of the soul, were not given without divine power. 

But it is said Providence, from above, from what is of prime importance, as from the head, reaches to all, "as 

the ointment," it is said, "which descends to Aaron's beard, and to the skirt of his garment"[5] (that is, of the 

great High Priest, "by whom all things were made, and without whom not even one thing was made"[6]); not 

to the ornament of the body; for Philosophy is outside of the People, like raiment.[7] The philosophers, 

therefore, who, trained to their own peculiar power of perception by the spirit of perception, when they 

investigate, not a part of philosophy, but philosophy absolutely, testify to the truth in a truth-loving and 

humble spirit; if in the case of good things said by those even who are of different sentiments they advance 

to understanding, through the divine administration, and the ineffable Goodness, which always, as far as 

possible, leads the nature of existences to that which is better. Then, by cultivating the acquaintance not of 

Greeks alone, but also of Barbarians, from the exercise common to their proper intelligence, they are 

conducted to Faith. And when they have embraced the foundation of truth, they receive in addition the power 

of advancing further to investigation. And thence they love to be learners, and aspiring after knowledge, 

haste to salvation. 

Thus Scripture says, that "the spirit of perception" was given to the artificers from God. [8] And this is nothing 

else than Understanding, a faculty of the soul, capable of studying existences, -of distinguishing and 

comparing what succeeds as like and unlike, -of enjoining and forbidding, and of conjecturing the future. 

And it extends not to the arts alone, but even to philosophy itself. 

Why, then, is the serpent called wise? Because even in its wiles there may be found a connection, and 

distinction, and combination, and conjecturing of the future. And so very many crimes are concealed; 

because the wicked arrange for themselves so as by all means to escape punishment. 

And Wisdom being manifold, pervading the whole world, and all human affairs, varies its appellation in 

each case. When it applies itself to first causes, it is called Understanding (<greek>nohsis</greek>). When, 

however, it confirms this by demonstrative reasoning, it is termed Knowledge, and Wisdom, and Science. 

When it is occupied in what pertains to piety, and receives without speculation the primal Word[9] in 

consequence of the maintenance of the operation in it, it is called Faith. In the sphere of things of sense, 

establishing that which appears as being truest, it is Right Opinion. In operations, again, performed by skill 

of hand, it is Art But when, on the other hand, without the study of primary causes, by the observation of 

similarities, and by transposition, it makes any attempt or combination, it is called Experiment. But belonging 

to it, and supreme and essential, is the Holy Spirit, which above all he who, in consequence of [divine] 

guidance, has believed, receives after strong faith. Philosophy, then, partaking of a more exquisite 

perception, as has been shown from the above statements, participates in Wisdom. 

Logical discussion, then, of intellectual subjects, with selection and assent, is called Dialectics; which 

establishes, by demonstration, allegations respecting truth, and demolishes the doubts brought forward. 

Those, then, who assert that philosophy did not come hither from God, all but say that God does not know 

each particular thing, and that He is not the cause of all good things; if, indeed, each of these belongs to the 
class of individual things. But nothing that exists could have subsisted at all, had God not willed. And if He 
willed, then philosophy is from God, He having willed it to be such as it is, for the sake of those who not 
otherwise than by its means would abstain from what is evil. For God knows all things-not those only which 
exist, but those also which shall be-and how each thing shall be. And foreseeing the particular movements, 
"He surveys all things, and hears all things," seeing the soul naked within; and possesses from eternity the 
idea of each thing individually. And what applies to theatres, and to the parts of each object, in looking at, 
looking round, and taking in the whole in one view, applies also to God. For in one glance He views all 
things together, and each thing by itself; but not all things, by way of primary intent. 

Now, then, many things in life take their rise in some exercise of human reason, having received the kindling 
spark from God. For instance, health by medicine, and soundness of body through gymnastics, and wealth 
by trade, have their origin and existence in consequence of Divine Providence indeed, but in consequence, 
too, of human co-operation. Understanding also is from God. 

But God's will is especially obeyed by the free-will of good men. Since many advantages are common to 
good and bad men: yet they are nevertheless advantageous only to men of goodness and probity, for 
whose sake God created them. For it was for the use of good men that the influence which is in God's gifts 
was originated. Besides, the thoughts of virtuous men are produced through the inspiration[1] of God; the 
soul being disposed in the way it is, and the divine will being conveyed to human souls, particular divine 
ministers contributing to such services. For regiments of angels are distributed over the nations and 
cities. [2] And, perchance, some are assigned to individuals. [3] 

The Shepherd, then, cares for each of his sheep; and his closest inspection is given to those who are 
excellent in their natures, and are capable of being most useful. Such are those fit to lead and teach, in 
whom the action of Providence is conspicuously seen; whenever either by instruction, or government, or 
administration, God wishes to benefit. But He wishes at all times. Wherefore He moves those who are 
adapted to useful exertion in the things which pertain to virtue, and peace, and beneficence. But all that is 
characterized by virtue proceeds from virtue, and leads back to virtue. And it is given either in order that 
men may become good, or that those who are so may make use of their natural advantages. For it 
co-operates both in what is general and what is particular. How absurd, then, is it, to those who attribute 
disorder and wickedness to the devil, to make him the bestower of philosophy, a virtuous thing ! For he is 
thus all but made more benignant to the Greeks, in respect of making men good, than the divine providence 
and mind. 

Again, I reckon it is the part of law and of right reason to assign to each one what is appropriate to him, and 
belongs to him, and falls to him. For as the lyre is only for the harper, and the flute for the flute-player; so 
good things are the possessions of good men. As the nature of the beneficent is to do good, as it is of the 
fire to warm, and the light to give light, and a good man will not do evil, or light produce darkness, or fire cold; 
so, again, vice cannot do aught virtuous. For its activity is to do evil, as that of darkness to dim the eyes. 
Philosophy is not, then, the product of vice, since it makes men virtuous; it follows, then, that it is the work of 
God, whose work it is solely to do good. And all things given by God are given and received well. 
Further, if the practice of philosophy does not belong to the wicked, but was accorded to the best of the 
Greeks, it is clear also from what source it was bestowed-manifestly from Providence, which assigns to 
each what is befitting in accordance with his deserts. "[4] 

Rightly, then, to the Jews belonged the Law, and to the Greeks Philosophy, until the Advent; and after that 
came the universal calling to be a peculiar people of righteousness, through the teaching which flows from 
faith, brought together by one Lord, the only God of both Greeks and Barbarians, or rather of the whole race 
of men. We have often called by the name philosophy that portion of truth attained through philosophy, 
although but partial. [1] 

Now, too what is good in the arts as arts, [2] have their beginning from God. For as the doing of anything 
artistically is embraced in the rules of art, so also acting sagaciously is classed under the head of sagacity 
(<greek>fronhsis</greek>). Now sagacity is virtue, and it is its function to know other things, but much more 
especially what belongs to itself. And Wisdom (<greek>Sofia</greek>) being power, is nothing but the 
knowledge of good things, divine and human. 

But "the earth is God's, and the fulness thereof,"[3] says the Scripture, teaching that good things come from 
God to men; it being through divine power and might that the distribution of them comes to the help of man. 
Now the modes of all help and communication from one to another are three. One is, by attending to 
another, as the master of gymnastics, in training the boy. The second is, by assimilation, as in the case of 
one who exhorts another to benevolence by practising it before. The one co-operates with the learner, and 
the other benefits him who receives. The third mode is that by command, when the gymnastic master, no 
longer training the learner, nor showing in his own person the exercise for the boy to imitate, prescribes the 
exercise by name to him, as already proficient in it. 
The Gnostic, accordingly, having received from God the power to be of service, benefits some by 

disciplining tiiem, by bestowing attention on tiiem; otiiers, by exiiorting tiiem, by assimilation; and others, by 
training and teaching them, by command. And certainly he himself is equally benefited by the Lord. Thus, 
then, the benefit that comes from God to men becomes known-angels at the same time lending 
encouragement.[4] For by angels, whether seen or not, the divine power bestows good things. Such was the 
mode adopted in the advent of the Lord. And sometimes also the power "breathes" in men's thoughts and 
reasonings, and "puts in" their hearts "strength" and a keener perception, and furnishes "prowess" and 
"boldness of alacrity"[5] both for researches and deeds. 

But exposed for imitation and assimilation are truly admirable and holy examples of virtue in the actions put 
on record. Further, the department of action is most conspicuous both in the testaments of the Lord, and in 
the laws in force among the Greeks, and also in the precepts of philosophy. 

And to speak comprehensively, all benefit appertaining to life, in its highest reason, proceeding from the 
Sovereign God, the Father who is over all, is consummated by the Son, who also on this account "is the 
Saviour of all men," says the apostle, "but especially of those who believe. "[6] But in respect of its 
immediate reason, it is from those next to each, in accordance with the command and injunction of Him who 
is nearest the First Cause, that is, the Lord. 

CHAP. XVIII. -THE USE OF PHILOSOPHY TO THE GNOSTIC. 

Greek philosophy the recreation of the Gnostic. 

Now our Gnostic always occupies himself with the things of highest importance. But if at any time he has 
leisure and time for relaxation from what is of prime consequence, he applies himself to Hellenic philosophy 
in preference to other recreation, feasting on it as a kind of dessert at supper.[7] Not that he neglects what is 
superior; but that he takes this in addition, as long as proper, for the reasons I mentioned above. But those 
who give their mind to the unnecessary and superfluous points of philosophy, and addict themselves to 
wrangling sophisms alone, abandon what is necessary and most essential, pursuing plainly the shadows of 
words. 

It is well indeed to know all. But the man whose soul is destitute of the ability to reach to acquaintance with 
many subjects of study, will select the principal and better subjects alone. For real science 
(<greek>episthmh</greek>, which we affirm the Gnostic alone possesses) is a sure comprehension 
(<greek>katalhyis</greek>), leading up through true and sure reasons to the knowledge 
(<greek>gnpsis</greek>) of the cause. And he, who is acquainted with what is true respecting any one 
subject, becomes of course acquainted with what is false respecting it. 

Philosophy necessary. 

For truly it appears to me to be a proper point for discussion. Whether we ought to philosophize: for its terms 

are consistent. 

But if we are not to philosophize, what then? (For no one can condemn a thing without first knowing it): the 

consequence, even in that case, is that we must philosophize. [8] First of all, idols are to be rejected. Such, 

then, being the case, the Greeks ought by the Law and the Prophets to learn to worship one God only, the 

only Sovereign; then to be taught by the apostle, "but to us an idol is no, thing in the world, "[1] since nothing 

among created things can be a likeness of God; and further, to be taught that none of those images which 

they worship can be similitudes: for the race of souls is not in form such as the Greeks fashion their idols. For 

souls are invisible; not only those that are rational, but those also of the other animals. And their bodies 

never become parts of the souls themselves, but organs-partly as seats, partly as vehicles-and in other 

cases possessions in various ways. But it is not possible to copy accurately even the likenesses of the 

organs; since, were it so, one might model the sun, as it is seen, and take the likeness of the rainbow in 

colours. 

After abandoning idols, then, they will hear the Scripture, "Unless your righteousness exceed the 

righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees "[2] (who justified themselves in the way of abstinence from 

what was evil),-so as, along with such, perfection as they evinced, and "the loving of your neighbour," to be 

able also to do good,you shall not "be kingly. "[3] 

For intensification of the righteousness which is according to the law shows the Gnostic. So one who is 

placed in the head, which is that which rules its own body-and who advances to the summit of faith, which is 

the knowledge (gnosis) itself, for which all the organs of perception exist-will likewise obtain the highest 

inheritance. 

The primacy of knowledge the apostle shows to those capable of reflection, in writing to those Greeks of 

Corinth, in the following terms: "But having hope, when your faith is increased, that we shall he magnified in 

you according to our rule abundantly, to preach the Gospel beyond you. "[4] He does not mean the 

extension of his preaciiing locally: for he says also that in Achaia faith abounded; and it is related also in the 
Acts of the Apostles that he preached the word in Athens. [5] But he teaches that knowledge (gnosis), which 
is the perfection of faith, goes beyond catechetical instruction, in accordance with the magnitude of the 
Lord's teaching and the rule of the Church. [6] Wherefore also he proceeds to add, "And if I am rude in 
speech, yet I am not in knowledge. "[7] 

Whence is the knowledge of truth? 

But let those who vaunt on account of having apprehended the truth tell us from whom they boast of having 
heard it. They will not say from God, but will admit that it was from men. And if so, it is either from themselves 
that they have learned it lately, as some of them arrogantly boast, or from others like them. But human 
teachers, speaking of God, are not reliable, as men. For he that is man cannot speak worthily the truth 
concerning God: the feeble and mortal [cannot speak worthily] of the Unoriginated and Incorruptible-the 
work, of the Workman. Then he who is incapable of speaking what is true respecting himself, is he not much 
less reliable in what concerns God ? For just as far as man is inferior to God in power, so much feebler is 
man's speech than Him; although he do not declare God, but only speak about God and the divine word. 
For human speech is by nature feeble, and incapable of uttering God. I do not say His name. For to name it 
is common, not to philosophers only, but also to poets. Nor [do I say] His essence; for this is impossible, but 
the power and the works of God. 

Those even who claim God as their teacher, with difficulty attain to a conception of God, grace aiding them 
to the attainment of their modicum of knowledge; accustomed as they are to contemplate the will [of God] by 
the will, and the Holy Spirit by the Holy Spirit. "For the Spirit searches the deep things of God. But the natural 
man receiveth not the things of the Spirit. "[8] 

The only wisdom, therefore, is the God-taught wisdom we possess; on which depend all the sources of 
wisdom, which make conjectures at the truth. 

Intimations of the Teacher's advent 

Assuredly of the coming of the Lord, who has taught us, to men, there were a myriad indicators, heralds, 
preparers, precursors, from the beginning, from the foundation of the world, intimating beforehand by deeds 
and words, prophesying that He would come, and where, and how, what should be the signs. From afar 
certainly Law and Prophecy kept Him in view beforehand. And then the precursor pointed Him out as 
present. After whom the heralds point out by their teaching the virtue of His manifestation. 

Universal diffusion of the Gospel a contrast to philosophy. 

The philosophers, however, chose to [teach philosophy] to the Greeks alone, [9] and not even to all of them; 
but Socrates to Plato, and Plato to Xenocrates, Aristotle to Theophrastus, and Zeno to Cleanthes, who 
persuaded their own followers alone. 

But the word of our Teacher remained not in Judea alone, as philosophy did in Greece; but was diffused 
over the whole world, over every nation, and village, and town, bringing already over to the truth whole 
houses, and each individual of those who heard it by him himself, and not a few of the philosophers 
themselves. 

And if any one ruler whatever prohibit the Greek philosophy, it vanishes forthwith. [1] But our doctrine on its 
very first proclamation was prohibited by kings and tyrants together, as well as particular rulers and 
governors, with all their mercenaries, and in addition by innumerable men, warring against us, and 
endeavouring as far as they could to exterminate it. But it flourishes the more. For it dies not, as human 
doctrine dies, nor fades as a fragile gift. For no gift of God is fragile. But it remains unchecked, though 
prophesied as destined to be persecuted to the end. Thus Plato writes of poetry: "A poet is a light and a 
sacred thing, and cannot write poetry till he be inspired and lose his senses." And Democritus similarly: 
"Whatever things a poet writes with divine afflatus, and with a sacred spirit, are very beautiful." And we know 
what sort of things poets say. And shall no one be amazed at the prophets of God Almighty becoming the 
organs of the divine voice ? 

Having then moulded, as it were, a statue of the Gnostic, we have now shown who he is; indicating in outline, 
as it were, both the greatness and beauty of his character. What he is as to the study of physical 
phenomena shall be shown afterwards, when we begin to treat of the creation of the world.
