Cyprian, The Epistles
Translation: Roberts-Donaldson 1885 (Ante-Nicene Fathers), Public Domain
Source: https://archive.org/details/EarlyChurchFathers38Volumes

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE l.-TO 
DONATUS 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN 

EPISTLE 1.(1) 
TO DONATUS. 

ARGUMENT. --CYPRIAN HAD PROMISED DONATUS THAT HE WOULD HAVE A 
DISCOURSE WITH HIM CONCERNING THINGS DIVINE, AND NOW BEING REMINDED OF 
HIS PROMISE, HE FULFILS IT. COMMENDING AT LENGTH THE GRACE OF GOD 
CONFERRED IN BAPTISM, HE DECLARES HOW HE HAD BEEN CHANGED THEREBY; 
AND, FINALLY, POINTING OUT THE ERRORS OF THE WORLD, HE EXHORTS TO 
CONTEMPT OF IT AND TO READING AND PRAYER. 

1. CAECILIUS CYPRIAN to Donatus sends, greeting. You rightly remind me, dearest Donatus for I not only 
remember my promise, but I confess that this is the appropriate time for its fulfilment, when the vintage 
festival invites the mind to unbend in repose, and to enjoy the annual and appointed respite of the declining 
year.(2) Moreover, the place is in accord with the season, and the pleasant aspect of the gardens 
harmonizes with the gentle breezes of a mild autumn in soothing and cheering the senses. In such a place 
as this it is delightful to pass the day in discourse, and, by the (study of the sacred) parables, (3) to train the 
conscience of the breast to the apprehension of the divine precepts. And that no profane intruder may 
interrupt our converse, nor any unrestrained clatter of a noisy household disturb it, let us seek this bower.(4) 
The neighbouring thickets ensure us solitude, and the vagrant trailings of the vine branches creeping in 
pendent mazes among the reeds that support them have made for us a porch vines and a leafy shelter. 
Pleasantly here we clothe our thoughts in words; and while we gratify our eyes with the agreeable outlook 
upon trees and vines, the mind is at once instructed by what we hear, and nourished by what we see, 
although at the present time your only pleasure and your only interest is in our discourse. Despising the 
pleasures of sight, your eye is now fixed on me. With your mind as well as your ears you are altogether a 
listener; and a listener, too, with an eagerness proportioned to your affection. 

2. And yet, of what kind or of what amount is anything that my mind is likely to communicate to yours? The 
poor mediocrity of my shallow understanding produces a very limited harvest, and enriches the soil with no 
fruitful deposits. Nevertheless, with such powers as I have, I will set about the matter; for the subject itself on 
which I am about to speak will assist me. In courts of justice, in the public assembly, in political debate, a 
copious eloquence may be the glory of a voluble ambition; but in speaking of the Lord God, a chaste 
simplicity of expression strives for the conviction of faith rather with the substance, than with the powers, of 
eloquence. Therefore accept from me things, not clever but weighty, words, not decked up to charm a 
popular audience with cultivated rhetoric, but simple and fitted by their unvarnished truthfulness for the 
proclamation of the divine mercy. Accept what is felt before it is spoken, what has not been accumulated 
with tardy painstaking during the lapse of years, but has been inhaled in one breath of ripening grace. 

3. While I was still lying in darkness and gloomy night, wavering hither and thither, tossed about on the foam 
of this boastful age, and uncertain of my wandering steps, knowing nothing of my real life, and remote from 
truth and light, I used to regard it as a difficult matter, and especially as difficult in respect of my character at 
that time, that a man should be capable of being born again(5)-a truth which the divine mercy had 
announced for my salvation, -and that a man quickened to a new life in the layer of saving water should be 
able to put off what he had previously been; and, although retaining all his bodily structure, should be 
himself changed in heart and soul. "How," said I, "is such a conversion possible, that there should be a 
sudden and rapid divestment of all which, either innate in us has hardened in the corruption of our material 
nature, or acquired by us has become inveterate by long accustomed use? These things have become 
deeply and radically engrained within us. When does he learn thrift who has been used to liberal banquets 
and sumptuous feasts? And he who has been glittering in gold and purple, and has been celebrated for his 
costly attire, when does he reduce himself to ordinary and simple clothing? One who has felt the charm of 
the fasces and of civic honours shrinks from becoming a mere private and inglorious citizen. The man who 
is attended by crowds of clients, and dignified by the numerous association of an officious train, regards it 
as a punishment when he is alone. It is inevitable, as it ever has been, that the love of wine should entice. 

pride inflate, anger inflame, covetousness disquiet, cruelty stimulate, ambition delight, lust hasten to ruin, 
with allurements that will not let go their hold." 

4. These were my frequent thoughts. For as I myself was held in bonds by the innumerable errors of my 
previous life, from which I did not believe that I could by possibility be delivered, so I was disposed to 
acquiesce in my clinging vices; and because I despaired of better things, I used to indulge my sins as if 
they were actually parts of me, and indigenous to me. But after that, by the help of the water of new birth, the 
stain of former years had been washed away, and a light from above, serene and pure, had been infused 
into my reconciled heart,-after that, by the agency of the Spirit breathed from heaven, a second birth had 
restored me to a new man;-then, in a wondrous manner, doubtful things at once began to assure 
themselves to me, hidden things to be revealed, dark things to be enlightened, what before had seemed 
difficult began to suggest a means of accomplishment, what had been thought impossible, to be capable of 
being achieved; so that I was enabled to acknowledge that what previously, being born of the flesh, had 
been living in the practice of sins, was of the earth earthly, but had now begun to be of God, and was 
animated by the Spirit of holiness. You yourself assuredly know and recollect as well as I do what was taken 
away from us, and what was given to us by that death of evil, and that life of virtue. You yourself know this 
without my information. Anything like boasting in one's own praise is hateful, although we cannot in reality 
boast but only be grateful for whatever we do not ascribe to man's virtue but declare to be the gift of God; so 
that now we sin not is the beginning of the work of faith, whereas that we sinned before was the result of 
human error. All our power is of God; I say, of God. From Him we have life, from Him we have strength, by 
power derived and conceived from Him we do, while yet in this world, foreknow the indications of things to 
come. Only let fear be the keeper of innocence, that the Lord, who of His mercy has flowed(1) into our hearts 
in the access of celestial grace, may be kept by righteous submissiveness in the hostelry of a grateful mind, 
that the assurance we have gained may not beget carelessness, and so the old enemy creep upon us 
again. 

5. But if you keep the way of innocence, the way of righteousness, if you walk with a firm and steady step, if, 
depending on God with your whole strength and with your whole heart, you only be what you have begun to 
be, liberty and power to do is given you in proportion to the increase of your spiritual grace. For there is not, 
as is the case with earthly benefits, any measure or stint in the dispensing of the heavenly gift. The Spirit 
freely flowing forth is restrained by no limits, is checked by no closed barriers within certain bounded 
spaces; it flows perpetually, it is exuberant in its affluence. Let our heart only be athirst, and be ready to 
receive: in the degree in which we bring to it a capacious faith, in that measure we draw from it an 
overflowing grace. Thence is given power, with modest chastity, with a sound mind, with a simple voice, with 
unblemished virtue, that is able to quench the virus of poisons for the healing of the sick, to purge out the 
stains of foolish souls by restored health, to bid peace to those hat are at enmity, repose to the violent, 
gentleness to the unruly, -by startling threats to force to avow themselves the impure and vagrant spirits that 
have betaken themselves into the bodies of men whom they purpose to destroy, to drive them with heavy 
blows to come out of them, to stretch them out struggling, howling, groaning with increase of constantly 
renewing pain, to beat them with scourges, to roast them with fire: the matter is carded on there, but is not 
seen; the strokes inflicted are hidden, but the penalty is manifest. Thus, in respect of what we have already 
begun to be, the Spirit that we have received possesses its own liberty of action; while in that we have not 
yet changed our body and members, the carnal view is still darkened by the clouds of this world. How great 
is this empire of the mind, and what a power it has, not alone that itself is withdrawn from the mischievous 
associations of the world, as one who is purged and pure can suffer no stain of a hostile irruption, but that it 
becomes still greater and stronger in its might, so that it can rule over all the imperious host of the attacking 
adversary with its sway! 

6. But in order that the characteristics of the divine may shine more brightly by the development of the truth, I 
will give you light to apprehend it, the obscurity caused by sin being wiped away. I will draw away the veil 
from the darkness of this hidden world. For a brief space conceive yourself to be transported to one of the 
loftiest peaks of some inaccessible mountain, thence gaze on the appearances of things lying below you, 
and with eyes turned in various directions look upon the eddies of the billowy world, while you yourself are 
removed from earthly contacts,-you will at once begin to feel compassion for the world, and with 
self-recollection and increasing gratitude to God, you will rejoice with all the greater joy that you have 
escaped it. Consider the roads blocked up by robbers, the seas beset with pirates, wars scattered all over 
the earth with the bloody horror of camps. The whole world is wet with mutual blood; and murder, which in the 
case of an individual is admitted to be a crime, is called a virtue when it is committed wholesale. Impunity is 
claimed for the wicked deeds, not on the plea that they are guiltless, but because the cruelty is perpetrated 
on a grand scale. 

7. And now, if you turn your eyes and your regards to the cities themselves, you will behold a concourse 
more fraught with sadness than any solitude. The gladiatorial games are prepared, that blood may gladden 
the lust of cruel eyes. The body is fed up with stronger food, and the vigorous mass of limbs is enriched with 

brawn and muscle, that the wretch fattened for punishment may die a harder death. IVIan is slaughtered that 
man may be gratified, and the skill that is best able to kill is an exercise and an art. Crime is not only 
committed, but it is taught. What can be said more inhuman,-what more repulsive? Training is undergone to 
acquire the power to murder, and the achievement of murder is its glory. What state of things, I pray you, can 
that be, and what can it be like, in which men, whom none have condemned, offer themselves to the wild 
beasts-men of ripe age, of sufficiently beautiful person, clad in costly garments? Living men, they are 
adorned for a voluntary death; wretched men, they boast of their own miseries. They fight with beasts, not for 
their crime, but for their madness. Fathers look on their own sons; a brother is in the arena, and his sister is 
hard by; and although a grander display of pomp increases the price of the exhibition, yet, oh shame! even 
the mother will pay the increase in order that she may be present at her own miseries. And in looking upon 
scenes so frightful and so impious and so deadly, they do not seem to be aware that they are parricides 
with their eyes. 

8. Hence turn your looks to the abominations, not less to be deplored, of another kind of spectacle. (1) In the 
theatres also you will behold what may well cause you grief and shame. It is the tragic buskin which relates 
in verse the crimes of ancient days. The old horrors(2) of parricide and incest are unfolded in action 
calculated to express the image of the truth, so that, as the ages pass by, any crime that was formerly 
committed may not be forgotten. Each generation is reminded by what it hears, that whatever has once 
been done may be done again. Crimes never die out by the lapse of ages; wickedness is never abolished 
by process of time; impiety is never buried in oblivion. Things which have now ceased to be actual deeds 
of vice become examples. In the mimes, moreover, by the teaching of infamies, the spectator is attracted 
either to reconsider what he may have done in secret, or to hear what he may do. Adultery is learnt while it is 
seen; and while the mischief having public authority panders to vices, the matron, who perchance had gone 
to the spectacle a modest woman, returns from it immodest. Still further, what a degradation of morals it is, 
what a stimulus to abominable deeds, what food for vice, to be polluted by histrionic gestures, against the 
covenant and law of one's birth, to gaze in detail upon the endurance of incestuous abominations! Men are 
emasculated, and all the pride and vigour of their sex is effeminated in the disgrace of their enervated body; 
and he is most pleasing there who has most completely broken down the man into the woman. He grows 
into praise by virtue of his crime; and the more he is degraded, the more skilful he is considered to be. Such 
a one is looked upon-oh shame! and looked upon with pleasure. And what cannot such a creature 
suggest? He inflames the senses, he flatters the affections, he drives out the more vigorous conscience of a 
virtuous breast; nor is there wanting authority for the enticing abomination, that the mischief may creep upon 
people with a less perceptible approach. They picture Venus immodest. Mars adulterous; and that Jupiter 
of theirs not more supreme in dominion than in vice, inflamed with earthly love in the midst of his own 
thunders, now growing white in the feathers of a swan, now pouring down in a golden shower, now breaking 
forth by the help of birds to violate the purity of boys. And now put the question. Can he who looks upon such 
things be healthyminded or modest? Men imitate the gods whom they adore, and to such miserable beings 
their crimes become their religion. (3) 

9. Oh, if placed on that lofty watch-tower you could gaze into the secret places-if you could open the closed 
doors of sleeping chambers, and recall their dark recesses to the perception of sight, -you would behold 
things done by immodest persons which no chaste eye could look upon; you would see what even to see is 
a crime; you would see what people embruted with the madness of vice deny that they have done, and yet 
hasten to do,-men with frenzied lusts rushing upon men, doing things which afford no gratification even to 
those who do them. I am deceived if the man who is guilty of such things as these does not accuse others of 
them. The depraved maligns the depraved, and thinks that he himself, though conscious of the guilt, has 
escaped, as if consciousness were not a sufficient condemnation. The same people who are accusers in 
public are criminals in private, condemning themselves at the same time as they condemn the culprits; they 
denounce abroad what they commit at home, willingly doing what, when they have done, they accuse, -a 
daring which assuredly is fitly mated with vice, and an impudence quite in accordance with shameless 
people. And I beg you not to wonder at the things that persons of this kind speak: the offence of their mouths 
in words is the least of which they are guilty. (1) 

1 0. But after considering the public roads full of pitfalls, after battles of many kinds scattered abroad over the 
whole world, after exhibitions either bloody or infamous, after the abominations of lust, whether exposed for 
sale in brothels or hidden within the domestic walls -abominations, the audacity of which is greater in 
proportion to the secrecy of the crime, -possibly you may think that the Forum at least is free from such 
things, that it is neither exposed to exasperating wrongs, nor polluted by the association of criminals. Then 
turn your gaze in that direction: there you will discover things more odious than ever, so that thence you will 
be more desirous of turning away your eyes, although the laws are carved on twelve tables, and the 
statutes are publicly prescribed on brazen tablets. Yet wrong is done in the midst of the laws themselves; 
wickedness is committed in the very face of the statutes; innocence is not preserved even in the place 
where it is defended. By turns the rancour of disputants rages; and when peace is broken among the 

togas, (2) the Forum echoes with the madness of strife. There close at hand is the spear and the sword, and 
the executioner also; there is the claw that tears, the rack that stretches, the fire that burns up,-more tortures 
for one poor human body than it has limbs. And in such cases who is there to help? One's patron? He 
makes a feint, and deceives. The judge? But he sells his sentence. He who sits to avenge crimes commits 
them, and the judge becomes the culprit, in order that the accused may perish innocently. Crimes are 
everywhere common; and everywhere in the multiform character of sin, the pernicious poison acts by 
means of degraded minds. One man forges a will, another by a capital fraud makes a false deposition; on 
the one hand, children are cheated of their inheritances, on the other, strangers are endowed with their 
estates. The opponent makes his charge, the false accuser attacks, the witness defames, on all sides the 
venal impudence of hired voices sets about the falsification of charges, while in the meantime the guilty do 
not even perish with the innocent. There is no fear about the laws; no concern for either inquisitor or judge; 
when the sentence can be bought off for money, it is not cared for. It is a crime now among the guilty to be 
innocent; whoever does not imitate the wicked is an offence to them. The laws have come to terms with 
crimes, and whatever is public has begun to be allowed. What can be the modesty, what can be the 
integrity, that prevails there, when there are none to condemn the wicked, and one only meets with those 
who ought themselves to be condemned? 

1 1 . But that we may not perchance appear as if we were picking out extreme cases, and with the view of 
disparagement were seeking to attract your attention to those things whereof the sad and revolting view 
may offend the gaze of a better conscience, I will now direct you to such things as the world in its ignorance 
accounts good. Among these also you will behold things that will shock you. In respect of what you regard 
as honours, of what you consider the fasces, what you count affluence in riches, what you think power in the 
camp, the glory of the purple in the magisterial office, the power of licence in the chief command, -there is 
hidden the virus of ensnaring mischief, and an appearance of smiling wickedness, joyous indeed, but the 
treacherous deception of hidden calamity. Just as some poison, in which the flavour having been 
medicated with sweetness, craftily mingled in its deadly juices, seems, when taken, to be an ordinary 
draught, but when it is drunk up, the destruction that you have swallowed assails you. You see, forsooth, that 
man distinguished by his brilliant dress, glittering, as he thinks, in his purple. Yet with what baseness has he 
purchased this glitter! What contempts of the proud has he had first to submit to! what haughty thresholds 
has he, as an early courtier, besieged! How many scornful footsteps of arrogant great men has he had to 
precede, thronged in the crowd of clients, that by and by a similar procession might attend and precede him 
with salutations,-a train waiting not upon his person, but upon his power! for he has no claim to be regarded 
for his character, but for his fasces. Of these, finally, you may see the degrading end, when the time-serving 
sycophant has departed, and the hanger-on, deserting them, has defiled the exposed side of the man who 
has retired into a private condition. (1) It is then that the mischiefs done to the squandered family-estate smite 
upon the conscience, then the losses that have exhausted the fortune are known,-expenses by which the 
favour of the populace was bought, and the people's breath asked for with fickle and empty entreaties. 
Assuredly, it was a vain and foolish boastfulness to have desired to set forth in the gratification of a 
disappointing spectacle, what the people would not receive, and what would ruin the magistrates. 

12. But those, moreover, whom you consider rich, who add forests to forests, and who, excluding the poor 
from their neighbourhood, stretch out their fields far and wide into space without any limits, who possess 
immense heaps of silver and gold and mighty sums of money, either in built-up heaps or in buried 
stores,-even in the midst of their riches those are torn to pieces by the anxiety of vague thought, lest the 
robber should spoil, lest the murderer should attack, test the envy of some wealthier neighbour should 
become hostile, and harass them with malicious lawsuits. Such a one enjoys no security either in his food or 
in his sleep. In the midst of the banquet he sighs, although he drinks from a jewelled goblet; and when his 
luxurious bed has enfolded his body, languid with feasting, in its yielding bosom, he lies wakeful in the midst 
of the down; nor does he perceive, poor wretch, that these things are merely gilded torments, that he is held 
in bondage by his gold, and that he is the slave of his luxury and wealth rather than their master. And oh, the 
odious blindness of perception, and the deep darkness of senseless greed! although he might disburden 
himself and get rid of the load, he rather continues to brood over his vexing wealth, -he goes on obstinately 
clinging to his tormenting hoards. From him there is no liberality to dependents, no communication to the 
poor. And yet such people call that their own money, which they guard with jealous labour, shut up at home 
as if it were another's, and from which they derive no benefit either for their friends, for their children, or, in 
fine, for themselves. Their possession amounts to this only, that they can keep others from possessing it; 
and oh, what a marvellous perversion of names! they call those things goods, which they absolutely put to 
none but bad uses. 

13. Or think you that even those are secure, -that those at least are safe with some stable permanence 
among the chaplets of honour and vast wealth, whom, in the glitter of royal palaces, the safeguard of 
watchful arms surrounds? They have greater fear than others. A man is constrained to dread no less than he 
is dreaded. Exaltation exacts its penalties equally from the more powerful, although he may be hedged in 

with bands of satellites, and may guard his person with the enclosure and protection of a numerous retinue. 
Even as he does not allow his inferiors to feel security, it is inevitable that he himself should want the sense 
of security. The power of those whom power makes terrible to others, is, first of all, terrible to themselves. It 
smiles to rage, it cajoles to deceive, it entices to slay, it lifts up to cast down. With a certain usury of mischief, 
the greater the height of dignity and honours attained, the greater is the interest of penalty required. 

14. Hence, then, the one peaceful and trustworthy tranquillity, the one solid and firm and constant security, is 
this, for a man to withdraw from these eddies of a distracting world, and, anchored on the ground of the 
harbour of salvation, to lift his eyes from earth to heaven; and having been admitted to the gift of God, and 
being already very near to his God in mind, he may boast, that whatever in human affairs others esteem lofty 
and grand, lies altogether beneath his consciousness. He who is actually greater than the world can crave 
nothing, can desire nothing, from the world. How stable, how free from all shocks is that safeguard; how 
heavenly the protection in its perennial blessings, -to be loosed from the snares of this entangling world, 
and to be purged from earthly dregs, and fitted for the light of eternal immortality! He will see what crafty 
mischief of the foe that previously attacked us has been in progress against us. We are constrained to have 
more love for what we shall be, by being allowed to know and to condemn what we were. Neither for this 
purpose is it necessary to pay a price either in the way of bribery or of labour; so that man's elevation or 
dignity or power should be begotten in him with elaborate effort; but it is a gratuitous gift from God, and it is 
accessible to all. As the sun shines spontaneously, as the day gives light, as the fountain flows, as the 
shower yields moisture, so does the heavenly Spirit infuse itself into us. When the soul, in its gaze into 
heaven, has recognised its Author, it rises higher than the sun, and far transcends all this earthly power, and 
begins to be that which it believes itself to be. (2) 

15. Do you, however, whom the celestial warfare has enlisted in the spiritual camp, only observe a 
discipline uncorrupted and chastened in the virtues of religion. Be constant as well in prayer as in reading; 
now speak with God, now let God speak with you, let Him instruct you in His precepts, let Him direct you. 
Whom He has made rich, none shall make poor; for, in fact, there can be no poverty to him whose breast 
has once been supplied with heavenly food. Ceilings enriched with gold, and houses adorned with mosaics 
of costly marble, will seem mean to you, now when you know that it is you yourself who are rather to be 
perfected, you who are rather to be adorned, and that that dwelling in which God has dwelt as in a temple, in 
which the Holy Spirit has begun to make His abode, is of more importance than all others. Let us embellish 
this house with the colours of innocence, let us enlighten it with the light of justice: this will never fall into 
decay with the wear of age, nor shall it be defiled by the tarnishing of the colours of its walls, nor of its gold. 
Whatever is artificially beautified is perishing; and such things as contain not the reality of possession afford 
no abiding assurance to their possessors. But this remains in a beauty perpetually vivid, in perfect honour, 
in permanent splendour. It can neither decay nor be destroyed; it can only be fashioned into greater 
perfection when the body returns to it. 

1 6. These things, dearest Donatus, briefly for the present. For although what you profitably hear delights 
your patience, indulgent in its goodness, your well-balanced mind, and your assured faith-and nothing is so 
pleasant to your ears as what is pleasant to you in God,-yet, as we are associated as neighbours, and are 
likely to talk together frequently, we ought to have some moderation in our conversation; and since this is a 
holiday rest, and a time of leisure, whatever remains of the day, now that the sun is sloping towards the 
evening, (1) let us spend it in gladness, nor let even the hour of repast be without heavenly grace. Let the 
temperate meal resound with psalms;(2) and as your memory is tenacious and your voice musical, 
undertake this office, as is your wont. You will provide a better entertainment for your dearest friends, if, while 
we have something spiritual to listen to, the sweetness of religious music charm our ears. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE ll.-FROM THE 
ROMAN CLERGY TO THE CARTHAGINIAN CLERGY, 
ABOUT THE RETIREMENT OF THE BLESSED 
CYPRIAN 

EPISTLE 11.(3) 

FROM THE ROMAN CLERGY TO THE CARTHAGINIAN CLERGY, ABOUT THE 
RETIREMENT OF THE BLESSED CYPRIAN. 

ARGUMENT. --THE ROMAN CLERGY HAD LEARNT FROM CREMENTIUS THE 
SUB-DEACON, THAT IN THE TIME OF PERSECUTION CYPRIAN HAD WITHDRAWN 
HIMSELF. THEREFORE, WITH THEIR ACCUSTOMED ZEAL FOR THE FAITH, THEY 
REMIND THE CARTHAGINIAN CLERGY OF THEIR DUTY, AND INSTRUCT THEM WHAT 
TO DO IN THE CASE OF THE LAPSED, DURING THE INTERVAL OF THE BISHOP'S 
ABSENCE. 

1 . We have been informed by Crementius the sub-deacon, who came to us from you, that the blessed 
father(4) Cyprian has for a certain reason withdrawn; "in doing which he acted quite rightly, because he is a 
person of eminence, and because a conflict is impending," which God has allowed in the world, for the sake 
of cooperating with His servants in their struggle against the adversary, and was, moreover, willing that this 
conflict should show to angels and to men that the victor shall be crowned, while the vanquished shall in 
himself receive the doom which has been made manifest to us. Since, moreover, it devolves upon us who 
appear to be placed on high, in the place of a shepherd, (5) to keep watch over the flock; if we be found 
neglectful, it will be said to us, as it was said to our predecessors also, who in such wise negligent had been 
placed in charge, that "we have not sought for that which was lost, and have not corrected the wanderer, and 
have not bound up that which was broken, but have eaten their milk, and been clothed with their wool;"(6) 
and then also the Lord Himself, fulfilling what had been written in the law and the prophets, teaches, saying, 

"I am the good shepherd, who lay down my life for the sheep. But the hireling, whose own the sheep are not, 
seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth, and the wolf scatter-eth them. "(7) To Simon, too. 
He speaks thus: "Lovestthou me? He answered, I do love Thee. He saith to him. Feed my sheep. "(8) We 
know that this saying arose out of the very circumstance of his withdrawal, and the rest of the disciples did 
likewise. (9) 

2. We are unwilling, therefore, beloved brethren, that you should be found hirelings, but we desire you to be 
good shepherds, since you are aware that no slight danger threatens you if you do not exhort our brethren to 
stand stedfast in the faith, so that the brotherhood be not absolutely rooted out, as being of those who rush 
headlong into idolatry. Neither is it in words only that we exhort you to this; but you will be able to ascertain 
from very many who come to you from us, that, God blessing us, we both have done and still do all these 
things ourselves with all anxiety and worldly risk, having before our eyes rather the fear of God and eternal 
sufferings than the fear of men and a short-lived discomfort, not forsaking the brethren, but exhorting them to 
stand firm in the faith, and to be ready to go with the Lord. And we have even recalled those who were 
ascending(l) to do that to which they were constrained. The Church stands in faith, notwithstanding that 
some have been driven to fall by very terror, whether that they were persons of eminence, or that they were 
afraid, when seized, with the fear of man: these, however, we did not abandon, although they were 
separated from us, but exhorted them, and do exhort them, to repent, if in any way they may receive pardon 
from Him who is able to grant it; test, haply, if they should be deserted by us, they should become worse. 

3. You see, then, brethren, that you also ought to do the like, so that even those who have fallen may amend 
their minds by your exhortation; and if they should be seized once more, may confess, and may so make 
amends for their previous sin. And there are other matters which are incumbent on you, which also we have 
here added, as that if any who may have fallen into this temptation begin to be taken with sickness, and 
repent of what they have done, and desire communion, it should in any wise be granted them. Or if you have 
widows or bedridden people(2) who are unable to maintain themselves, or those who are in prisons or are 
excluded from their own dwellings, these ought in all cases to have some to minister to them. Moreover, 
catechumens when seized with sickness ought not to be deceived, (3) but help is to be afforded them. And, 

as matter of the greatest importance, if the bodies of the martyrs and others be not buried, a considerable 
risl< is incurred by those whose duty it is to do this office. By whomsoever of you, then, and on whatever 
occasion this duty may have been performed, we are sure that he is regarded as a good servant,-as one 
who has been faithful in the least, and will be appointed ruler over ten cities. May God, however, who gives 
all things to them that hope in Him, grant to us that we may all be found in these works. The brethren who are 
in bonds greet you, as do the elders, and the whole Church, which itself also with the deepest anxiety keeps 
watch over all who call on the name of the Lord. And we likewise beg you in your turn to have us in 
remembrance. Know, moreover, that Bassianus has come to us; and we request of you who have a zeal for 
God, to send a copy of this letter to whomsoever you are able, as occasions may serve, or make your own 
opportunities, or send a message, that they may stand firm and stedfast in the faith. We bid you, beloved 
brethren, ever heartily farewell. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE lll.-TO THE 
PRESBYTERS AND DEACONS ABIDING AT ROME. A.D 
250 

d 

EPISTLE 111.(4) 

TO THE PRESBYTERS AND DEACONS ABIDING 

AT ROME. A.D. 250. 

ARGUMENT. --THIS IS A FAMILIAR AND FRIENDLY EPISTLE; SO THAT IT REQUIRES NO 
FORMAL ARGUMENT, ESPECIALLY AS IT CAN BE SUFFICIENTLY GATHERED FROM THE 
TITLE ITSELF. THE LETTER OF THE ROMAN CLERGY, TO WHICH CYPRIAN IS 
REPLYING, IS MISSING. 

1 . Cyprian to the elders and deacons, brethren abiding at Rome, sends, greeting. When the report of the 
departure of the excellent man, my colleague, (5) was still uncertain among us, my beloved brethren, and I 
was wavering doubtfully in my opinion on the matter, I received a letter sent to me from you by Grementius 
the sub-deacon, in which I was most abundantly informed of his glorious end; and I rejoiced greatly that, in 
harmony with the integrity of his administration, an honourable consummation also attended him. Wherein, 
moreover, I greatly congratulate you, that you honour his memory with a testimony so public and so 
illustrious, so that by your means is made known to me, not only what is glorious to you in connection with the 
memory of your bishop, but what ought to afford to me also an example of faith and virtue. For in proportion 
as the fall of a bishop is an event which tends ruinously to the fall of his followers, so on the other hand it is a 
useful and helpful thing when a bishop, by the firmness of his faith, sets himself forth to his brethren as an 
object of imitation. 

2. I have, moreover, read another epistle, (6) in which neither the person who wrote nor the persons to whom 
it was written were plainly declared; and inasmuch as in the same letter both the writing and the matter, and 
even the paper itself, gave me the idea that something had been taken away, or had been changed from 
the original, I have sent you back the epistle as it actually came to hand, that you may examine whether it is 
the very same which you gave to Grementius the sub-deacon, to carry. For it is a very serious thing if the 
truth of a clerical letter is corrupted by any falsehood or deceit. In order, then, that we may know this, 
ascertain whether the writing and subscription are yours, and write me again what is the truth of the matter. I 
bid you, dearest brethren, ever heartily farewell. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLES IV & V.-TO 
THE PRESBYTERS AND DEACONS 

EPISTLE IV.(1) TO THE PRESBYTERS AND DEACONS. 

ARGUMENT. --CYPRIAN EXHORTS HIS CLERGY FROM HIS PLACE OF RETIREMENT, 
THAT IN HIS ABSENCE THEY SHOULD BE UNITED;THAT NOTHING SHOULD BE 
WANTING TO PRISONERS OR TO THE REST OF THE POOR; AND FURTHER, THAT 
THEY SHOULD KEEP THE PEOPLE IN QUIET, LEST, IF THEY SHOULD RUSH IN 
CROWDS TO VISIT THE MARTYRS IN PRISON, THIS PRIVILEGE SHOULD AT LENGTH BE 
FORBIDDEN THEM. A.D. 250. 

1 . Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his beloved brethren, greeting. Being by the grace of God in 
safety, dearest brethren, I salute you, rejoicing that I am informed of the prosperity of all things in respect of 
your safety also; and as the condition of the place(2) does not permit me to be with you now, I beg you, by 
your faith and your religion, to discharge there both your own office and mine, that there may be nothing 
wanting either to discipline or diligence. In respect of means, moreover, for meeting the expenses, whether 
for those who, having confessed their Lord with a glorious voice, have been put in prison, or for those who 
are labouring in poverty and want, and still stand fast in the Lord, I entreat that nothing be wanting, since the 
whole of the small sum which was collected there was distributed among the clergy for cases of that kind, 
that many might have means whence they could assist the necessities and burthens of individuals. 
2. 1 beg also that there may be no lack, on your parts, of wisdom and carefulness to preserve peace. For 
although from their affection the brethren are eager to approach and to visit those good confessors, on 
whom by their glorious beginnings the divine consideration has already shed a brightness, yet I think that 
this eagerness must be cautiously indulged, and not in crowds,-not in numbers collected together at once', 
lest from this very thing ill-will be aroused, and the means of access be denied, and thus, while we insatiably 
wish for all, we lose all. Take counsel, therefore, and see that this may be more safely managed with 
moderation, so that the presbyters also, who there offer(3) with the confessors, may one by one take turns 
with the deacons individually; because, by thus changing the persons and varying the people that come 
together, suspicion is diminished. For, meek and humble in all things, as befits the servants of God, we 
ought to accommodate ourselves to the times, and to provide for quietness, and to have regard to the 
people. I bid you, brethren, beloved and dearly longed-for, always heartily farewell; and have me in 
remembrance. Greet all the brotherhood. Victor the deacon, and those who are with me, greet you. Farewell! 

EPISTLE V.(4) TO THE PRESBYTERS AND DEACONS. 

ARGUMENT. -THE ARGUMENT OF THIS LETTER IS NEARLY THE SAME AS THAT OF 
THE PRECEDING ONE, EXCEPT THAT THE WRITER DIRECTS THE CONFESSORS ALSO 
TO BE ADMONISHED BY THE CLERGY OF THEIR DUTY, TO GIVE ATTENTION TO 
HUMILITY, AND OBEY THE PRESBYTERS AND DEACONS. HIS OWN RETIREMENT 
INCIDENTALLY FURNISHES AN OCCASION FOR THIS. 

1 . Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his brethren, greeting. I had wished indeed, beloved brethren, 
with this my letter to greet the whole of my clergy in health and safety. But since the stormy time which has in 
a great measure overwhelmed my people, has, moreover, added this enhancement to my sorrows, that it 
has touched with its desolation even a portion of the clergy, I pray the Lord that, by the divine mercy, I may 
hereafter greet you at all events as safe, who, as I have learned, stand fast both in faith and virtue. And 
although some reasons might appear to urge me to the duty of myself hastening to come to you, firstly, for 
instance, because of my eagerness and desire for you, which is the chief consideration in my prayers, and 
then, that we might be able to consult together on those matters which are required by the general 
advantage, in respect of the government of the Church, and having carefully examined them with abundant 
counsel, might wisely arrange them;-yet it seemed to me better, still to preserve my retreat and my quiet for 
a while, with a view to other advantages connected with the peace and safety of us all:-which advantages 
an account will be given you by our beloved brother Tertullus, who, besides his other care which he 
zealously bestows on divine labours, was, moreover, the author of this counsel; that I should be cautious 

and moderate, and not rashly trust myself into the sight of the public; and especially that I should beware of 
that place where I had been so often inquired for and sought after. 

2. Relying, therefore, upon your love and your piety, which I have abundantly known, in this letter I both 
exhort and command you, that those of you whose presence there is least suspicious and least perilous, 
should in my stead discharge my duty, in respect of doing those things which are required for the religious 
administration. In the meantime let the poor be taken care of as much and as well as possible; but 
especially those who have stood with unshaken faith and have not forsaken Christ's flock, that, by your 
diligence, means be supplied to them to enable them to bear their poverty, so that what the troublous time 
has not effected in respect of their faith, may not be accomplished by want in respect of their afflictions. Let a 
more earnest care, moreover, be bestowed upon the glorious confessors. And although I know that very 
many of those have been maintained by the vow(1) and by the love of the brethren, yet if there be any who 
are in want either of clothing or maintenance, let them be supplied, with whatever things are necessary, as I 
formerly wrote to you, while they were still kept in prison, -only let them know from you and be instructed, and 
learn what, according to the authority of Scripture, the discipline of the Church requires of them, that they 
ought to be humble and modest and peaceable, that they should maintain the honour of their name, so that 
those who have achieved glory by what they have testified, may achieve glory also by their characters, and 
in all things seeking the Lord's approval, may show themselves worthy, in consummation of their praise, to 
attain a heavenly crown. For there remains more than what is yet seen to be accomplished, since it is written 
"Praise not any man before his death;"(2) and again, "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown 
of life. "(3) And the Lord also says, "He that endureth to the end, the same shall be saved. "(4) Let them 
imitate the Lord, who at the very time of His passion was not more proud, but more humble. For then He 
washed His disciples' feet, saying, "If I, your Lord and Master, have washed your feet, ye ought also to wash 
one another's feet. For I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you. "(5) Let them 
also follow the example of the Apostle Paul, who, after often-repeated imprisonment, after scourging, after 
exposures to wild beasts, in everything continued meek and humble; and even after his rapture to the third 
heaven and paradise, he did not proudly arrogate anything to himself when he said, "Neither did we eat any 
man's bread for nought, but wrought with labour and travail night and day, that we might not be chargeable to 
any of you. "(6) 

3. These several matters, I pray you, suggest to our brethren. And as "he who humbleth himself shall be 
exalted, "(7) now is the time when they should rather fear the ensnaring adversary, who more eagerly attacks 
the man that is strongest, and becoming more virulent, for the very reason that he is conquered, strives to 
overcome his conqueror. The Lord grant that I may soon both see them again, and by salutary exhortation 
may establish their minds to preserve their glory. For I am grieved when I hear that some of them run about 
wickedly and proudly, and give themselves up to follies or to discords; that members of Christ, and even 
members that have confessed Christ, are defiled by unlawful concubinage, and cannot be ruled either by 
deacons or by presbyters, but cause that, by the wicked and evil characters of a few, (8) the honourable 
glories of many and good confessors are tarnished;(9) whom they ought to fear, lest, being condemned by 
their testimony and judgment, they be excluded from their fellowship. That, finally, is the illustrious and true 
confessor, concerning whom afterwards the Church does not blush, but boasts. 

4. In respect of that which our fellow-presbyters, Donatus and Fortunatus, Novatus and Cordius, wrote to me, 
I have not been able to reply by myself, since, from the first commencement of my episcopacy, I made up 
my mind to do nothing on my own private opinion, without your advice and without the consent of the 
people. (1 0) But as soon as, by the grace of God, I shall have come to you, then we will discuss in common, 
as our respective dignity requires, those things which either have been or are to be done. I bid you, brethren 
beloved and dearly longed-for, ever heartily farewell, and be mindful of me. Greet the brotherhood that is 
with you earnestly from me, and tell them to remember Inc. Farewell. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE VI.-TO 
ROGATIANUS THE PRESBYTER, AND THE OTHER 
CONFESSORS. A.D. 250 

EPISTLE VI. (11) 

TO ROGATIANUS THE PRESBYTER, AND THE OTHER CONFESSORS. A.D. 250. 

ARGUMENT. --HE EXHORTS ROGATIANUS AND THE OTHER CONFESSORS TO 
MAINTAIN DISCIPLINE, THAT NONE WHO HAD CONFESSED CHRIST IN WORD SHOULD 
SEEM TO DENY HIM IN DEED; CASUALLY REBUKING SOME OF THEM, WHO, BEING 
EXILED ON ACCOUNT OF THE FAITH, WERE NOT AFRAID TO RETURN UNBIDDEN INTO 
THEIR COUNTRY. 

1. Cyprian to the presbyter Rogatianus, and to the other confessors, his brethren, greeting. I had both 
heretofore, dearly beloved and bravest brethren, sent you a letter, in which I congratulated your faith and 
virtue with exulting words, and now my voice has no other object, first of all, than with joyous mind, 
repeatedly and always to announce the glory of your name. For what can I wish greater or better in my 
prayers than to see the flock of Christ enlightened by the honour of your confession? For although all the 
brethren ought to rejoice in this, yet, in the common gladness, the share of the bishop is the greatest. For the 
glory of the Church is the glory of the bishop. (1) In proportion as we grieve over those whom a hostile 
persecution has cast down, in the same proportion we rejoice over you whom the devil has not been able to 
over-Conic. 

2. Yet I exhort you by our common faith, by the true and simple love of my heart towards you, that, having 
overcome the adversary in this first encounter, you should hold fast your glory with a brave and persevering 
virtue. We are still in the world; we are still placed in the battle-field; we fight daily for our lives. Care must be 
taken, that after such beginnings as these there should also come an increase, and that what you have 
begun to be with such a blessed commencement should be consummated in you. It is a slight thing to have 
been able to attain anything; it is more to be able to keep what you have attained; even as faith itself and 
saving birth makes alive, not by being received, but by being preserved. Nor is it actually the attainment, but 
the perfecting, that keeps a man for God. The Lord taught this in His instruction when He said, "Behold, thou 
art made whole; sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee. "(2) Conceive of Him as saying this also to 
His confessor, "Lo thou art made a confessor; sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee." Solomon 
also, and Saul, and many others, so long as they walked in the Lord's ways, were able to keep the grace 
given to them. When the discipline of the Lord was forsaken by them, grace also forsook them. 

3. We must persevere in the straight and narrow road of praise and glory; and since peacefulness and 
humility and the tranquillity of a good life is fitting for all Christians, according to the word of the Lord, who 
looks to none other man than "to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and that trembleth at"(3) His word, it 
the more behoves you confessors, who have been made an example to the rest of the brethren, to observe 
and fulfil this, as being those whose characters should provoke to imitation the life and conduct of all. For as 
the Jews were alienated from God, as those on whose account "the name of God is blasphemed among 
the Gentiles, "(4) so on the other hand those are dear to God through whose conformity to discipline the 
name of God is declared with a testimony of praise, as it is written, the Lord Himself forewarning and saying, 
"Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good works and glorify your Father which is in 
heaven. "(5) And Paul the apostle says, "Shine as lights in the world. "(6) And similarly Peter exhorts: "As 
strangers," says he, "and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul, having your 
conversation honest among the Gentiles; that whereas they speak against you as evil-doers, they may by 
your good works, which they shall behold, glorify the Lord. "(7) This, indeed, the greatest part of you, I rejoice 
to say, are careful for; and, made better by the honour of your confession itself, guard and preserve its glory 
by tranquil and virtuous lives. 

4. But I hear that some infect your number, and destroy the praise of a distinguished name by their corrupt 
conversation; whom you yourselves, even as being lovers and guardians of your own praise, should 
rebuke and check and correct. For what a disgrace is suffered by your name, when one spends his days in 
intoxication and debauchery, (8) another returns to that country whence he was banished, to perish when 

arrested, not now as being a Christian, but as being a criminal!(9) I iiear tiiat some are puffed up and are 
arrogant, altiiougii it is written, "Be not iiigh-minded, but fear: for if God spared not tiie natural brandies, tal<e 
iieed lest He also spare not thee. "(10) Our Lord "was led as a sheep to the slaughter; and as a lamb before 
her shearers is dumb, so He opened not His mouth. "(1 1) "I am not rebellious," says He, "neither do I 
gainsay. I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to the palms of their hands. I hid not my face from the 
filthiness of spitting. "(12) And dares any one now, who lives by and in this very One, lift up himself and be 
haughty, forgetful, as well of the deeds which He did, as of the commands which He left to us either by 
Himself or by His apostles? But if "the servant is not greater than his Lord. "(13) let those who follow the Lord 
humbly and peacefully and silently tread in His steps, since the lower one is, the more exalted be may 
become; as says the Lord, "He that is least among you, the same shall be great."(1) 

5. What, then, is that-how execrable should it appear to you-which I have learnt with extreme anguish and 
grief of mind, to wit, that there are not wanting those who defile the temples of God, and the members 
sanctified after confession and made glorious, (2) with a disgraceful and infamous concubinage, associating 
their beds promiscuously with women's! In which, even if there be no pollution of their conscience, there is a 
great guilt in this very thing, that by their offence originate examples for the ruin of Others. (3) There ought 
also to be no contentions and emulations among you, since the Lord left to us His peace, and it is written, 
"Thou shall love thy neighbour as thyself."(4) "But if ye bite and find fault with one another, take heed that ye 
be not consumed one of another."(5) From abuse and revilings also I entreat you to abstain, for "revilers do 
not attain the kingdom of God;"(6) and the tongue which has confessed Christ should be preserved sound 
and pure with its honour. For he who, according to Christ's precept, speaks things peaceable and good and 
just, daily confesses Christ. We had renounced the world when we were baptized; but we have now indeed 
renounced the world when tried and approved by God, we leave all that we have, and have followed the 
Lord, and stand and live in His faith and fear. 

6. Let us confirm one another by mutual exhortations, and let us more and more go forward in the Lord; so 
that when of His mercy He shall have made that peace which He promises to give, we may return to the 
Church new and almost changed men, and may be received, whether by our brethren or by the heathen, in 
all things corrected and renewed for the better; and those who formerly admired our glory in our courage 
may now admire the discipline in our lives. (7) I bid you, beloved brethren, ever heartily farewell; and be 
mindful of me. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE VII.-TO THE 
CLERGY, CONCERNING PRAYER TO GOD 

EPISTLE VII. (8) 

TO THE CLERGY, CONCERNING PRAYER TO GOD. 

ARGUMENT. --THE ARGUMENT OF THE PRESENT EPISTLE IS NEARLYTHE SAME AS 
THAT OF THE TWO PRECEDING, EXCEPT THAT HE EXHORTS IN THIS TO DILIGENT 
PRAYER. 

1. Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his brethren, greeting. Although I l<now, brethren beloved, that 
from the fear which we all of us owe to God, you also are instantly urgent in continual petitions anti earnest 
prayers to Him, still I myself remind your religious anxiety, that in order to appease and entreat the Lord, we 
must lament not only in words, but also with fastings and with tears, and with every kind of urgency. For we 
must perceive and confess that the so disordered ruin arising from that affliction, which has in a great 
measure laid waste, and is even still laying waste, our flock, has visited us according to our sins, in that we 
do not keep the way of the Lord, nor observe the heavenly commandments given to us for our salvation. Our 
Lord did the will of His Father, and we do not do the will of our Lord; eager about our patrimony and our gain, 
seeking to satisfy our pride, yielding ourselves wholly to emulation and to strife, careless of simplicity and 
faith, renouncing the world in words only, and not in deeds, every one of us pleasing himself, and 
displeasing all others, (9)-therefore we are smitten as we deserve, since it is written: "And that servant, which 
knoweth his master's will, and has not obeyed his will, shall be beaten with many stripes. "(1 0) But what 
stripes, what blows, do we not deserve, when even confessors, who ought to be an example of virtuous life 
to others, do not maintain discipline? Therefore, while an inflated and immodest boastfulness about their 
own confession excessively elates some, tortures come upon them, and tortures without any cessation of 
the tormentor, without any end of condetonation, without any comfort of death,-tortures which do not easily 
let them pass to the crown, but wrench them on the rack until they cause them to abandon their faith, unless 
some one taken away by the divine compassion should depart in the very midst of the torments, gaining 
glory not by the cessation of his torture, but by the quickness of his death: 

2. These things we suffer by our own fault and our own deserving, even as the divine judgment has 
forewarned us, saying, "If they forsake my law and walk not in my judgments, if they profane my statutes and 
keep not my commandments, then will I visit their transgressions with the rod, and their iniquities with 
stripes. "(1) It is for this reason that we feel the rods and the stripes, because we neither please God with 
good deeds nor atone(2) for our sins. Let us of our inmost heart and of our entire mind ask for God's mercy, 
because He Himself also adds, saying, "Nevertheless my loving-kindness will I not scatter away from 
them. "(3) Let us ask, and we shall receive; and if there be delay and tardiness in our receiving, since we 
have grievously offended, let us knock, because "to him that knocketh also it shall be opened, "(4) if only our 
prayers, our groanings, and our tears, knock at the door; and with these we must be urgent and persevering, 
even although prayer be offered with one mind. (5) 

3. For,-which the more induced and constrained me to write this letter to you,-you ought to know (since the 
Lord has condescended to show and to reveal it) that it was said in a vision, "Ask, and ye shall obtain." 
Then, afterwards, that the attending people were bidden to pray for certain persons pointed out to them, but 
that in their petitions there were dissonant voices, and wills disagreeing, and that this excessively 
displeased Him who had said, "Ask, and ye shall obtain," because the disagreement of the people was out 
of harmony, and there was not a consent of the brethren one and simple, and a united concord; since it is 
written, "God who maketh men to be of one mind in a house;"(6) and we read in the Acts of the Apostles, 
"And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one soul. "(7) And the Lord has bidden us 
with His own voice, saying, "This is my command, that ye love one another."(8) And again, "I say unto you, 
that if two of you shall agree on earth as touching anything that you shall ask, it shall be done for you of my 
Father which is in heaven. "(9) But if two of one mind can do so much, what might be effected if the unanimity 
prevailed among all? But if, according to the peace which our Lord gave us, there were agreement among 
all brethren, we should before this have obtained from the divine mercy what we seek; nor should we be 
wavering so long in this peril of our salvation and our faith. Yes, truly, and these evils would not have come 
upon the brethren, if the brotherhood had been animated with one spirit. 

4. For there also was shown that there sate the father of a family, a young man also being seated at his right 
hand, who, anxious and somewhat sad with a kind of indignation, holding his chin in his right hand, occupied 
his place with a sorrowful look. But another standing on the left hand, bore a net, which he threatened to 
throw, in order to catch the people standing round. (10) And when he who saw marvelled what this could be, it 
was told him that the youth who was thus sitting on the right hand was saddened and grieved because his 
commandments were not observed; but that he on the left was exultant because an opportunity was 
afforded him of receiving from the father of the family the power of destroying. This was shown long before 
the tempest of this devastation arose. And we have seen that which had been shown fulfilled; that while we 
despise the commandments of the Lord, while we do not keep the salutary ordinances of the law that He 
has given, the enemy was receiving a power of doing mischief, and was overwhelming, by the cast of his 
net, those who were imperfectly armed and too careless to resist. 

5. Let us urgently pray and groan with continual petitions. For know, beloved brethren, that I was not long ago 
reproached with this also in a vision, that we were sleepy in our prayers, and did not pray with watchfulness; 
and undoubtedly God, who "rebukes whom He loves, (1 1) when He rebukes, rebukes that He may amend, 
amends that He may preserve. Let us therefore strike off and break away from the bonds of sleep, and pray 
with urgency and watchfulness, as the Apostle Paul bids us, saying, "Continue in prayer, and watch in the 
same. "(12) For the apostles also ceased not to pray day and night; and the Lord also Himself, the teacher 
of our discipline, and the way of our example, frequently and watch-fully prayed, as we read in the Gospel: 
"He went out into a mountain to pray, and continued all night in prayer to God. "(13) And assuredly what He 
prayed for. He prayed for on our behalf, since He was not a sinner, but bore the sins of others. But He so 
prayed for us, that in another place we read, "And the Lord said to Peter, Behold, Satan has desired to sift 
you as wheat: but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not."(14) But if for us and for our sins He both 
laboured and watched and prayed, how much more ought we to be instant in prayers; and, first of all, to pray 
and to entreat the Lord Himself, and then through Him, to make satisfaction to God the Father! We have an 
advocate and an intercessor for our sins, Jesus Christ the Lord and our God, if only we repent of our sins 
past, and confess and acknowledge our sins, whereby we now offend the Lord, and for the time to come 
engage to walk in His ways, and to fear His commandments. The Father corrects and protects us, if we still 
stand fast in the faith both in afflictions and perplexities, that is to say, cling closely to His Christ; as it is 
written, "Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine 
or nakedness, or peril, or sword?(1) None of these things can separate believers, nothing can tear away 
those who are clinging to His body and blood. Persecution of that kind is an examination and searching out 
of the heart. God wills us to be sifted and proved, as He has always proved His people; and yet in His trials 
help has never at any time been wanting to believers. 

6. Finally, to the very least of His servants although placed among very many sins, and unworthy of His 
condescension, yet He has condescended of His goodness towards us to command:(2) "Tell him," said 
He, "to be safe, because peace is coming; but that, in the meantime, there is a little delay, that some who 
still remain may be proved." But we are admonished by these divine condescensions both concerning a 
spare diet and a temperate use of drink; to wit, lest worldly enticement should enervate the breast now 
elevated with celestial vigour, or lest the mind, weighed down by too abundant feasting, should be less 
watchful unto prayers and supplication. 

7. It was my duty not to conceal these special matters, nor to hide them alone in my own 
consciousness, -matters by which each one of us may be both instructed and guided. And do not you for 
your part keep this letter concealed among yourselves, but let the brethren have it to mad. For it is the part of 
one who desires that his brother should not be warned and instructed, to intercept those words with which the 
Lord condescends to admonish and instruct us. Let them know that we are proved by our Lord, and let them 
never fail of that faith whereby we have once believed in Him, under the conflict of this present affliction. Let 
each one, acknowledging his own sins, even now put off the conversation of the old man. "For no man who 
looks back as he putteth his hand to the plough is fit for the kingdom of God. "(3) And, finally. Lot's wife, who, 
when she was delivered, looked back in defiance of the commandment, lost the benefit of her escape. (4) 
Let us look not to things which are behind, whither the devil calls us back, but to things which are before, 
whither Christ calls us. Let us lift up our eyes to heaven, lest the earth with its delights and enticements 
deceive us. Let each one of us pray God not for himself only, but for all the brethren, even as the Lord has 
taught us to pray, when He bids to each one, not private prayer, but enjoined them, when they prayed, to 
pray for all in common prayer and concordant supplication. (5) If the Lord shall behold us humble and 
peaceable; if He shall see us joined one with another; if He shall see us fearful concerning His anger; if 
corrected and amended by the present tribulation. He will maintain us safe from the disturbances of the 
enemy. Discipline hath preceded; pardon also shall follow. 

8. Let us only, without ceasing to ask, and with full faith that we shall receive, in simplicity and unanimity 
beseech the Lord, entreating not only with groaning but with tears, as it behoves those to entreat who are 
situated between the ruins of those who wail, and the remnants of those who fear; between the manifold 

slaughter of the yielding, and the little firmness of those who still stand. Let us ask that peace may be soon 
restored; that we may be quickly helped in our concealments and our dangers; that those things may be 
fulfilled which the Lord deigns to show to his servants,-the restoration of the Church, the security of our 
salvation; after the rains, serenity; after the darkness, light; after the storms and whirlwinds, a peaceful calm; 
the affectionate aids of paternal love, the accustomed grandeurs of the divine majesty whereby both the 
blasphemy of persecutors may be restrained, the repentance of the lapsed renewed, and the stedfast faith 
of the persevering may glory. I bid you, beloved brethren, ever heartily farewell; and have me in 
remembrance. Salute the brotherhood in my name; and remind them to remember me. Farewell. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE VIII.-TO THE 
MARTYRS AND CONFESSORS 

EPISTLE VIII. (6) 

TO THE MARTYRS AND CONFESSORS. 

ARGUMENT. --CYPRIAN, COMMENDING THE AFRICAN MARTYRS MARVELLOUSLY FOR 
THEIR CONSTANCY, URGES THEM TO PERSEVERANCE BY THE EXAMPLE OF THEIR 
COLLEAGUE MAPPALICUS. 

Cyprian to the martyrs and confessors in Ciirist our Lord and in God tiie Fattier, everlasting salvation. I 
gladly rejoice and am thankful, most brave and blessed brethren, at hearing of your faith and virtue, wherein 
the Church, our Mother, glories. Lately, indeed, she gloried, when, in consequence of an enduring 
confession, that punishment was undergone which drove the confessors of Christ into exile; yet the present 
confession is so much the more illustrious and greater in honour as it is braver in suffering. The combat has 
increased, and the glory of the combatants has increased also. Nor were you kept back from the struggle 
by fear of tortures, but by the very tortures themselves you were more and more stimulated to the conflict; 
bravely and firmly you have returned with ready devotion, to contend in the extremest contest. Of you I find 
that some are already crowned, while some are even now within reach of the crown of victory; but all whom 
the danger has shut up in a glorious company are animated to carry on the struggle with an equal and 
common warmth of virtue, as it behoves the soldiers of Christ in the divine camp: that no allurements may 
deceive the incorruptible stedfastness of your faith, no threats terrify you, no sufferings or tortures overcome 
you, because "greater is He that is in us, than he that is in the world;"(1) nor is the earthly punishment able to 
do more towards casting down, than is the divine protection towards lifting up. This truth is proved by the 
glorious struggle of the brethren, who, having become leaders to the rest in overcoming their tortures, 
afforded an example of virtue and faith, contending in the strife, until the strife yielded, being overcome. With 
what praises can I commend you, most courageous brethren? With what vocal proclamation can I extol the 
strength of your heart and the perseverance of your faith? You have borne the sharpest examination by 
torture, even unto the glorious consummation, and have not yielded to sufferings, but rather the sufferings 
have given way to you. The end of torments, which the tortures themselves did not give, the crown has 
given. The examination by torture waxing severer, continued for a long time to this result, not to overthrow the 
stedfast faith, but to send the men of God more quickly to the Lord. The multitude of those who were present 
saw with admiration the heavenly contest,-the contest of God, the spiritual contest, the battle of Christ,-saw 
that His servants stood with free voice, with unyielding mind, with divine virtue-bare, indeed, of weapons of 
this world, but believing and armed with the weapons of faith. The tortured stood more brave than the 
torturers; and the limbs, beaten and torn as they were, overcame the hooks that bent and tore them. The 
scourge, often repeated with all its rage, could not conquer invincible faith, even although the membrane 
which enclosed the entrails were broken, and it was no longer the limbs but the wounds of the servants of 
God that were tortured. Blood was flowing which might quench the blaze of persecution, which might subdue 
the flames of Gehenna with its glorious gore. (2) Oh, what a spectacle was that to the Lord,-how sublime, how 
great, how acceptable to the eyes of God in the allegiance and devotion of His soldiers! As it is written in the 
Psalms, when the Holy Spirit at once speaks to us and warns us: "Precious in the sight of the Lord is the 
death of His saints. "(3) Precious is the death which has bought immortality at the cost of its blood, which has 
received the crown from the consummation of its virtues. How did Christ rejoice therein! How willingly did He 
both fight and conquer in such servants of His, as the protector of their faith, and giving to believers as much 
as he who taketh believes that he receives! He was present at His own contest; He lifted up, strengthened, 
animated the champions and assertors of His name. And He who once conquered death on our behalf, 
always conquers it in us. "When they," says He, "deliver you up, take no thought what ye shall speak: for it 
shall be given you in that hour what ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father 
which speaketh in you. "(4) The present struggle has afforded a proof of this saying. A voice filled with the 
Holy Spirit broke forth from the martyr's mouth when the most blessed Mappalicus said to the proconsul in 
the midst of his torments, "You shall see a contest to-morrow." And that which he said with the testimony of 
virtue and faith, the Lord fulfilled. A heavenly contest was exhibited, and the servant of God was crowned ill 
the struggle of the promised fight. This is the contest which the prophet Isaiah of old predicted, saying, "It 

shall be no light contest for you with men, since God appoints the struggle. "(5) And in order to show what this 
struggle would be, he added the words, "Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and ye shall call 
His name Emmanuel. "(6) This is the struggle of our faith in which we engage, in which we conquer, in which 
we are crowned. This is the struggle which the blessed Apostle Paul has shown to us, in which it behoves us 
to run and to attain the crown of glory. "Do ye not know," says he, "that they which run in a race, run all 
indeed, but one receiveth the prize? So run that ye may obtain." "Now they do it that they may receive a 
corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible. "(7) Moreover, setting forth his own struggle, and declaring that he 
himself should soon be a sacrifice for the Lord's sake, he says, "I am now ready to be offered, and the time 
of my assumption is at hand. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: 
henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give 
me at that day; and not to me only, but unto all them also that love His appearing. "(1) This fight, therefore, 
predicted of old by the prophets, begun by the Lord, waged by the apostles, Mappalicus promised again to 
the proconsul in his own name and that of his colleagues. Nor did the faithful voice deceive in his promise; 
he exhibited the fight to which he had pledged himself, and he received the reward which he deserved. I not 
only beseech but exhort the rest of you, that you all should follow that martyr now most blessed, and the 
other partners of that engagement,-soldiers and comrades, stedfast in faith, patient in suffering, victors in 
tortures,-that those who are united at once by the bond of confession, and the entertainment of a dungeon, 
may also be united in the consummation of their virtue and a celestial crown; that you by your joy may dry 
the tears of our Mother, the Church, who mourns over the wreck and death of very many; and that you may 
confirm, by the provocation of your example, the stedfastness of others who stand also. If the battle shall call 
you out, if the day of your contest shall come engage bravely, fight with constancy, as knowing that you are 
fighting under the eyes of a present Lord, that you are attaining by the confession of His name to His own 
glory; who is not such a one as that He only looks on His servants, but He Himself also wrestles in us. 
Himself is engaged,-Himself also in the struggles of our conflict not only crowns, but is crowned. But if 
before the day of your contest, of the mercy of God, peace shall supervene, let there still remain to you the 
sound will and the glorious conscience. (2) Nor let any one of you be saddened as if he were inferior to 
those who before you have suffered tortures, have overcome the world and trodden it under foot, and so 
have come to the Lord by a glorious road. For the Lord is the "searcher out of the reins and the hearts. "(3) 
He looks through secret things, and beholds that which is concealed. In order to merit the crown from Him, 
His own testimony alone is sufficient, who will judge us. Therefore, beloved brethren, either case is equally 
lofty and illustrious,-the former more secure, to wit, to hasten to the Lord with the consummation of our 
victory, -the latter more joyous; a leave of absence, after glory, being received to flourish in the praises of 
the Church. O blessed Church of ours, which the honour of the divine condescension illuminates. Which in 
our own flmes the glorious blood of martyrs renders illustrious! She was white before in the works of the 
brethren; now she has become purple in the blood of the martyrs. Among her flowers are wanting neither 
roses nor lilies. Now let each one strive for the largest dignity of either honour. Let them receive crowns, 
either white, as of labours, or of purple, as of suffering. In the heavenly camp both peace and strife have their 
own flowers, with which the soldier of Christ may be crowned for glory. I bid you, most brave and beloved 
brethren, always heartily farewell in the Lord; and have me in remembrance. Fare ye well. 

EPISTLE IX.(4) 

TO THE CLERGY, CONCERNING CERTAIN PRESBYTERS WHO HAD RASHLY GRANTED 
PEACE TO THE LAPSED BEFORE THE PERSECUTION HAD BEEN APPEASED, AND 
WITHOUT THE PRIVITY OF THE BISHOPS. 

ARGUMENT. --THE ARGUMENT OF THIS EPISTLE IS CONTAINED IN THE FOLLOWING 
WORDS OF THE XIVTH EPISTLE:~"TO THE PRESBYTERS AND DEACONS," HE SAYS, 
"WAS NOT WANTING THE VIGOUR OF THE PRIESTHOOD, SO THAT SOME, TOO LITTLE 
MINDFUL OF DISCIPLINE, AND HASTY WITH A RASH PRECIPITATION, WHO HAD 
ALREADY BEGUN TO COMMUNICATE WITH THE LAPSED, WERE CHECKED." 

1. Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his brethren, greeting. I have long been patient, beloved 
brethren, hoping that my forbearing silence would avail to quietness. But since the unreasonable and 
reckless presumption of some is seeking by its boldness to disturb both the honour of the martyrs, and the 
modesty of the confessors, and the tranquility of the whole people, it behoves me no longer to keep silence, 
lest too much reticence should issue in danger both to the people and to ourselves. For what danger ought 
we not to fear from the Lord's displeasure, when some of the presbyters, remembering neither the Gospel 
nor their own place, and, moreover, considering neither the Lord's future judgment nor the bishop now 
placed over them, claim to themselves entire authority,(5)-a thing which was never in any wise done under 
our predecessors,-with discredit and contempt of the bishop? 

2. And I wish, if it could be so without the sacrifice of our brethren's safety, that they could make good their 
claim to all things; I could dissemble and bear the discredit of my episcopal authority, as I always have 
dissembled and borne it. But it is not now the occasion for dissimulating when our brotherhood is deceived 
by some of you, who, while without the means of restoring salvation they desire to please, become a still 
greater stumbling-block to the lapsed. For that it is a very great crime which persecution has compelled to 
be committed, they themselves know who have committed it; since our Lord and Judge has said, 
"Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I also confess before my Father which is in heaven; but 
whosoever shall deny me, him will I also deny."(1) And again He has said, "All sins shall be forgiven unto 
the sons of men, and blasphemies; but he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost shall not have 
forgiveness, but is guilty of eternal sin. "(2) Also the blessed apostle has said, "Ye cannot drink the cup of the 
Lord and the cup of devils; ye cannot be partakers of the Lord's table and of the table of devils. "(3) He who 
withholds these words from our brethren deceives them, wretched that they are; so that they who truly 
repenting might satisfy God, both as the Father and as merciful, with their prayers and works, are seduced 
more deeply to perish; and they who might raise themselves up fall the more deeply. For although in 
smaller sins sinners may do penance for a set time, and according to the rules of discipline come to public 
confession, (4) and by imposition of the hand of the bishop and clergy receive the right of communion: now 
with their time still unfulfilled, while persecution is still raging, while the peace of the Church itself is not vet 
restored, they are admitted to communion, and their name is presented; and while the penitence is not yet 
performed, confession is not yet made, the hands Of the bishop and clergy are not yet laid upon them, the 
eucharist is given to them; although it is written, "Whosoever shall eat the bread and drink the cup of the Lord 
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. "(5) 

3. But now they are not guilty who so little observe the law of Scripture; but they will be guilty who are in office 
and do not suggest these things to brethren, so that, being instructed by those placed above them, they 
may do all things with the fear of God, and with the observance given and prescribed by Him. Then, 
moreover, they lay the blessed martyrs open to ill-will, and involve the glorious servants of God with the 
priest of God; so that although they, mindful of my place, have directed letters to me, and have asked that 
their wishes should theft be examined, and peace granted them, -when our Mother, the Church herself, 
should first have received peace for the Lord's mercy, and the divine protection, have brought me back to 
His Church,-yet these, disregarding the honour which the blessed martyrs with the confessors maintain for 
me, despising the Lord's law and that observance, which the same martyrs and confessors bid to be 
maintained, before the fear of persecution is quenched, before my return, almost even before the departure 

of the martyrs, communicate with the lapsed, and offer and give them the eucharist: when even if the martyrs, 
in the heat of their glory, were to consider less carefully the Scriptures, and to desire anything more, they 
should be admonished by the presbyters' and deacons' suggestions, as was always done in time past.(6) 
4. For this reason the divine rebuke does not cease to chastise us night nor day. For besides the visions of 
the night, by day also, the innocent age of boys is among us filled with the Holy Spirit, seeing in an ecstasy 
with their eyes, and hearing and speaking those things whereby the Lord condescends to warn and instruct 
us. (7) And you shall hear all things when the Lord, who bade me withdraw, shall bring me back again to you. 
In the meanwhile, let those certain ones among you who are rash and incautious and boastful, and who do 
not regard man, at least fear God, knowing that, if they shall persevere still in the same course, I shall use 
that power of admonition which the Lord bids me use; so that they may meanwhile be withheld from 
offering, (8) and have to plead their cause both before me and before the confessors themselves and 
before the whole people, when, with God's permission, we begin to be gathered together once more into the 
bosom of the Church, our Mother. Concerning this matter, I have written to the martyrs and confessors, and to 
the people, letters; both of which I have bidden to be read to you. I wish you, dearly beloved brethren and 
earnestly longed-for, ever heartily farewell in the Lord; and have me in remembrance. Fare ye well. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE X.-TO THE 
MARTYRS AND CONFESSORS 

EPISTLE X. (9) 

TO THE MARTYRS AND CONFESSORS WHO SOUGHT THAT PEACE SHOULD BE 
GRANTED TO THE LAPSED. 

ARGUMENT. --THE OCCASION OF THIS LETTER IS GIVEN BELOW IN EPISTLE XIV. AS 
FOLLOWS:-"WHEN I FOUND THAT THOSE WHO HAD POLLUTED THEIR HANDS AND 
MOUTHS WITH SACRILEGIOUS CONTACT, OR HAD NO LESS INFECTED THEIR 
CONSCIENCE WITH WICKED CERTIFICATES," ETC.(1) 

1 . Cyprian to the martyrs and confessors, his beloved brethren, greeting. The anxiety of my situation and the 
fear of the Lord constrain me, my brave and beloved brethren, to admonish you in my letters, that those who 
so devotedly and bravely maintain the faith of the Lord should also maintain the law and discipline of the 
Lord. For while it behoves all Christ's soldiers to keep the precepts of their commander; to you it is more 
especially fitting that you should obey His precepts, inasmuch as you have been made an example to 
others, both of valour and of the fear of God. And I had indeed believed that the presbyters and deacons 
who are there present with you would admonish and instruct you more fully concerning the law of the Gospel, 
as was the case always in time past under my predecessors; so that the deacons passing in and out of the 
prison controlled the wishes of the martyrs by their counsels, and by the Scripture precepts. But now, with 
great sorrow of mind, I gather that not only the divine precepts are not suggested to you by them, but that 
they are even rather restrained, so that those things which are done by you yourselves, both in respect of 
God with caution, and in respect of God's priest(2) with honour, are relaxed by certain presbyters, who 
consider neither the fear of God nor the honour of the bishop. Although you sent letters to me in which you 
ask that your wishes should be examined, and that peace should be granted to certain of the lapsed as 
soon as with the end of the persecution we should have begun to meet with our clergy, and to be gathered 
together once more; those presbyters, contrary to the Gospel law, contrary also to your respectful petition, 
before penitence was fulfilled, before confession even of the gravest and most heinous sin was made, 
before hands were placed upon the repentant by the bishops and clergy, dare to offer on their behalf, and to 
give them the eucharist, that is, to profane the sacred body of the Lord, although it is written, "Whosoever 
shall eat the bread and drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the 
Lord."(3) 

2. And to the lasped indeed pardon may be granted in respect of this thing. For what dead person would not 
hasten to be made alive? Who would not be eager to attain to his own salvation? But it is the duty of those 
placed over them to keep the ordinance, and to instruct those that are either hurrying or ignorant, that those 
who ought to be shepherds of the sheep may not become their butchers. For to concede those things which 
tend to destruction is to deceive. Nor is the lapsed raised in this manner, but, by offending God, he is more 
urged on to ruin. Let them learn, therefore, even from you, what they ought to have taught; let them reserve 
your petitions and wishes for the bishops, (4) and let them wait for ripe and peaceable times to give peace at 
your requests. The first thing is, that the Mother should first receive peace from the Lord, and then, in 
accordance with your wishes, that the peace of her children should be considered. 

3. And since I hear, most brave and beloved brethren, that you are pressed by the shamelessness of some, 
and that your modesty suffers violence; I beg you with what entreaties I may, that, as mindful of the Gospel, 
and considering what and what sort of things in past time your predecessors the martyrs conceded, how 
careful they were in all respects, you also should anxiously and cautiously weigh the wishes of those who 
petition you, since, as friends of the Lord, and hereafter to exercise judgment with Him, you must inspect 
both the conduct and the doings and the deserts of each one. You must consider also the kinds and 
qualities of their sins, lest, in the event of anything being abruptly and unworthily either promised by you or 
done by me, our Church(5) should begin to blush, even before the very Gentiles. For we are visited and 
chastened frequently, and we are admonished, that the commandments of the Lord may be kept without 
corruption or violation, which I find does not cease to be the case there among you so as to prevent the 
divine judgment from instructing very many of you also in the discipline of the Church. Now this can all be 

done, if you will regulate those things that are asked of you with a careful consideration of religion, 
perceiving and restraining those who, by accepting persons, either make favours in distributing your 
benefits, or seek to make a profit of an unlawful trade. 

4. Concerning this I have written both to the clergy and to the people, both of which letters I have directed to 
be read to you. But you ought also to bring back and amend that matter according to your diligence, in such 
a way as to designate those by name to whom you desire that peace should be granted. For I hear that 
certificates are so given to some as that it is said, "Let such a one be received to communion along with his 
friends," which was never in any case done by the martyrs so that a vague and blind petition should by and 
by heap reproach upon us. For it opens a wide door to say, "Such a one with his friends;" and twenty or thirty 
or more, may be presented to us, who may be asserted to be neighbours and connections, and freedmen 
and servants, of the man who receives the certificate. And for this reason I beg you that you will designate 
by name in the certificate those whom you yourselves see, whom you have known, whose penitence you 
see to be very near to full satisfaction, and so direct to us letters in conformity with faith and discipline. I bid 
you, very brave and beloved brethren, ever heartily in the Lord farewell; and have me in remembrance. 
Fare ye well. 

EPISTLE Xl.(1) 

TO THE PEOPLE. 

ARGUMENT. --THE SUBSTANCE OF THIS LETTER IS ALSO SUGGESTED IN EPISTLE XIV, 
"AMONG THE PEOPLE ALSO," HE SAYS, "I HAVE DONE WHAT I COULD TO QUIET THEIR 
MINDS, AND HAVE INSTRUCTED THEM TO BE RETAINED IN ECCLESIASTICAL 
DISCIPLINE." 

1 . Cyprian to his bretiiren among tiie people wiio stand fast,(2) greeting. Tiiat you bewail and grieve over 
the downfall of our brethren I know from myself, beloved brethren, who also bewail with you and grieve for 
each one, and suffer and feel what the blessed apostle said: "Who is weak," said he, "and I am not weak? 
who is offended, and I burn not?"(3) And again he has laid it down in his epistle, saying, "Whether one 
member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one member rejoice, all the members rejoice with it."(4) I 
sympathize with you in your suffering and grief, therefore, for our brethren, who, having lapsed and fallen 
prostrate under the severity of the persecution, have inflicted a like pain on us by their wounds, inasmuch as 
they tear away part of our bowels with them,-to these the divine mercy is able to bring healing. Yet I do not 
think that there must be any haste, nor that anything must be done incautiously and immaturely, lest, while 
peace is grasped at, the divine indignation be more seriously incurred. The blessed martyrs have written to 
me about certain persons, requesting that their wishes may be examined into. When, as soon as peace is 
given to us all by the Lord, we shall begin to return to the Church, then the wishes of each one shall be 
looked into in your presence, and with your judgment.(5) 

2. Yet I hear that certain of the presbyters, neither mindful of the Gospel nor considering what the martyrs 
have written to me, nor reserving to the bishop the honour of his priesthood and of his dignity, have already 
begun to communicate with the lapsed, and to offer on their behalf, and to give them the eucharist, when it 
was fitting that they should attain to these things in due course. For, as in smaller sins which are not 
committed against God, penitence may be fulfilled in a set time, and confession may be made with 
investigation of the life of him who fulfils the penitence, and no one can come to communion unless the 
hands of the bishop and clergy be first imposed upon him; how much more ought all such matters as these 
to be observed with caution and moderation, according to the discipline of the Lord, in these gravest and 
extremest sins! This warning, indeed, our presbyters and deacons ought to have given you, that they might 
cherish the sheep committed to their care, and by the divine authority might instruct them in the way of 
obtaining salvation by prayer. I am aware of the peacefulness as well as the fear of our people, who would 
be watchful in the satisfaction and the deprecation of God's anger, unless some of the presbyters, by way of 
gratifying them, had deceived them. 

3. Even you, therefore, yourselves, guide them each one, and control the minds of the lapsed by counsel 
and by your own moderation, according to the divine precepts. Let no one pluck the unripe fruit at a time as 
yet premature. Let no one commit his ship, shattered and broken with the waves, anew to the deep, before 
he has carefully repaired it. Let none be in haste to accept and to put on a rent tunic, unless he has seen it 
mended by a skilful workman, and has received it arranged by the fuller. Let them bear with patience my 
advice, I beg. Let them look for my return, that when by God's mercy I come to you, I, with many of my 
co-bishops, being called together according to the Lord's discipline, (6) and in the presence of the 
confessors, and with your opinion also, may be able to examine the letters and the wishes of the blessed 
martyrs. Concerning this matter I have written both to the clergy and to the martyrs and confessors, both of 
which letters I have directed to be read to you. I bid you, brethren beloved and most longed-for, ever heartily 
farewell in the Lord; and have me in remembrance. Fare ye well. 

A 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLES XII &XIII.-TO 
THE CLERGY 

EPISTLE XII. (1) 

TO THE CLERGY, CONCERNING THE LAPSED AND CATECHUMENS, THAT THEY 
SHOULD NOT BE LEFT WITHOUT SUPERINTENDENCE. 

ARGUMENT. --THE BURDEN OF THIS LETTER, AS OF THE SUCCEEDING ONE, IS FOUND 
BELOW IN THE XIVTH EPISTLE. "BUT AFTERWARDS," HE SAYS, "WHEN SOME OF THE 
LAPSED, WHETHER OF THEIR OWN ACCORD, OR BY THE SUGGESTION OF ANY 
OTHER, BROKE FORTH WITH A DARING DEMAND, AS THOUGH THEY WOULD 
ENDEAVOUR, BY A VIOLENT EFFORT, TO EXTORT THE PEACE THAT HAD BEEN 
PROMISED TO THEM BY THE MARTYRS AND CONFESSORS," ETC. (2) 

1 . Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his brethren, greeting. I marvel, beloved brethren, that you have 
answered nothing to me in reply to my many letters which I have frequently written to you, although as well 
the advantage as the need of our brotherhood would certainly be best provided for if, receiving information 
from you, I could accurately investigate and advise upon the management of affairs. Since, however, I see 
that there is not yet any Opportunity of coming to you, and that the summer has already begun-a season 
that is disturbed with continual and heavy sicknesses,-l think that our brethren must be dealt with;-that they 
who have received certificates from the martyrs, and may be assisted by their privilege with God, if they 
should be seized with any misfortune and peril of sickness, should, without waiting for my presence, before 
any presbyter who might be present, or if a presbyter should not be found and death begins to be imminent, 
before even a deacon, be able to make confession of their sin, that, with the imposition of hands upon them 
for repentance, they should come to the Lord with the peace which the martyrs have desired, by their letters 
to us, to be granted to them. (3) 

2. Cherish also by your presence the rest of the people who are lapsed, and cheer them by your 
consolation, that they may not fail of the faith and of God's mercy. For those shall not be forsaken by the aid 
and assistance of the Lord, who meekly, humbly, and with true penitence have persevered in good works; 
but the divine, remedy will be granted to them also. To the hearers(4) also, if there are any overtaken by 
danger, and placed near to death, let your vigilance not be wanting; let not the mercy of the Lord be denied 
to those that are imploring the divine favour.(5) I bid you, beloved brethren, ever heartily farewell; and 
remember me. Greet the whole brotherhood in my name, and remind them and ask them to be mindful of 
me. Fare ye well. 

EPISTLE XIII. (6) 

TO THE CLERGY, CONCERNING THOSE WHO ARE IN HASTE TO RECEIVE PEACE. A.D. 
250. 

ARGUMENT. -PEACE MUST BE ATTAINED THROUGH PENITENCE, AND PENITENCE IS 
REALIZED BY KEEPING THE COMMANDMENTS. THEY WHO ARE OPPRESSED WITH 
SICKNESS, IF THEY ARE RELIEVED BY THE SUFFRAGES OF THE MARTYRS, MAY BE 
ADMITTED TO PEACE; BUT OTHERS ARE TO BE KEPT BACK UNTILTHE PEACE OF THE 
CHURCH IS SECURED. 

1 . Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his brethren, greeting. I have read your letter, beloved brethren, 
wherein you wrote that your wholesome counsel was not wanting to our brethren, that, laying aside all rash 
haste, they should manifest a religious patience to God, so that when by His mercy we come together, we 
may debate upon all kinds of things, according to the discipline of the Church, especially since it is written, 
"Remember from whence thou hast fallen, and repent."(7) Now he repents, who, remembering the divine 
precept, with meekness and patience, and obeying the priests of God, deserves well of the Lord by his 
obedience and his righteous works. 

2. Since, however, you intimate that some are petulant, and eagerly urge their being received to 

communion, and have desired in tiiis matter tiiat some rule siiould be given by me to you, I tliinl< I iiave 
sufficiently written on this subject in the last letter that was sent to you, that they who have received a 
certificate froth the martyrs, and can be assisted by their help with the Lord in respect of their sins, if they 
begin to be oppressed with any sickness or risk; when they have made confession, and have received the 
imposition of hands on them by you in acknowledgment of their penitence, should be remitted to the Lord 
with the peace promised to them by the martyrs. But others who, without having received any certificate from 
the martyrs, are envious(8) (since this is the cause not of a few, nor of one church, nor of one province, but of 
the whole world), must wait, in dependence on the protection of the Lord, for the public peace of the Church 
itself. For this is suitable to the modesty and the discipline, and even the life of all of us, that the chief officers 
meeting together with the clergy in the presence also of the people who stand fast, to whom themselves, 
moreover, honour is to be shown for their faith and fear, we may be able to order all things with the 
religiousness of a common consultation. (1) But how irreligious is it, and mischievous, even to those 
themselves who are eager, that while such as are exiles, and driven from their country, and spoiled of all 
their property, have not yet returned to the Church, some of the lapsed should be hasty to anticipate even 
confessors themselves, and to enter into the Church before them! If they are so over-anxious, they have 
what they require in their own power, the times themselves offering them freely more than they ask. The 
struggle is still going forward, and the strife is daily celebrated. If they truly and with constancy repent of what 
they have done, and the fervour of their faith prevails, he who cannot be delayed may be crowned. (2) I bid 
you, beloved brethren, ever heartily farewell; and have me in remembrance. Greet all the brotherhood in my 
name, and tell them to be mindful of me. Fare ye well. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE XIV.-TO THE 
PRESBYTERS AND DEACONS ASSEMBLED AT ROME , 

EPISTLE XIV.(3) 

TO THE PRESBYTERS AND DEACONS ASSEMBLED AT ROME. 

ARGUMENT. --HE GIVES AN ACCOUNT OF HIS WITHDRAWAL AND OF THE THINGS 
WHICH HE DID THEREIN, HAVING SENT TO ROME FOR HIS JUSTIFICATION, COPIES OF 
THE LETTERS WHICH HE HAD WRITTEN TO HIS PEOPLE; NAY, HE MAKES USE OF THE 
SAME WORDS WHICH HE HAD EMPLOYED IN THEM. (4) 

1. Cyprian to his bretiiren tiie presbyters and deacons assembled at Rome, greeting. Having ascertained, 
beloved brethren, that what I have done and am doing has been told to you in a somewhat garbled and 
untruthful manner, I have thought it necessary to write this letter to yon, wherein I might give an account to you 
of my doings, my discipline, and my diligence; for, as the Lord's commands teach, immediately the first 
burst of the disturbance arose, and the people with violent clamour repeatedly demanded me, I, taking into 
consideration not so much my own safety as the public peace of the brethren, withdrew for a while, lest, by 
my over-bold presence, the tumult which had begun might be still further provoked. Nevertheless, although 
absent in body, I was not wanting either in spirit, or in act, or in my advice, so as to fail in any benefit that I 
could afford my brethren by my counsel, acccording to the Lord's precepts, in anything that my poor abilities 
enabled me. 

2. And what I did, these thirteen letters sent forth at various times declare to you, which I have transmitted to 
you; in which neither counsel to the clergy, nor exhortation to the confessors, nor rebuke, when it was 
necessary, to the exiles, nor my appeals and persuasions to the whole brotherhood, that they should 
entreat the mercy of God, were wanting to the full extent that, according to the law of faith and the fear of God, 
with the Lord's help, nay poor abilities could endeavour. But afterwards, when tortures came, my words 
reached both to our tortured brethren and to those who as yet were only imprisoned with a view to torture, to 
strengthen and console them. Moreover, when I found that those who had polluted their hands and mouths 
with sacrilegious contact, or had no less infected their consciences with wicked certificates, were 
everywhere soliciting the martyrs, and were also corrupting the confessors with importunate and excessive 
entreaties, so that, without any discrimination or examination of the individuals themselves, thousands of 
certificates were daily given, contrary to the law of the Gospel, I wrote letters in which I recalled by my 
advice, as much as possible, the martyrs and confessors to the Lord's commands. To the presbyters and 
deacons also was not wanting the vigour of the priesthood;(5) so that some, too little mindful of discipline, 
and hasty, with a rash precipitation, who had already begun to communicate with the lapsed, were 
restrained by my interposition. Among the people, moreover, I have done what I could to quiet their minds, 
and have instructed them to maintain ecclesiastical discipline. 

3. But afterwards, when some of the lapsed, whether of their own accord, or by the suggestion of any other, 
broke forth with a daring demand, as though they would endeavour by a violent effort to extort the peace that 
had been promised to them by the martyrs and confessors; concerning this also I wrote twice to the clergy, 
and commanded it to be read to them; that for the mitigation of their violence in any manner for the 
meantime, if any who had received a certificate from the martyrs were departing from this life, having made 
confession, and received the imposition of hands on them for repentance, they should be remitted to the 
Lord with the peace promised them by the martyrs. Nor in this did I give them a law, or rashly constitute 
myself the author of the direction; but as it seemed fit both that honour should be paid to the martyrs, and that 
the vehemence of those who were anxious to disturb everything should be restrained; and when, besides, I 
had read your letter which you lately wrote hitherto my clergy by Grementius the sub-deacon, to the effect 
that assistance should be given to those who might, after their lapse, be seized with sickness, and might 
penitently desire communion; I judged it well to stand by your judgment, lest our proceedings, which ought to 
be united and to agree in all things, should in any respect be different. (1) The cases of the rest, even 
although they might have received certificates from the martyrs, I ordered altogether to be put off, and to be 
reserved till I should be present, that so, when the Lord has given to us peace, and several bishops shall 
have begun to assemble into one place, we may be able to arrange and reform everything, having the 
advantage also of your counsel. I bid you, beloved brethren, ever heartily farewell. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE XV.-TO 
MOYSES AND MAXIMUS, AND THE REST OF THE 
CONFESSORS 

EPISTLE XV.(2) 

TO MOYSES AND MAXIMUS, AND THE REST OF THE CONFESSORS. 

ARGUMENT. --THE BURDEN OF THIS LETTER IS GIVEN IN EPISTLE XXXI. BELOW, 
WHERE THE ROMAN CLERGY SAY: "ON WHICH SUBJECT WE OWE YOU, AND GIVE YOU 
OUR DEEPEST AND ABUNDANT THANKS, THAT YOU THREW LIGHT INTO THE GLOOM 
OF THEIR PRISON BY YOUR LETTERS. "(3) 

1 . Cyprian to Moyses and Maximus, the presbyters and the other confessors, his brethren, greeting. 
Celerinus, a companion both of your faith and virtue, and God's soldier in glorious engagements, has come 
to me, beloved brethren, and represented all of you, as well as each individual, forcibly to my affection. I 
beheld in him, when he came, the whole of you; and when he spoke sweetly and often of your love to me, in 
his words I heard you. I rejoice very greatly when such things are brought to me from you by such men as 
he. In a certain manner I am also there with you in prison. I think that I who am thus bound to your hearts, 
enjoy with you the delights of the divine approval. Your individual love associates me with your honour; the 
Spirit does not allow our love to be separated. Confession(4) shuts you up in prison; affection shuts me up 
there. And I indeed, remembering you day and night, both when in the sacrifices I offer prayer with many, 
and when in retirement I pray with private petition, beseech of the Lord a full acknowledgment to your crowns 
and your praises. But my poor ability is too weak to recompense you; you give more when you remember 
me in prayer, since, already breathing only celestial things, and meditating only divine things, you ascend to 
loftier heights, even by the delay of your suffering; and by the long lapse of time, are not wasting, but 
increasing your glory. A first and single confession makes blessed; you confess as often as, when asked to 
retire from prison, you prefer the prison with faith and virtue; your praises are as numerous as the days; as 
the months roll onward, ever your merits increase. He conquers once who suffers at once; but he who 
continues always battling with punishments, and is not overcome with suffering, is daily crowned. 

2. Now, therefore, let magistrates and consuls or proconsuls go by; let them glory in the ensigns of their 
yearly dignity, and in their twelve fusees. Behold, the heavenly dignity in you is sealed by the brightness of a 
year's honour, and already, in the continuance of its victorious glory, has passed over the rolling circle of the 
returning year. The rising sun and the waning moon enlightened the world; but to you. He who made the sun 
and moon was a greater light in your dungeon, and the brightness of Christ glowing in your hearts and 
minds, irradiated with that eternal and brilliant light the gloom of the place of punishment, which to others was 
so horrible and deadly. The winter has passed through the vicissitudes of the months; but you, shut up in 
prison, were undergoing, instead of the inclemencies of winter, the winter of persecution. To the winter 
succeeded the mildness of spring, rejoicing with roses and crowned with flowers; but to you were present 
roses and flowers from the delights of paradise, and celestial garlands wreathed your brows. Behold, the 
summer is fruitful with the fertility of the harvest, and the threshing-floor is filled with grain; but you who have 
sown glory, reap the fruit of glory, and, placed in the Lord's threshing-floor, behold the chaff burnt up with 
unquenchable fire; yon yourselves as grains of wheat, winnowed and precious corn, now purged and 
garnered, regard the dwelling-place of a prison as your granary. Nor is there wanting to the autumn spiritual 
grace for discharging the duties of the season. The vintage is pressed out of doors, and the grape which 
shall hereafter flow into the cups is trodden in the presses. You, rich bunches out of the Lord's vineyard, and 
branches with fruit already ripe, trodden by the tribulation of worldly pressure, fill your wine-press in the 
torturing prison, and shed your blood instead of wine; brave to bear suffering, you willingly drink the cup of 
martyrdom. Thus the year rolls on with the Lord's servants,-thus is celebrated the vicissitude of the seasons 
with spiritual deserts, and with celestial rewards. 

3. Abundantly blessed are they who, from your number, passing through these footprints of glory, have 
already departed from the world; and, having finished their journey of virtue and faith, have attained to the 
embrace and the kiss of the Lord, to the joy of the Lord Himself. But yet your glory is not less, who are still 
engaged in contest, and, about to follow the glories of your comrades, are long waging the battle, and with 

an unmoved and unshaken faith standing fast, are daily exhibiting in your virtues a spectacle in the sight of 
God. The longer is your strife, the loftier will be your crown. The struggle is one, but it is crowded with a 
manifold multitude of contests; you conquer hunger, and despise thirst, and tread under foot the squalor of 
the dungeon, and the horror of the very abode of punishment, by the vigour of your courage. Punishment is 
there subdued; torture is worn out; death is not feared but desired, being overcome by the reward of 
immortality, so that he who has conquered is crowned with eternity of life. What now must be the mind in you, 
how elevated, how large the heart, when such and so great things are resolved, when nothing but the 
precepts of God and the rewards of Christ are considered! The will is then only God's will; and although you 
are still placed in the flesh, it is the life not of the present world, but of the future, that you now live. 
4. It now remains, beloved brethren, that you should be mindful of me; that, among your great and divine 
considerations, you should also think of me in your mind and spirit; and that I should be in your prayers and 
supplications, when that voice, which is illustrious by the purification of confession, and praiseworthy for the 
continual tenor of its honour, penetrates to God's ears, and heaven being open to it, passes from these 
regions of the world subdued, to the realms above, and obtains from the Lord's goodness even what it 
asks. For what do you ask from the Lord's mercy which you do not deserve to obtain?-you who have thus 
observed the Lord's commands, who have maintained the Gospel discipline with the simple vigour of your 
faith, who, with the glory of your virtue uncorrupted, have stood bravely by the Lord's commands, and by His 
apostles, and have confirmed the wavering faith of many by the truth of your martyrdom? Truly, Gospel 
witnesses, and truly, Christ's martyrs, resting upon His roots, founded with strong foundation upon the Rock, 
you have joined discipline with virtue, you have brought others to the fear of God, you have made your 
martyrdoms, examples. I bid you, brethren, very brave and beloved, ever heartily farewell; and remember 
me. 

EPISTLE XVI. (1) 

THE CONFESSORS TO CYPRIAN. 

ARGUMENT. -A CERTIFICATE WRITTEN IN THE NAME OF THE MARTYRS BY 
LUCIANUS. 

All the confessors to father(2) Cyprian, greeting. Know that, to all, concerning whom the account of what they 
have done since the commission of their sin has been, in your estimation, satisfactory, we have granted 
peace; and we have desired that this rescript should be made known by you to the other bishops also. We 
bid you to have peace with the holy martyrs. Lucianus wrote this, there being present of the clergy, both an 
exorcist and a reader. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE XVII.-TO THE 
PRESBYTERS AND DEACONS ABOUT THE 
FOREGOING AND THE FOLLOWING LETTERS 

EPISTLE XVII. (3) 

TO THE PRESBYTERS AND DEACONS ABOUT THE FOREGOING AND THE FOLLOWING 
LETTERS. 

ARGUMENT. --NO ACCOUNT IS TO BE MADE OF CERTIFICATES FROM THE MARTYRS 
BEFORE THE PEACE OF THE CHURCH IS RESTORED. 

Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his brethren, greeting. The Lord speal<eth and saith, "Upon whom 
shall I look, but upon him that is humble and quiet, and that trembleth at my words?"(4) Although we ought all 
to be this, yet especially those ought to be so who must labour, that, after their grave lapse, they may, by 
true penitence and absolute humility, deserve well of the Lord. Now I have read the letter of the whole body 
of confessors, which they wish to be made known by me to all my colleagues, and in which they requested 
that the peace given by themselves should be assured to those concerning whom the account of what they 
have done since their crime has been, in our estimation, satisfactory; which matter, as it waits for the counsel 
and judgment of all of us, (5) I do not dare to prejudge, and so to assume a common cause for my own 
decision. And therefore, in the meantime, let us abide by the letters which I lately wrote to you, of which I 
have now sent a copy to many of my colleagues, (6) who wrote in reply, that they were pleased with what I 
had decided, and that there must be no departure therefrom, until, peace being granted to us by the Lord, 
we shall be able to assemble together into one place, and to examine into the cases of individuals. But that 
you may know both what my colleague Caldonius wrote to me, and what I replied to him, I have enclosed 
with my letter a copy of each letter, the whole of which I beg you to read to our brethren, that they may be 
more and more settled down to patience, and not add another fault to what had hitherto been their former 
fault, not being willing to obey either me or the Gospel, nor allowing their cases to be examined in 
accordance with the letters of all the confessors. I bid you, beloved brethren, ever heartily farewell; and 
have me in remembrance. Salute all the brotherhood. Fare ye well! 

EPISTLE XVIII. (1) 

CALDONIUS TO CYPRIAN. 

ARGUMENT. --WHEN, IN THE URGENCY OF A NEW PERSECUTION, CERTAIN OF THE 
LAPSED HAD CONFESSED CHRIST, AND SO, BEFORE THEY WENT AWAY INTO EXILE, 
SOUGHT FOR PEACE, CALDONIUS CONSULTS CYPRIAN AS TO WHETHER PEACE 
SHOULD BE GRANTED THEM. 

Caldonius to Cyprian and his fellow-presbyters(2) abiding at Cartilage, greeting. Tlie necessity of tlie times 
induces us not liastily to grant peace. But it was well to write to you, that they(3) who, after having 
sacrificed, (4) were again tried, became exiles. And thus they seem to me to have atoned for their former 
crime, in that they now let go their possessions and homes, and, repenting, follow Christ. Thus Felix, who 
assisted in the office of presbyter(5) under Decimus, and was very near to me in bonds (I knew that same 
Felix very thoroughly), Victoria, his wife, and Lucius, being faithful, were banished, and have left their 
possessions, which the treasury now has in keeping. Moreover, a woman. Bona by name, who was 
dragged by her husband to sacrifice, and (with no conscience guilty of the crime, but because those who 
held her hands, sacrificed) began to cry against them, "I did not do it; you it was who did it!"-was also 
banished. (6) Since, therefore, all these were asking for peace, saying, "We have recovered the faith which 
we had lost, we have repented, and have publicly confessed Chrisf'-although it seems to me that they 
ought to receive peace,-yet I have referred them to your judgment, that I might not appear to presume 
anything rashly. If, therefore, you should wish me to do anything by the common decision, write to me. Greet 
our brethren; our brethren greet you. I bid you, beloved brethren, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE XIX. (7) 

CYPRIAN REPLIES TO CALDONIUS. 

ARGUMENT. --CYPRIAN TREATS OF NOTHING PECULIAR IN THIS EPISTLE, BEYOND 
ACQUIESCING IN THE OPINION OF CALDONIUS, TO WIT, THAT PEACE SHOULD NOT BE 
REFUSED TO SUCH LAPSED AS, BY A TRUE REPENTANCE AND CONFESSION OF THE 
NAME OF CHRIST, HAVE DESERVED IT, AND HAVE THEREFORE RETURNED TO HIM. 

Cyprian to Caldonius, his brotiier, greeting. We iiave received your letter, beloved brother, which is 
abundantly sensible, and full of honesty and faith. Nor do we wonder that, skilled and exercised as you are 
in the Scriptures of the Lord, you do everything discreetly and wisely, lyon have judged quite correctly about 
granting peace to our brethren, which they, by true penitence and by the glory of a confession of the Lord, 
have restored to themselves, being justified by their words, by which before they had condemned 
themselves. Since, then, they have washed away all their sin, and their former stain, by the help of the Lord, 
has been done away by a more powerful virtue, they ought not to lie any longer under the power of the devil, 
as it were, prostrate; when, being banished and deprived of all their property, they have lifted themselves up 
and have begun to stand with Christ. And I wish that the others also would repent after their fall, and be 
transferred into their former condition; and that you may know how we have dealt with these, in their urgent 
and eager rashness and importunity to extort peace, I have sent a book(8) to you, with letters to the number 
of five, that I wrote to the clergy and to the people, and to the martyrs also and confessors, which letters have 
already been sent to many of our colleagues, and have satisfied them; and they replied that they also 
agree with me in the same opinion according to the Catholic faith; which very thing do you also 
communicate to as many of our colleagues as you can, that among all these, may be observed one mode 
of action and one agreement, according to the Lord's precepts. (9) I bid you, beloved brother, ever heartily 
farewell. 

EPISTLES XX & XXI.-BETWEEN CELERINUS AND 
LUCIAN 

EPISTLE XX. (1) 

CELERINUS TO LUCIAN. 

ARGUMENT. -CELERINUS, ON BEHALF OF HIS LAPSED SISTERS AT ROME, 
BESEECHES PEACE FROM THE CARTHAGINIAN CONFESSORS. 

1 . Celerinus to Lucian, greeting. In writing tiiis letter to you, my lord and brother, I have been rejoicing and 
sorrowful,-rejoicing in that I had heard that you had been tried on behalf of the name of our Lord Jesus Christ 
our Saviour, and had confessed His name in the presence of the magistrates of the world; but sorrowful, in 
that from the time when I was in your company I have never been able to receive your letters. And now lately 
a twofold sorrow has fallen upon me; that although you knew that Montanus, our common brother, was 
coming to me from you out of the dungeon, you did not intimate anything to me concerning your wellbeing, 
nor about anything that is done in connection with you. This, however, continually happens to the servants of 
God, especially to those who are appointed for the confession of Christ. For I know that every one looks not 
now to the things that are of the world, but that he is hoping for a heavenly crown. Moreover, I said that 
perhaps you had forgotten to write to me. For if from the lowest place I may be called by you yours, or 
brother, if I should be worthy to hear myself named Celerinus; yet, when I also was in such a purple(2) 
confession, I remembered my oldest brethren, and I took notice of them in my letters, that their former love 
was still around me and mine. Yet I beseech, beloved of the Lord, that if, first of all, you are Washed in that 
sacred blood, and have suffered for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ before my letters find you in this 
world, or should they now reach you, that you would answer them to me. So may He crown you whose name 
you have confessed. For I believe, that although in this world we do not see each other, yet in the future we 
shall embrace one another in the presence of Christ. Entreat that I may be worthy, even I, to be crowned 
along with your company. 

2. Know, nevertheless, that I am placed in the midst of a great tribulation; and, as if you were present with me, 
I remember your former love day and night, God only knows. And therefore I ask that you will grant my 
desire, and that you will grieve with me at the (spiritual) death of my sister, who in this time of devastation has 
fallen from Christ; for she has sacrificed and provoked our Lord, as seems manifest to us. And for her deeds 
I in this day of paschal rejoicing, (3) weeping day and night, have spent the days in tears, in sackcloth, and 
ashes, and I am still spending them so to this day, until(4) the aid of our Lord Jesus Christ, and affection 
manifested through you, or through those my lords who have been crowned, from whom you are about to 
ask it, shall come to the help of so terrible a shipwreck. For I remember your former love, that you will grieve 
with all the rest for our sisters whom you also knew well-that is, Numeria and Candida,-for whose sin, 
because they have us as brethren, we ought to keep watch. For I believe that Christ, according to their 
repentance and the works which they have done towards our banished colleagues who came from you-by 
whom themselves you will hear of their good works,-that Christ, I say, will have mercy upon them, when you. 
His martyrs, beseech Him. 

3. For I have heard that you have received the ministry of the purpled ones. Oh, happy are you, even 
sleeping on the ground, to obtain your wishes which you have always desired! You have desired to be sent 
into prison for His name's sake, which now has come to pass; as it is written, "The Lord grant thee according 
to thine own heart;"(5) and now made a priest of God over them, and the same their minister has 
acknowledged it.(6) I ask, therefore my lord, and I entreat by our Lord Jesus Christ, that you will refer the 
case to the rest of your colleagues, your brethren, my lords, and ask from them, that whichever of you is first 
crowned, should remit such a great sin to those our sisters, Numeria and Candida. For this latter I have 
always called Etecusa(7)-God is my witness,-because she gave gifts for herself that she might not 
sacrifice; but she appears only to have ascended to the Tria Fata, (8) and thence to have descended. I 
know, therefore, that she has not sacrificed. Their cause having been lately heard, the chief rulers(9) 
commanded them in the meantime to remain as they are, until a bishop should be appointed. (10) But, as far 
as possible, by your holy prayers and petitions, in which we trust, since you are friends as well as witnesses 
of Christ, (we pray) that you would be indulgent in all these matters. 

4. I entreat, therefore, beloved lord Lucian, be mindful of me, and acquiesce in my petition; so may Christ 

grant you that sacred crown which he has given you not only in confession but also in holiness, in which you 
have always walked and have always been an example to the saints as well as a witness, that you will 
relate to all my lords, your brethren the confessors, all about this matter, that they may receive help from you. 
For this, my lord and brother, you ought to know, that it is not I alone who ask this on their behalf, but also 
Statius and Severianus, and all the confessors who have come thence hither from you; to whom these very 
sisters went down to the harbour(1) and took them up into the city, and they have ministered to sixty-five, and 
even to this day have tended them in all things. For all are with them. But I ought not to burden that sacred 
heart of yours any more, since I know that you will labour with a ready will. Macharius, with his sisters 
Cornelia and Emerita, salute you, rejoicing in your sanguinary confession, as well as in that of all the 
brethren, and Saturninus, who himself also wrestled with the devil, who also bravely confessed the name of 
Christ, who moreover, under the torture of the grappling claws, bravely confessed, and who also strongly 
begs and entreats this. Your brethren Calphurnius and Maria, and all the holy brethren, salute you. For you 
ought to know this too, that I have written also to my lords your brethren letters, which I request that you will 
deign to read to them. 

EPISTLE XXI. (2) 

LUCIAN REPLIES TO CELERINUS. 

ARGUMENT. -LUCIAN ASSENTS TO THE PETITION OF CELERINUS. 

1. Lucian to Celerinus, his lord, and (if I shall be worthy to be called so) colleague in Christ, greeting. I have 
received your letter, most dearly beloved lord and brother, in which you have so laden me with expressions 
of kindness, that by reason of your so burdening me I was almost overcome with such excessive joy; so that 
I exulted in reading, by the benefit of your so great humility, the letter, which I also earnestly desired after so 
long a time to read, in which you deigned to call me to remembrance, saying to me in your writing, "if I may 
be worthy to be called your brother," of a man such as I am who confessed the name of God with trembling 
before the inferior magistrates. For you, by God's will, when you confessed, not only frightened back the 
great serpent himself, the pioneer of Antichrist,(3) (but) have conquered him, by that voice and those divine 
words, whereby I know how you love the faith, and how zealous you are for Christ's discipline, in which I 
know and rejoice that you are actively occupied. (4) Now beloved, already to be esteemed among the 
martyrs, you have wished to overload me with your letter, in which you told us concerning our sisters, on 
whose behalf I wish that we could by possibility mention them without remembering also so great a crime 
committed. Assuredly we should not then think of them with so many tears as we do now. 

2. You ought to know what has been done concerning us. When the blessed martyr Paulus was still in the 
body, he called me and said to me: "Lucian, in the presence of Christ I say to you. If any one, after my being 
called away, shall ask for peace from you, grant it in my name." Moreover, all of us whom the Lord has 
condescended in such tribulation to call away, by our letters, by mutual agreement, have given peace to all. 
You see, then, brother, how (I have done this) in part of what Paulus bade me, as what we in all cases 
decreed when we were in this tribulation, wherein by the command of the emperor we were ordered to be 
put to death by hunger and thirst, and were shut up in two cells, that so they might weaken us by hunger and 
thirst. Moreover, the fire from the effect of our torture was so intolerable(5) that nobody could bear it. But now 
we have attained the brightness itself. And therefore, beloved brother, greet Numeria and Candida, who 
(shall have peace(6)) according to the precept of Paulus, and the rest of the martyrs whose names I subjoin: 
viz., Bassus in the dungeon of the perjured, (7) Mappalicus at the torture, Fortunio in prison, Paulus after 
torture, Fortunata, Victorinus, Victor, Herennius, Julia, Martial, and Aristo, who by God's will were put to death 
in the prison by hunger, of whom in a few days you will hear of me as a companion. For now there are eight 
days, from the day in which I was shut up again, to the day in which I wrote my letter to you. For before these 
eight days, for five intervening days, I received a morsel of bread and water by measure. And therefore, 
brother, as here, since the Lord has begun to give peace to the Church itself, according to the precept of 
Paulus, and our tractate, the case being set forth before the bishop, and confession being made, I ask that 
not only these may have peace, but also (all) those whom you know to be very near to our heart. 

3. All my colleagues greet you. Do you greet the confessors of the Lord who are there with you, whose 
names you have intimated, among whom also are Saturninus, with his companions, but who also is my 
colleague, and Maris, Collecta, and Emerita, Calphurnius and Maria, Sabina, Spesina, and the sisters, 
Januaria, Dativa, Donata. We greet Saturus with his family, Bassianus and all the clergy, Uranius, Alexius, 
Quintainus, Colonica, and all whose names I have not written, because I am already weary. Therefore they 
must pardon me. I bid you heartily farewell, and Alexius, and Getulicus, and the money-changers, and the 
sisters. My sisters Januaria and Sophia, whom I commend to you, greet you.(1) 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE XXII.-TO THE 
CLERGY ABIDING AT ROME, CONCERNING MANY OF 
THE CONFESSORS... 

d 

EPISTLE XXII.(2) 

TO THE CLERGY ABIDING AT ROME, CONCERNING MANY OF THE CONFESSORS, AND 
CONCERNING THE FORWARDNESS OF LUCIAN AND THE MODESTY OF CELERINUS 
THE CONFESSOR. 

ARGUMENT. --IN THIS LETTER CYPRIAN INFORMS THE ROMAN CLERGY OF THE 
SEDITIOUS DEMAND OF THE LAPSED TO BE RESTORED TO PEACE, AND OF THE 
FORWARDNESS OF LUCIAN. IN ORDER THAT THEY MAY BETTER UNDERSTAND 
THESE MATTERS, CYPRIAN TAKES CARE THAT NOT ONLY HIS OWN LETTERS, BUT 
ALSO THOSE OF CELERINUS AND LUCIAN, SHOULD BE SENT TO THEM. 

1 . Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons abiding at Rome, iiis bretiiren, greeting. After tiie letters tiiat I 
wrote to you, beloved brethren, in which what I had done was explained, and some slight account was given 
of my discipline and diligence, there came another matter which, any more than the others, ought not to be 
concealed from you. For our brother Lucian, who himself also is one of the confessors, earnest indeed in 
faith, and robust in virtue, but little established in the reading of the Lord's word, has attempted certain things, 
constituting himself for a time an authority for unskilled people, so that certificates written by his hand were 
given indiscriminately to many persons in the name of Paulus; whereas Mappalicus the martyr, cautious 
and modest, mindful of the law and discipline, wrote no letters contrary to the Gospel, but only, moved with 
domestic affection for his mother,(3) who had fallen, commanded peace to be given to her. Saturninus, 
moreover, after his torture, still remaining in prison, sent out no letters of this kind. But Lucian, not only while 
Paulus was still in prison, gave everywhere in his name certificates written with his own hand, but even after 
his decease persisted in doing the same things under his name, saying that this had been commanded him 
by Paulus, ignorant that he must obey the Lord rather than his fellow-servant. In the name also of Aurelius, a 
young man who had undergone the torture, many certificates were given, written by the hand of the same 
Lucian, because Aurelius did not know how to write himself. 

2. In order, in some measure, to put a stop to this practice, I wrote letters to them, which I have sent to you 
under the enclosure of the former letter, in which I did not fail to ask and persuade them that consideration 
might be had for the law of the Lord and the Gospel. But after I sent my letters to them, that, as it were, 
something might be done more moderately and temperately; the same Lucian wrote a letter in the name of 
all the confessors, in which well nigh every bond of faith, and fear of God, and the Lord's command, and the 
sacredness and sincerity of the Gospel were dissolved. For he wrote in the name of all, that they had given 
peace to all, and that he wished that this decree should be communicated through me to the other bishops, 
of which letter I transmitted a copy to you. It was added indeed, "of whom the account of what they have 
done since their crime has been satisfactory;"-a thing this which excites a greater odium against me, 
because I, when I have begun to hear the cases of each one and to examine into them, seem to deny to 
many what they now are all boasting that they have received from the martyrs anti confessors. 

3. Finally, this seditious practice has already begun to appear; for in our province, through some of its cities, 
an attack has been made by the multitude upon their rulers, and they have compelled that peace to be 
given to them immediately which they all cried out had been once given to them by the martyrs and 
confessors. Their rulers, being frightened and subdued, were of little avail to resist them, either by vigour of 
mind or by strength of faith. With us, moreover, some turbulent spirits, who in time past were with difficulty 
governed by me, and were delayed till my coming, were inflamed by this letter as if by a firebrand, and 
began to be more violent, and to extort the peace granted to them. I have sent a copy to you of the letters 
that I wrote to my clergy about these matters, and, moreover, what Caldonius, my colleague, of his integrity 
and faithfulness wrote, and what I replied to him. I have sent both to you to read. Copies also of the letter of 
Celerinus, the good and stout confessor, which he wrote to Lucian the same confessor-also what Lucian 
replied to him,-l have sent to you; that you may know both my labour in respect of everything, and my 
diligence, and might learn the truth itself, how moderate and cautious is Celerinus the confessor, and how 

reverent both in his humility and fear for our faith; while Lucian, as I have said, is less skilful concerning the 
understanding of the Lord's word, and by his facility, is mischievous on account of the dislike that he causes 
for my reverential dealing. For while the Lord has said that the nations are to be baptized in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and their past sins are to be done away in baptism; this man, 
ignorant of the precept and of the law, commands peace to be granted and sins to be done away in the 
name of Paulus; and he says that this was commanded him by Paulus, as you will observe in the letter sent 
by the same Lucian to Celerinus, in which he very little considered that it is not martyrs that make the Gospel, 
but that martyrs are made by the Gospel;(1) since Paul also, the apostle whom the Lord called a chosen 
vessel unto Him, laid down in his epistle: "I marvel that ye are so soon removed from Him that called you 
into the grace of Christ, unto another gospel: which is not another; but there be some that trouble you, and 
would pervert the Gospel of Christ. But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto 
you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. As we said before, so say I now again. 
If any man preach any other gospel unto you than that ye have received, let him be accursed. "(2) 
4. But your letter, which I received, written to my clergy, came opportunely; as also did those which the 
blessed confessors, Moyses and Maximus, Nicostratus, and the rest, sent to Saturninus and Aurelius, and 
the others, in which are contained the full vigour of the Gospel and the robust discipline of the law of the Lord. 
Your words much assisted me as I laboured here, and withstood with the whole strength of faith the onset of 
ill-will, so that my work was shortened from above, and that before the letters which I last sent you reached 
you, you declared to me, that according to the Gospel law, your judgment also strongly and unanimously 
concurred with mine. I bid you, brethren, beloved and longed-for, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE XXIII. (3) 

TO THE CLERGY, ON THE LETTERS SENT TO ROME, AND ABOUT THE APPOINTMENT 
OF SATURUS AS READER, AND OPTATUS AS SUB-DEACON. A.D. 250. 

ARGUMENT. --THE CLERGY ARE INFORMED BY THIS LETTER OF THE ORDINATION OF 
SATURUS AND OPTATUS, AND WHAT CYPRIAN HAD WRITTEN TO ROME. 

Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his brethren, greeting. That nothing may be unl<nown to your 
consciousness, beloved brethren, of what was written to me and what I replied, I have sent you a copy of 
each letter, and I believe that my rejoinder will not displease you. But I ought to acquaint you in my letter 
concerning this, that for a very urgent reason I have sent a letter to the clergy who abide in the city. And since 
it behoved me to write by clergy, while I know that very many of ours are absent, and the few that are there 
are hardly sufficient for the ministry of the daily duty, it was necessary to appoint some new ones, who might 
be sent. Know, then, that I have made Saturus a reader, and Optatus, the confessor, a sub-deacon; whom 
already, by the general advice, we had made next to the clergy, in having entrusted to Saturus on 
Easter-day, once and again, the reading; and when with the teacher-presbyters(4) we were carefully trying 
readers-in appointing Optatus from among the readers to be a teacher of the hearers;-examining, first of 
all, whether all things were found fitting in them, which ought to be found in such as were in preparation for the 
clerical office. Nothing new, therefore, has been done by me in your absence; but what, on the general 
advice of all of us had been begun, has, upon urgent necessity, been accomplished. I bid you, beloved 
brethren, ever heartily farewell; and remember me. Fare ye well. 

EPISTLES XXIV & XXV.-BETWEEN CYPRIAN & 
MOYSES AND MAXIMUS AND THE OTHER 
CONFESSORS 

EPISTLE XXIV.(5) 

TO MOYSES AND MAXIMUS AND THE REST OF THE CONFESSORS. 

ARGUMENT. --THIS LETTER IS ONE OF CONGRATULATION TO THE ROMAN 
CONFESSORS. 

1 . Cyprian to Moyses and Maximus, the presbyters, and to the other confessors, his very beloved brethren, 
greeting. I had already known from rumour, most brave and blessed brethren, the glory of your faith and 
virtue, rejoicing greatly and abundantly congratulating you, that the highest condescension of our Lord 
Jesus Christ should have prepared you for the crown by confession of His name. For you, who have 
become chiefs and leaders in the battle of our day, have set forward the standard of the celestial warfare; 
you have made a beginning of the spiritual contest which God has purposed to be now waged by your 
valour; you, with unshaken strength and unyielding firmness, have broken the first onset of the rising war. 
Thence have arisen happy openings of the fight; thence have begun good auspices of victory. It happened 
that here martyrdoms were consummated by tortures. But he who, preceding in the struggle, has been 
made an example of virtue to the brethren, is on common ground with the martyrs in honour. Hence you 
have delivered to us garlands woven by your hand, and have pledged your brethren from the cup of 
salvation. 

2. To these glorious beginnings of confession and the omens of a victorious warfare, has been added the 
maintenance of discipline, which I observed from the vigour of your letter that you lately sent to your 
colleagues joined with you to the Lord in confession, with anxious admonition, that the sacred precepts of 
the Gospel and the commandments of life once delivered to us should be kept with firm and rigid 
observance. Behold another lofty degree of your glory; behold, with confession, a double title to deserving 
well of God,-to stand with a firm step, and to drive away in this struggle, by the strength of your faith, those 
who endeavour to make a breach in the Gospel, and bring impious hands to the work of undermining the 
Lord's precepts:-to have before afforded the indications of courage, and now to afford lessons of life. The 
Lord, when, after His resurrection. He sent forth His apostles, charges them, saying, "All power is given unto 
me in heaven and in earth. Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, 
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded 
you."(1) And the Apostle John, remembering this charge, subsequently lays it down in his epistle: "Hereby," 
says he, "we do know that we know Him, if we keep His commandments. He that saith he knoweth Him, and 
keepeth not His commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. "(2) You prompt the keeping of these 
precepts; you observe the divine and heavenly commands. This is to be a confessor of the Lord; this is to 
be a martyr of Christ, -to keep the firmness of one's profession inviolate among all evils, and secure. (3) For 
to wish to become a martyr for the Lord, and to try to overthrow the Lord's precepts; to use against Him the 
condescension that He has granted you;-to become, as it were, a rebel with arms that you have received 
from Him;-this is to wish to confess Christ, and to deny Christ's Gospel. I rejoice, therefore, on your behalf, 
most brave and faithful brethren; and as much as I congratulate the martyrs there honoured for the glory of 
their strength, so much do I also equally congratulate you for the crown of the Lord's discipline. The Lord has 
shed forth His condescension in manifold kinds of liberality. He has distributed the praises of good soldiers 
and their spiritual glories in plentiful variety. We also are sharers in your honour; we count your glory our 
glory, whose times have been brightened by such a felicity, that it should be the fortune of our day to see the 
proved servants of God and Christ's soldiers crowned. I bid you, most brave and blessed brethren, ever 
heartily farewell; and remember me. 

EPISTLE XXV. (4) 

MOYSES, MAXIMUS, NICOSTRATUS, AND THE OTHER CONFESSORS ANSWER THE 
FOREGOING LETTER. .A.D. 250. 

ARGUMENT. --THEY GRATEFULLY ACKNOWLEDGE THE CONSOLATION WHICH THE 
ROMAN CONFESSORS HAD RECEIVED FROM CYPRIAN'S LETTER. MARTYRDOM IS NOT 
A PUNISHMENT, BUT A HAPPINESS. THE WORDS OF THE GOSPEL ARE BRANDS TO 
INFLAME FAITH. IN THE CASE OF THE LAPSED, THE JUDGMENT OF CYPRIAN IS 
ACQUIESCED IN. 

1. To Caecilius Cyprian, bishop of tiie ciiurcii of tiie Cartiiaginians, IVIoyses and IVIaximus, presbyters, and 
Nicostratus and Rufinus, deacons, and tiie otiier confessors persevering in tiie faitii of tiie trutii, in God tiie 
Fatiier, and in His Son Jesus Ciirist our Lord, and in tiie Holy Spirit, greeting. Placed, brother, as we are 
among various and manifold sorrows, on account of the present desolations of many brethren throughout 
almost the whole world, (5) this chief consolation has reached us, that we have been lifted up by the receipt 
of your letter, and have gathered some alleviation for the griefs of our saddened spirit. From which we can 
already perceive that the grace of divine providence wished to keep us so long shut up in the prison chains, 
perhaps for no other reason than that, instructed and more vigorously animated by your letter, we might with 
a more earnest will attain to the destined crown. For your letter has shone upon us as a calm in the midst of a 
tempest, and as the longed-for tranquillity in the midst of a troubled sea, and as repose in labours, as health 
in dangers and pains, as in the densest darkness, the bright and glowing light. Thus we drank it up with a 
thirsty spirit, and received it with a hungry desire; so that we rejoice to find ourselves by it sufficiently fed and 
strengthened for encounter with the foe. The Lord will reward you for that love of yours, and will restore you 
the fruit due to this so good work; for he who exhorts is not less worthy of the reward of the crown than he who 
suffers; not less worthy of praise is he who has taught, than he who has acted also; he is not less to be 
honoured who has warned, than he who has fought; except that sometimes the weight of glory more 
redounds to him who trains, than to him who has shown himself a teachable learner; for the latter, perchance, 
would not have bad what he has practised, unless the former had taught him. 

2. Therefore, again, we say, brother Cyprian, we have received great joy, great comfort, great refreshment, 
especially in that you have described, with glorious and deserved praises, the glorious, I will not say, 
deaths, but immortalities of martyrs. For such departures should have been proclaimed with such words, 
that the things which were related might be told in such manner as they were done. Thus, from your letter, we 
saw those glorious triumphs of the martyrs; and with our eyes in some sort have followed them as they went 
to heaven, and have contemplated them seated among angels, and the powers and dominions of heaven. 
Moreover, we have in some manner perceived with our ears the Lord giving them the promised testimony in 
the presence of the Father. It is this, then, which also raises our spirit day by day, and inflames us to the 
following of the track of such dignity. 

3. For what more glorious, or what more blessed, can happen to any man from the divine condescension, 
than to confess the Lord God, in death itself, before his very executioners? Than among the raging and 
varied and exquisite tortures of worldly power, even when the body is racked and torn and cut to pieces, to 
confess Christ the Son of God with a spirit still free, although departing? Than to have mounted to heaven 
with the world left behind? Than, having forsaken men, to stand among the angels? Than, all worldly 
impediments being broken through, already to stand free in the sight of God? Than to enjoy the heavenly 
kingdom without any delay? Than to have become an associate of Christ's passion in Christ's name? Than 
to have become by the divine condescension the judge of one's own judge? Than to have brought off an 
unstained conscience from the confession of His name? Than to have refused to obey human and 
sacrilegious laws against the faith? Than to have borne witness to the truth with a public testimony? Than, by 
dying, to have subdued death itself, which is dreaded by all? Than, by death itself, to have attained 
immortality? Than when torn to pieces, and tortured by all the instruments of cruelty, to have overcome the 
torture by the tortures themselves? Than by strength of mind to have wrestled with all the agonies of a 
mangled body? Than not to have shuddered at the flow of one's own blood? Than to have begun to love 
one's punishments, after having faith to bear them?(1) Than to think it an injury to one's life not to have left it? 

4. For to this battle our Lord, as with the trumpet of His Gospel, stimulates us when He says, "He that loveth 
father or mother more than me is not worthy of me: and he that loveth his own soul more than me is not worthy 
of me. And he that taketh not his cross, and followeth after me, is not worthy of me. "(2) And again, "Blessed 
are they which are persecuted for righteousness' sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed shall ye 
be, when men shall persecute you, and hate you. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for so did their fathers 
persecute the prophets which were before you. "(3) And again," Because ye shall stand before kings and 
powers, and the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the son, and he that endureth to 
the end shall be saved;"(4) and "To him that overcometh will I give to sit on my throne, even as I also 
overcame and am set down on the throne of my Father."(5) Moreover the apostle: "Who shall separate us 
from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or 
sword? (As it is written. For thy sake are we killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the 

slaughter.) Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors for Him who hath loved us. "(6) 

5. When we read these things, (7) and things of the like kind, brought together in the Gospel, and feel, as it 
were, torches placed under us, with the Lord's words to inflame our faith, we not only do not dread, but we 
even provoke(8) the enemies of the truth; and we have already conquered the opponents of God, by the 
very fact of our not yielding to them, and have subdued their nefarious laws against the truth. And although 
we have not yet shed our blood, we are prepared to shed it. Let no one think that this delay of our 
departure(l) is any clemency; for it obstructs us, it makes a hindrance to our glory, it puts off heaven, it 
withholds the glorious sight of God. For in a contest of this kind, and in the kind of contest when faith is 
struggling in the encounter, it is not true clemency to put off martyrs by delay. Entreat therefore, beloved 
Cyprian, that of His mercy the Lord will every day more and more arm and adorn every one of us with 
greater abundance and readiness, and will confirm and strengthen us by the strength of His power; and, as 
a good captain, will at length bring forth His soldiers, whom He has hitherto trained and proved in the camp 
of our prison, to the field of the battle set before them. May He hold forth to us the divine arms, those 
weapons that know not how to be conquered,-the breastplate of righteousness, which is never accustomed 
to be broken,-the shield of faith, which cannot be pierced through, -the helmet of salvation, which cannot be 
shattered, -and the sword of the Spirit, which has never been wont to be injured. For to whom should we 
rather commit these things for him to ask for us, than to our so reverend bishop, (2) as destined victims 
asking help of the priest? 

6. Behold another joy of ours, that, in the duty of your episcopate, although in the meantime you have been, 
owing to the condition of the times, divided from your brethren, you have frequently confirmed the 
confessors by your letters; that you have ever afforded necessary supplies from your own just acquisitions; 
that in all things you have always shown yourself in some sense present; that in no part of your duty have 
you hung behind as a deserter.(3) But what more strongly stimulated us to a greater joy we cannot be silent 
upon, but must describe with all the testimony of our voice. For we observe that you have both rebuked with 
fitting censure, and worthily, those who, unmindful of their sins, had, with hasty and eager desire, extorted 
peace from the presbyters in your absence, and those who, without respect for the Gospel, had with profane 
facility granted the holiness(4) of the Lord unto dogs, and pearls to swine; although a great crime, and one 
which has extended with incredible destructiveness almost over the whole earth, ought only, as you yourself 
write, to be treated cautiously and with moderation, with the advice of all the bishops, presbyters, deacons, 
confessors, and even the laymen who abide fast,(5) as in your letters you yourself also testify; so that, while 
wishing unseasonably to bring repairs to the ruins, we may not appear to be bringing about other and 
greater destruction, for where is the divine word left, if pardon be so easily granted to sinners? Certainly their 
spirits are to be cheered and to be nourished up to the season of their maturity, and they are to be instructed 
from the Holy Scriptures how great and surpassing a sin they have committed. Nor let them be animated by 
the fact that they are many, but rather let them be checked by the fact that they are not few. (6) An unblushing 
number has never been accustomed to have weight in extenuation of a crime; but shame, modesty, 
patience, discipline, humility, and subjection, waiting for the judgment of others upon itself, and bearing the 
sentence of others upon its own judgment,-this it is which proves penitence; this it is which skins over a 
deep wound; this it is which raises up the ruins of the fallen spirit and restores them, which quells and 
restrains the burning vapour of their raging sins. For the physician will not give to the sick the food of healthy 
bodies, lest the unseasonable nourishment, instead of repressing, should stimulate the power of the raging 
disease, -that is to say, lest what might have been sooner diminished by abstinence, should, through 
impatience, be prolonged by growing indigestion. 

7. Hands, therefore, polluted with impious sacrifices(7) must be purified with good works, and wretched 
mouths defiled with accursed food(8) must be purged with words of true penitence, and the spirit must be 
renewed and consecrated in the recesses of the faithful heart. Let the frequent groanings of the penitents be 
heard; let faithful tears be shed from the eyes not once only, but again and again, so that those very eyes 
which wickedly looked upon idols may wash away, with tears that satisfy God, the unlawful things that they 
had done. Nothing is necessary for diseases but patience: they who are weary and weak wrestle with their 
pain; and so at length hope for health, if, by tolerating it, they can overcome their suffering; for unfaithful is the 
scar which the physician has too quickly produced; and the healing is undone by any little casualty, if the 
remedies be not used faithfully from their very slowness. The flame is quickly recalled again to a 
conflagration, unless the material of the whole fire be extinguished even to the extremest spark; so that men 
of this kind should justly know that even they themselves are more advantaged by the very delay, and that 
more trusty remedies are applied by the necessary postponement. Besides, where shall it be said that they 
who confess Christ are shut up in the keeping of a squalid prison, if they who have denied Him are in no peril 
of their faith? Where, that they are bound in the cincture of chains in God's name, if they who have not kept 
the confession of God are not deprived of communion? Where, that the imprisoned martyrs lay down their 
glorious lives, if those who have forsaken the faith do not feel the magnitude of their dangers and their sins? 
But if they betray too much impatience, and demand communion with intolerable eagerness, they vainly 

utter with petulant and unbridled tongues those querulous and invidious reproaches which avail nothing 
against the truth, since they might have retained by their own right what now by a necessity, which they of 
their own free will have sought, they are compelled to sue for.(1) For the faith which could confess Christ, 
could also have been kept by Christ in communion. We bid you, blessed and most glorious father, ever 
heartily farewell in the Lord; and have us in remembrance. 

EPISTLES XXVI & XXVI I. -CYPRIAN TO THE LAPSED & 
TO THE PRESBYTERS AND DEACONS 

A 

EPISTLE XXVI. (2) 

CYPRIAN TO THE LAPSED. 

ARGUMENT. --THE ARGUMENT OF THIS LETTER IS FOUND BELOW IN LETTER XXVII. 
"THEY WROTE TO ME," SAYS HE, "NOT ASKING THAT PEACE SHOULD BE GRANTED 
THEM, BUT CLAIMING IT FOR THEMSELVES AS ALREADY GRANTED, BECAUSE THEY 
SAY THAT PAULUS HAS GIVEN PEACE TO ALL; AS YOU WILL READ IN THEIR LETTER 
OF WHICH I HAVE SENT YOU A COPY, TOGETHER WITH WHAT I BRIEFLY REPLIED TO 
THEM" BUT THE LETTER OF THE LAPSED TO WHICH HE REPLIES IS WANTING. 

1 . Our Lord, whose precepts and admonitions we ougiit to observe, describing tiie iionour of a bisliop(3) 
and tiie order of His Ciiurcii, speal<s in tiie Gospel, and says to Peter: "I say unto tiiee, Tiiat tiiou art Peter, 
and upon tiiis rocl< will I build my Church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give unto 
thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: 
and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. "(4) Thence, through the changes of 
times and successions, the ordering of bishops and the plan of the Church flow onwards; so that the Church 
is founded upon the bishops, and every act of the Church is controlled by these same rulers.s Since this, 
then, is founded on the divine law, I marvel that some, with daring temerity, have chosen to write to me as if 
they wrote in the name of the Church; when the Church is established in the bishop and the clergy, and all 
who stand fast in the faith. For far be it from the mercy of God and His uncontrolled might to suffer the number 
of the lapsed to be called the Church; since it is written, "God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. "(6) 
For we indeed desire that all may be made alive; and we pray that, by our supplications and groans, they 
may be restored to their original state. But if certain lapsed ones claim to be the Church, and if the Church be 
among them and in them, what is left but for us to ask of these very persons that they would deign to admit us 
into the Church? Therefore it behoves them to be submissive and quiet and modest, as those who ought to 
appease God, in remembrance of their sin, and not to write letters in the name of the Church, when they 
should rather be aware that they are writing to the Church. 

2. But some who are of the lapsed have lately written to me, and are humble and meek and trembling and 
fearing God, and who have always laboured in the Church gloriously and liberally, and who have never 
made a boast of their labour to the Lord, knowing that He has said, "When ye shall have done all these 
things, say. We are unprofitable servants: we have done that which was our duty to do. "(7) Thinking of which 
things, and although they had received certificates from the martyrs, nevertheless, that their satisfaction 
might be admitted by the Lord, these persons beseeching have written to me that they acknowledge their 
sin, and are truly repentant, and do not hurry rashly or importunately to secure peace; but that they are 
waiting for my presence, saying that even peace itself, if they should receive it when I was present, would be 
sweeter to them. How greatly I congratulate these, the Lord is my witness, who hath condescended to tell 
what such, and such sort of servants deserve of His kindness. Which letters, as I lately received, and now 
read that yon have written very differently, I beg that you will discriminate between your wishes; and whoever 
you are who have sent this letter, add your names to the certificate, and transmit the certificate to me with 
your several names. For I must first know to whom I have to reply; then I will respond to each of the matters 
that you have written, having regard to the mediocrity of my place and conduct. I bid you, beloved brethren, 
ever heartily farewell, and live quietly and tranquilly according to the Lord's discipline. Fare ye well. 

EPISTLE XXVII. (1) 

TO THE PRESBYTERS AND DEACONS. 

ARGUMENT. -THE ARGUMENT OF THIS LETTER IS SUFFICIENTLY IN AGREEMENT 
WITH THE PRECEDING, AND IT APPEARS THAT IT IS THE ONE OF WHICH HE SPEAKS 
IN THE FOLLOWING LETTER; FOR HE PRAISES HIS CLERGY FOR HAVING REJECTED 
FROM COMMUNION GAIUS OF DIDDA, A PRESBYTER, AND HIS DEACON, WHO RASHLY 

COMMUNICATED WITH THE LAPSED; AND EXHORTS THEM TO DO THE SAME WITH 
CERTAIN OTHERS. 

1 . Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his brethren, greeting. You have done uprightly and with 
discipline, beloved brethren, that, by the advice of my colleagues who were present, you have decided not 
to communicate with Gaius the presbyter of Didda, and his deacon; who, by communicating with the lapsed, 
and offering their oblations, (2) have been frequently taken in their wicked errors; and who once and again, 
as you wrote to me, when warned by my colleagues not to do this, have persisted obstinately, in their 
presumption and audacity, deceiving certain brethren also from among our people, whose benefit we 
desire with all humility to consult, and whose salvation we take care for, not with affected adulation, but with 
sincere faith, that they may supplicate the Lord with true penitence and groaning and sorrow, since it is 
written, "Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent. "(3) And again, the divine Scripture says, "Thus 
saith the Lord, When thou shalt be converted and lament, then thou shalt be saved, and shall know where 
thou hast been. "(4) 

2. Yet how can those mourn and repent, whose groanings and tears some of the presbyters obstruct when 
they rashly think that they may be communicated with, not knowing that it is written, "They who call you happy 
s cause you to err, and destroy the path of your feet?"(6) Naturally, our wholesome and true counsels have 
no success, whilst the salutary truth is hindered by mischievous blandishments and flatteries, and the 
wounded and unhealthy mind of the lapsed suffers what those also who are bodily diseased and sick often 
suffer; that while they refuse wholesome food and beneficial drink as bitter and distasteful, and crave those 
things which seem to please them and to be sweet for the present, they are inviting to themselves mischief 
and death by their recklessness and intemperance. Nor does the true remedy of the skilful physician avail 
to their safety, whilst the sweet enticement is deceiving with its charms. 

3. Do you, therefore, according to my letters, take counsel about this faithfully and wholesomely, and do not 
recede from better counsels; and be careful to read these same letters to my colleagues also, if there are 
any present, or if any should come to you; that, with unanimity and concord, we may maintain a healthful plan 
for soothing and healing the wounds of the lapsed, intending to deal very fully with all when, by the Lord's 
mercy, we shall begin to assemble together. In the meantime, if any unrestrained and impetuous person, 
whether of our presbyters or deacons or of strangers, should dare, before our decree, to communicate with 
the lapsed, let him be expelled from our communion, and plead the cause of his rashness before all of us 
when, by the Lord's permission, we shall assemble together again. (7) Moreover, you wished me to reply 
what I thought concerning Philumenus and Fortunatus, sub-deacons, and Favorinus, an acolyte, who retired 
in the midst of the time of trial, and have now returned. Of which thing I cannot make myself sole judge, since 
many of the clergy are still absent, and have not considered, even thus late, that they should return to their 
place; and this case of each one must be considered separately and fully investigated, not only with my 
colleagues, but also with the whole of the people themselves. (7) For a matter which hereafter may constitute 
an example as regards the ministers of the Church must be weighed and adjudged with careful deliberation. 
In the meanwhile, let them only abstain from the monthly division, (8) not so as to seem to be deprived of the 
ministry of the Church, but that all matters being in a sound state, they may be reserved till my coming. I bid 
you, beloved brethren, ever heartily farewell. Greet all the brotherhood, and fare ye well. 

EPISTLES XXVIII & XXIX.-BETWEEN CYPRIAN & THE 
PRESBYTERS AND DEACONS ABIDING AT ROME 

A 

EPISTLE XXVIII.(9) 

TO THE PRESBYTERS AND DEACONS ABIDING AT ROME. 

ARGUMENT. --THE ROMAN CLERGY ARE INFORMED OF THE TEMERITY OF THE 
LAPSED WHO WERE DEMANDING PEACE. 

Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons abiding at Rome, iiis bretiiren, greeting. Botii our common love and 
tiie reason of tiie tiling demand, beloved brethren, that I should keep back from your knowledge nothing of 
those matters which are transacted among us, that so we may have a common plan for the advantage of the 
administration of the Church. For after I wrote to you the letter which I sent by Saturus the reader, and Optatus 
the sub-deacon, the combined temerity of certain of the lapsed, who refuse to repent and to make 
satisfaction to God, wrote to me, not asking that peace might be given to them, but claiming it as already 
given; because they say that Paulus has given peace to all, as you will read in their letter of which I have 
sent you a copy, as well as what I briefly replied to them in the meantime. But that you may also know what 
sort of a letter I afterwards wrote to the clergy, I have, moreover, sent you a copy of this. But if, after all, their 
temerity should not be repressed either by my letters or by yours, and should not yield to wholesome 
counsels, I shall take such proceedings as the Lord, according to His Gospel, has enjoined to be taken. I 
bid you, beloved brethren, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE XXIX.(1) 

THE PRESBYTERS AND DEACONS ABIDING AT ROME, TO CYPRIAN. 

ARGUMENT. -THE ROMAN CHURCH DECLARES ITS JUDGMENT CONCERNING THE 
LAPSED TO BE IN AGREEMENT WITH THE CARTHAGINIAN DECREES. ANY 
INDULGENCE SHOWN TO THE LAPSED IS REQUIRED TO BE IN ACCORDANCE WITH 
THE LAW OF THE GOSPEL. THAT THE PEACE GRANTED BY THE CONFESSORS 
DEPENDS ONLY UPON GRACE AND GOOD-WILL, IS MANIFEST FROM THE FACT THAT 
THE LAPSED ARE REFERRED TO THE BISHOPS. THE SEDITIOUS DEMAND FOR PEACE 
MADE BY FELICISSIMUS IS TO BE ATTRIBUTED TO FACTION. 

1 . The presbyters and deacons abiding at Rome, to Father(2) Cyprian, greeting. When, beloved brother, we 
carefully read your letter which you had sent by Fortunatus the sub-deacon, we were smitten with a double 
sorrow, and disordered with a twofold grief, that there was not any rest given to you in such necessities of the 
persecution, and that the unreasonable petulance of the lapsed brethren was declared to be carried even 
to a dangerous boldness of expression. But although those things which we have spoken of severely 
afflicted us and our spirit, yet your rigour and the severity that you have used, according to the proper 
discipline, moderates the so heavy load of our grief, in that you rightly restrain the wickedness of some, and, 
by your exhortation to repentance, show the legitimate way of salvation That they should have wished to 
hurry to such an extreme as this, we are indeed considerably surprised; as that with such urgency, and at so 
unseasonable and bitter a time, being in so great and excessive a sin, they should not so much ask for, as 
claim, peace for themselves; nay, should say that they already have it in heaven. If they have it, why do they 
ask for what they possess? But if, by the very fact that they are asking for it, it is proved that they have it not, 
wherefore do they not accept the judgment of those from whom they have thought fit to ask for the peace, 
which they certainly have not got? But if they think that they have from any other source the prerogative of 
communion, let them try to compare it with the Gospel, that so at length it may abundantly avail them, if it is 
not out of harmony with the Gospel law. But on what principle can that give Gospel communion which seems 
to be established contrary to Gospel truth? For since every prerogative contemplates the privilege of 
association, precisely on the assumption of its not being out of harmony with the will of Him with whom it 
seeks to be associated; then, because this is alien from His will with whom it seeks to be associated, it must 
of necessity lose the indulgence and privilege of the association. 

2. Let them, then, see what it is they are trying to do in this matter. For if they say that the Gospel has 
established one decree, but the martyrs have established another; then they, setting the martyrs at variance 
with the Gospel, will be in danger on both sides. For, on the one hand, the majesty of the Gospel will already 
appear shattered and cast down, if it can be overcome by the novelty of another decree; and, on the other, 
the glorious crown of confession will be taken from the heads of the martyrs, if they be not found to have 
attained it by the observation of that Gospel whence they become martyrs; so that, reasonably, no one 
should be more careful to determine nothing contrary to the Gospel, than he who strives to receive the name 
of martyr from the Gospel. We should like, besides, to be informed of this: if martyrs become martyrs for no 
other reason than that by not sacrificing they may keep the peace of the Church even to the shedding of their 
own blood, lest, overcome by the suffering of the torture, by losing peace, they might lose salvation; on what 
principle do they think that the salvation, which if they had sacrificed they thought that they should not have, 
was to be given to those who are said to have sacrificed; although they ought to maintain that law in others, 
which they themselves appear to have held before their own eyes? In which thing we observe that they have 
put forward against their own cause the very thing which they thought made for them. For if the martyrs 
thought that peace was to be granted to them, why did not they themselves grant it? Why did they think that, 
as they themselves say, they were to be referred to the bishops? For he who orders a thing to be done, can 
assuredly do that which he orders to be done. But, as we understand, nay, as the case itself speaks and 
proclaims, the most holy martyrs thought that a proper measure of modesty and of truth must be observed 
on both sides. For as they were urged by many, in remitting them to the bishop they conceived that they 
would consult their own modesty so as to be no further disquieted; and in themselves not holding 
communion with them, they judged that the purity of the Gospel law ought to be maintained unimpaired. 

3. But of your charity, brother, never desist from soothing the spirits of the lapsed and affording to the erring 
the medicine of truth, although the temper of the sick is wont to reject the kind offices of those who would heal 
them. This wound of the lapsed is as yet fresh, and the sore is still rising into a tumour; and therefore we are 
certain, that when, in the course of more protracted time, that urgency of theirs shall have worn out, they will 
love that very delay which refers them to a faithful medicine; if only there be not those who arm them for their 
own danger, and, instructing them perversely, demand on their behalf, instead of the salutary remedies of 
delay, the fatal poisons of a premature communion. For we do not believe, that without the instigation of 
certain persons they would all have dared so petulantly to claim peace for themselves. We know the faith of 
the Carthaginian church, (1) we know her training, we know her humility; whence also we have marvelled that 
we should observe certain things somewhat rudely suggested against you by letter, although we have often 
become aware of your mutual love and charity, in many illustrations of reciprocal affection of one another. It 
is time, therefore, that they should repent of their fault, that they should prove their grief for their lapse, that 
they should show modesty, that they should manifest humility, that they should exhibit some shame, that, by 
their submission, they should appeal to God's clemency for themselves, and by due honour for(2) God's 
priest should draw forth upon themselves the divine mercy. How vastly better would have been the letters of 
these men themselves, if the prayers of those who stood fast had been aided by their own humility! since 
that which is asked for is more easily obtained, when he for whom it is asked is worthy, that what is asked 
should be obtained. 

4. In respect, however, of Privatus of Lambesa, you have acted as you usually do, in desiring to inform us of 
the matter, as being an object of anxiety; for it becomes us all to watch for the body of the whole Church, 
whose members are scattered through every various province. (3) But the deceitfulness of that crafty man 
could not be hid from us even before we had your letters; for previously, when from the company of that very 
wickedness a certain Futurus came, a standard-bearer of Privatus, and was desirous of fraudulently 
obtaining letters from us, we were neither ignorant who he was, nor did he get the letters which he wanted. 
We bid you heartily farewell in the Lord. 

EPISTLE XXX. (4) 

THE ROMAN CLERGY TO CYPRIAN. 

ARGUMENT. --THE ROMAN CLERGY ENTER INTO THE MATTERS WHICH THEY HAD 
SPOKEN OF IN THE FOREGOING LETTER, MORE FULLY AND SUBSTANTIALLY IN THE 
PRESENT ONE; REPLYING, MOREOVER, TO ANOTHER LETTER OF CYPRIAN, WHICH IS 
THOUGHT NOT TO BE EXTANT, AND FROM WHICH THEY QUOTE A FEW WORDS. THEY 
THANK CYPRIAN FOR HIS LETTERS SENT TO THE ROMAN CONFESSORS AND 
MARTYRS. (5) 

1 . To Father(6) Cyprian, the presbyters and deacons abiding at Rome, greeting. Altiiougii a mind conscious 
to itself of uprigiitness, and relying on the vigour of evangelical discipline, and made a true witness to itself 
in the heavenly decrees, is accustomed to be satisfied with God for its only judge, and neither to seek the 
praises nor to dread the charges of any other, yet those are worthy of double praise, who, knowing that they 
owe their conscience to God alone as the judge, yet desire that their doings should be approved also by 
their brethren themselves. It is no wonder, brother Cyprian, that you should do this, who, with your usual 
modesty and inborn industry, have wished that we should be found not so much judges of, as sharers in, 
your counsels, so that we might find praise with you in your doings while we approve them; and might be 
able to be fellow-heirs with you in your good counsels, because we entirely accord with them. In the same 
way we are all thought to have laboured in that in which we are all regarded as allied in the same 
agreement of censure and discipline. 

2. For what is there either in peace so suitable, or in a war of persecution so necessary, as to maintain the 
due severity of the divine rigour? Which he who resists, will of necessity wander in the unsteady course of 
affairs, and will be tossed hither and thither by the various and uncertain storms of things; and the helm of 
counsel being, as it were, wrenched from his hands he will drive the ship of the Church's safety among the 
rocks; so that it would appear that the Church's safety can be no otherwise secured, than by repelling any 
who set themselves against it as adverse waves, and by maintaining the ever-guarded rule of discipline 
itself as if it were the rudder of safety in the tempest. Nor is it now but lately that this counsel has been 
considered by us, nor have these sudden appliances against the wicked but recently occurred to us; but 
this is read of among us as the ancient severity, the ancient faith, the ancient discipline, (1) since the apostle 
would not have published such praise concerning us, when he said "that your faith is spoken of throughout 
the whole world"(2) unless already from thence that vigour had borrowed the roots of faith from those times; 
from which praise and glory it is a very great crime to have become degenerate. (3) For it is less disgrace 
never to have attained to the heraldry of praise, than to have fallen from the height of praise; it is a smaller 
crime not to have been honoured with a good testimony, than to have lost the honour of good testimonies; it 
is less discredit to have lain without the announcement of virtues, ignoble without praise, than, disinherited of 
the faith, (4) to have lost our proper praises. For those things which are proclaimed to the glory of any one, 
unless they are maintained by anxious and careful pains, swell up into the odium of the greatest crime. (5) 

3. That we are not saying this dishonestly, our former letters have proved, wherein we have declared our 
opinion to you with a very plain statement, both against those who had betrayed themselves as unfaithful by 
the unlawful presentation of wicked certificates, as ifthey thought that they would escape those esnaring 
nets of the devil; whereas, not less than ifthey had approached to the wicked altars, (6) they were held fast 
by the very fact that they had testified to him; and against those who had used those certificates when made, 
although they had not been present when they were made, since they had certainly asserted their presence 
by ordering that they should be so written. For he is not guiltless of wickedness who has bidden it to be 
done; nor is he unconcerned in the crime with whose consent it is publicly spoken of, although it was not 
committed by him. And since the whole mystery(7) of faith is understood to be contained in the confession of 
the name of Christ, he who "seeks for deceitful tricks to excuse himself, has denied Christ; and he who wants 
to appear to have satisfied either edicts or laws put forth against the Gospel, has obeyed those edicts by 
the very fact by which he wished to appear to have obeyed them. Moreover, also, we have declared our 
faith and consent against those, too, who had polluted their hands and their mouths with unlawful sacrifices, 
whose own minds were before polluted; whence also their very hands and mouths were polluted also. (8) 

Far be it from the Roman Church to slacken her vigour with so profane a facility, and to loosen the nerves of 
her severity by overthrowing the majesty of faith; so that, when the wrecks of your ruined brethren are still not 
only lying, but are falling around, remedies of a too hasty kind, and certainly not likely to avail, should be 
afforded for communion; and by a false mercy, new wounds should be impressed on the old wounds of their 
transgression; so that even repentance should be snatched from these wretched beings, to their greater 
overthrow. For where can the medicine of indulgence profit, if even the physician himself, by intercepting 
repentance, makes easy way for new dangers, if he only hides the wound, and does not suffer the 
necessary remedy of time to close the scar? This is not to cure, but, if we wish to speak the truth, to slay. (9) 

4. Nevertheless, you have letters agreeing with our letters from the confessors, whom the dignity of their 
confession has still shut up here in prison, and whom, for the Gospel contest, their faith has once already 
crowned in a glorious confession; letters wherein they have maintained the severity of the Gospel discipline, 
and have revoked the unlawful petitions, so that they might not be a disgrace to the Church. Unless they had 
done this, the ruins of Gospel discipline(1 0) would not easily be restored, especially since it was to none so 
fitting to maintain the tenor of evangelical vigour unimpaired, and its dignity, as to those who had given 
themselves up to be tortured and cut to pieces by raging men on behalf of the Gospel, that they might not 
deservedly forfeit the honour of martyrdom, if, on the occasion of martyrdom, they had wished to be 
betrayers of the Gospel. For he who does not guard what he has, in that condition whereon he possesses it, 
by violating the condition whereon he possesses it, loses what he possessed. 

5. In which matter we ought to give you also, and we do give you, abundant thanks, that you have brightened 
the darkness of their prison by your letters; that you came to them in whatever way you could enter; that you 
refreshed their minds, robust in their own faith and confession, by your addresses and letters; that, following 
up their felicities with worthy praises, you have inflamed them to a much more ardent desire of heavenly 
glory; that you urged them forward; that you animated, by the power of your discourse, those who, as we 
believe and hope, will be victors by and by; so that although all may seem to come from the faith of those 
who confess, and from the divine mercy, yet they seem in their martyrdom to have become in some sort 
debtors to you. But once more, to return to the point whence our discourse appears to have digressed, you 
shall find subjoined the sort of letters that we also sent to Sicily; although upon us is incumbent a greater 
necessity of delaying this affair; having, since the departure of Fabian of most noble memory, had no 
bishop appointed as yet, on account of the difficulties of affairs and times, who can arrange all things of this 
kind, and who can take account of those who are lapsed, with authority and wisdom. However, what you 
also have yourself declared in so important a matter, is satisfactory to us, that the peace of the Church must 
first be maintained; then, that an assembly for counsel being gathered together, with bishops, presbyters, 
deacons, and confessors, as well as with the laity who stand fast,(1) we should deal with the case of the 
lapsed. For it seems extremely invidious and burdensome to examine into what seems to have been 
committed by many, except by the advice of many; or that one should give a sentence when so great a 
crime is known to have gone forth, and to be diffused among so many; since that cannot be a firm decree 
which shall not appear to have had the consent of very many. (2) Look upon almost the whole world 
devastated, and observe that the remains and the ruins of the fallen are lying about on every side, and 
consider that therefore an extent of counsel is asked for, large in proportion as the crime appears to be 
widely propagated. Let not the medicine be less than the wound, let not the remedies be fewer than the 
deaths, that in the same manner as those who fell, fell for this reason that they were too incautious with a 
blind rashness, so those who strive to set in order this mischief should use every moderation in counsels, 
lest anything done as it ought not to be, should, as it were, be judged by all of no effect. 

6. Thus, with one and the same counsel, with the same prayers and tears, let us, who up to the present time 
seem to have escaped the destruction of these times of ours, as well as those who appear to have fallen 
into those calamities of the time, entreat the divine majesty, and ask peace for the Church's name. With 
mutual prayers, let us by turns cherish, guard, arm one another; let us pray for the lapsed, (3) that they may 
be raised up; let us pray for those who stand, that they may not be tempted to such a degree as to be 
destroyed; let us pray that those who are said to have fallen may acknowledge the greatness of their sin, 
and may perceive that it needs no momentary nor over-hasty cure; let us pray that penitence may follow 
also the effects of the pardon of the lapsed; that so, when they have Understood their own crime, they may 
be willing to have patience with us for a while, and no longer disturb the fluctuating condition of the Church, 
lest they may seem themselves to have inflamed an internal persecution for us, and the fact of their 
unquietness be added to the heap of their sins. For modesty is very greatly fitting for them in whose sins it is 
an immodest mind that is condemned. Let them indeed knock at the doors, but assuredly let them not break 
them down; let them present themselves at the threshold of the church, but certainly let them not leap over it; 
let them watch at the gates of the heavenly camp, but let them be armed with modesty, by which they 
perceive that they have been deserters; let them resume the trumpet of their prayers, but let them not 
therewith sound a point of war; let them arm themselves indeed with the weapons of modesty, and let them 
resume the shield of faith, which they had put off by their denial through the fear of death, but let those that 

are even now armed believe that they are armed against their foe, the devil, not against the Church, which 
grieves over their fall. A modest petition will much avail them; a bashful entreaty, a necessary humility, a 
patience which is not careless. Let them send tears as their ambassadors for their sufferings; let groanings, 
brought forth from their deepest heart, discharge the office of advocate, and prove their grief and shame for 
the crime they have committed. 

7. Nay, if they shudder at the magnitude of the guilt incurred; if with a truly medicinal hand they deal with the 
deadly wound of their heart and conscience and the deep recesses of the subtle mischief, let them blush 
even to ask; except, again, that it is a matter of greater risk and shame not to have besought the aid of 
peace. But let all this be in the sacrament;(1) in the law of their very entreaty let consideration be had for the 
time; let it be with downcast entreaty, with subdued petition, since he also who is besought ought to be bent, 
not provoked; and as the divine clemency ought to be looked to, so also ought the divine censure; and as it 
is written, "I forgave thee all that debt, because thou desiredst me, "(2) so it is written, "Whosoever shall deny 
me before men, him will I also deny before my Father and before His angels. "(3) For God, as He is merciful, 
so He exacts obedience to His precepts, and indeed carefully exacts it; and as He invites to the banquet, 
so the man that hath not a wedding garment He binds hands and feet, and casts him out beyond the 
assembly of the saints. He has prepared heaven, but He has also prepared held He has prepared places 
of refreshment, but He has also prepared eternal punishment. He has prepared the light that none can 
approach unto, but He has also prepared the vast and eternal gloom of perpetual night. 

8. Desiring to maintain the moderation of this middle course in these matters, we for a long time, and indeed 
many of us, and, moreover, with some of the bishops who are near to us and within reach, and some whom, 
placed afar off, the heat of the persecution had driven out from other provinces, (5) have thought that nothing 
new was to be done before the appointment of a bishop I but we believe that the care of the lapsed must be 
moderately dealt with, so that, in the meantime, whilst the grant of a bishop is withheld from us(6) by God, the 
cause of such as are able to bear the delays of postponement should be kept in suspense; but of such as 
impending death does not suffer to bear the delay, having repented and professed a detestation of their 
deeds with frequency; if with tears, if with groans, if with weeping they have betrayed the signs of a grieving 
and truly penitent spirit, when there remains, as far as man can tell, no hope of living; to them, finally, such 
cautious and careful help should be ministered, God Himself knowing what He will do with such, and in what 
way He will examine the balance of His judgment; while we, however, take anxious care that neither ungodly 
men should praise our smooth facility, nor truly penitent men accuse our severity as cruel. We bid you, most 
blessed and glorious father, ever heartily farewell in the Lord; and have us in memory. (7) 

EPISTLE XXXI.-CYPRIAN TO THE CARTHAGINIAN 
CLERGY, ABOUT THE LETTERS SENT TO ROME, AND 
RECEIVED THENCE 

d 

EPISTLE XXXI.(8) 

TO THE CARTHAGINIAN CLERGY, ABOUT THE LETTERS SENT TO ROME, AND 
RECEIVED THENCE. 

ARGUMENT. --THE CARTHAGINIAN CLERGY ARE REQUESTED TO TAKE CARE THAT 
THE LETTERS OF THE ROMAN CLERGY AND CYPRIAN'S ANSWER ARE 
COMMUNICATED. 

Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his brethren, greeting. That you, my beloved brethren, might l<now 
what letters I have sent to the clergy acting(9) at Rome, and what they have replied to me, and, moreover, 
what Moyses and Maximus, the presbyters, and Rufinus and Nicostratus, the deacons, and the rest of the 
confessors that with them are kept in prison, replied likewise to my letters, I have sent you copies to read. 
Do you take care, with as much diligence as you can, that what I have written, and what they have replied, 
be made known to our brethren. And, moreover, if any bishops from foreign places, (10) my colleagues, or 
presbyters, or deacons, should be present, or should arrive among you, let them hear all these matters from 
you; and if they wish to transcribe copies of the letters and to take them to their own people, let them have 
the opportunity of transcribing them; although I have, moreover, bidden Saturus the reader, our brother, to 
give liberty of copying them to any individuals who wish it; so that, in ordering, for the present, the condition 
of the Church in any manner, an agreement, one and faithful, may be observed by all. But about the other 
matters which were to be dealt with, as I have also written to several of my colleagues, we will more fully 
consider them in a common council, when, by the Lord's permission, we shall begin to assemble into one 
place. I bid you, brethren, beloved and longed-for, ever heartily farewell. Salute the brotherhood. Fare ye 
well. 

EPISTLES XXXII, XXXIII & XXXIV.-CYPRIAN TO THE 
CLERGY AND PEOPLE, ABOUT THE ORDINATIONS OF 
AURELIUS, CELERINUS AND NUMIDICUS Jj 

EPISTLE XXXII.(11) 

TO THE CLERGY AND PEOPLE, ABOUT THE ORDINATION OF AURELIUS AS A READER. 

ARGUMENT. --CYPRIAN TELLS THE CLERGY AND PEOPLE THAT AURELIUS THE 
CONFESSOR HAS BEEN ORDAINED A READER BY HIM, AND COMMENDS, BY THE WAY, 
THE CONSTANCY OF HIS VIRTUE AND HIS MIND, WHEREBY HE WAS EVEN 
DESERVING OF A HIGHER DEGREE IN THE CHURCH. 

1 . Cyprian to the elders and deacons, and to the whole people, greeting. In ordinations of the clergy, 
beloved brethren, we usually consult you beforehand, and weigh the character and deserts of individuals, 
with the general advice. (1) But human testimonies must not be waited for when the divine approval 
precedes. Aurelius, our brother, an illustrious youth, already approved by the Lord, and dear to God, in 
years still very young, but, in the praise of virtue and of faith, advanced; inferior in the natural abilities of his 
age, but superior in the honour he has merited,-has contended here in a double conflict, having twice 
confessed and twice been glorious in the victory of his confession, both when he conquered in the course 
and was banished, and when at length he fought in a severer conflict, he was triumphant and victorious in the 
battle of suffering. As often as the adversary wished to call forth the servants of God, so often this prompt 
and brave soldier both fought and conquered. It had been a slight matter, previously to have engaged 
under the eyes of a few when he was banished; he deserved also in the forum to engage with a more 
illustrious virtue so that, after overcoming the magistrates, he might also triumph over the proconsul, and, 
after exile, might vanquish tortures also. Nor can I discover what I ought to speak most of in him,-the glory of 
his wounds or the modesty of his character; that he is distinguished by the honour of his virtue, or 
praiseworthy for the admirableness of his modesty. He is both so excellent in dignity and so lowly in 
humility, that it seems that he is divinely reserved as one who should be an example to the rest for 
ecclesiastical discipline, of the way in which the servants of God should in confession conquer by their 
courage, and, after confession, be conspicuous for their character. 

2. Such a one, to be estimated not by his years but by his deserts, merited higher degrees of clerical 
ordination and larger increase. But, in the meantime, I judged it well, that he should begin with the office of 
reading; because nothing is more suitable for the voice which has confessed the Lord in a glorious 
utterance, than to sound Him forth in the solemn repetition of the divine lessons; than, after the sublime words 
which spoke out the witness of Christ, to read the Gospel of Christ whence martyrs are made; to come to the 
desk after the scaffold; there to have been conspicuous to the multitude of the Gentiles, here to be beheld 
by the brethren; there to have been heard with the wonder of the surrounding people, here to be heard with 
the joy of the brotherhood. Know, then, most beloved brethren, that this man has been ordained by me and 
by my colleagues who were then present. I know that you will both gladly welcome these tidings, and that 
you desire that as many such as possible may be ordained in our church. And since joy is always hasty, 
and gladness can bear no delay, he reads on the Lord's day, in the meantime, for me; that is, he has made 
a beginning of peace, by solemnly entering on his office of a reader.(2) Do you frequently be urgent in 
supplications, and assist my prayers by yours, that the Lord's mercy favouring us may soon restore both the 
priest(3) safe to his people, and the martyr for a reader with the priest. I bid you, beloved brethren in God the 
Father, and in Jesus Christ, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE XXXIII.(4) 

TO THE CLERGY AND PEOPLE, ABOUT THE ORDINATION OF CELERINUS AS READER. 

ARGUMENT. -THIS LETTER IS ABOUT THE SAME IN PURPORT WITH THE PRECEDING, 
EXCEPT THAT HE LARGELY COMMENDS THE CONSTANCY OF CELERINUS IN HIS 

CONFESSION OF THE FAITH. MOREOVER, THAT BOTH OF THESE LETTERS WERE 
WRITTEN DURING HIS RETREAT, IS SUFFICIENTLY INDICATED BY THE 
CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE CONTEXT. 

1 . Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, and to the whole people, his brethren in the Lord, greeting. The 
divine benefits, beloved brethren, should be acknowledged and embraced, wherewith the Lord has 
condescended to embellish and illustrate His Church in our times by granting a respite to His good 
confessors and His glorious martyrs, that they who had grandly confessed Christ should afterwards adorn 
Christ's clergy in ecclesiastical ministries. Exult, therefore, and rejoice with me on receiving my letter, 
wherein I and my colleagues who were then present mention to you Celerinus, our brother, glorious alike for 
his courage and his character, as added to our clergy, not by human recommendation, but by divine 
condescension; who, when he hesitated to yield to the Church, was constrained by her own admonition and 
exhortation, in a vision by night, not to refuse our persuasions; and she had more power, and constrained 
him, because it was not right, nor was it becoming, that he should be without ecclesiastical honour, whom the 
Lord honoured with the dignity of heavenly glory. (5) 

2. This man was the first in the struggle of our days; he was the leader among Christ's soldiers; he, in the 
midst of the burning beginnings of the persecution, engaged with the very chief and author of the 
disturbance, in conquering with invincible firmness the adversary of his own conflict.(l) He made a way for 
others to conquer; a victor with no small amount of wounds, but triumphant by a miracle, with the long-abiding 
and permanent penalties of a tedious conflict. For nineteen days, shut up in the close guard of a dungeon, 
he was racked and in irons; but although his body was laid in chains, his spirit remained free and at liberty. 
His flesh wasted away by the long endurance of hunger and thirst; but God fed his soul, that lived in faith and 
virtue, with spiritual nourishments. He lay in punishments, the stronger for his punishments; imprisoned, 
greater than those that imprisoned him; lying prostrate, but loftier than those who stood; as bound, and firmer 
titan the links which bound him; judged, and more sublime than those who judged him; and although his feet 
were bound on the rack, yet the serpent was trodden on and ground down and vanquished. In his glorious 
body shine the bright evidences of his wounds; their manifest traces show forth, and appear on the man's 
sinews and limbs, worn out with tedious wasting away. (2) Great things are they-marvellous things are 
they-which the brotherhood may hear of his virtues and of his praises. And should any one appear like 
Thomas, who has little faith in what he hears, the faith of the eyes is not wanting, so that what one hears he 
may also see. In the servant of God, the glory of the wounds made the victory; the memory of the scars 
preserves that glory. 

3. Nor is that kind of title to glories in the case of Celerinus, our beloved, an unfamiliar and novel thing. He is 
advancing in the footsteps of his kindred; he rivals his parents and relations in equal honours of divine 
condescension. His grandmother, Celerina, was some time since crowned with martyrdom. Moreover, his 
paternal and maternal uncles, Laurentius and Egnatius, who themselves also were once warring in the 
camps of the world, but were true and spiritual soldiers of God, casting down the devil by the confession of 
Christ, merited palms and crowns from the Lord by their illustrious passion. We always offer sacrifices for 
them, (3) as you remember, as often as we celebrate the passions and days of the martyrs in the annual 
commemoration. Nor could he, therefore, be degenerate and inferior whom this family dignity and a 
generous nobility provoked, by domestic examples of virtue and faith. But if in a worldly family it is a matter 
of heraldry and of praise to be a patrician, of bow much greater praise and honour is it to become of noble 
rank in the celestial heraldry! I cannot tell whom I should call more blessed, -whether those ancestors, for a 
posterity so illustrious, or him, for an origin so glorious. So equally between them does the divine 
condescension flow, and pass to and fro, that, just as the dignity of their offspring brightens their crown, so 
the sublimity of his ancestry illuminates his glory. 

4. When this man, beloved brethren, came to us with such condescension of the Lord, illustrious by the 
testimony and wonder of the very man who had persecuted him, what else behoved to be done except that 
he should be placed on the pulpit,(4) that is, on the tribunal of the Church; that, resting on the loftiness of a 
higher station, and conspicuous to the whole people for the brightness of his honour, he should read the 
precepts and Gospel of the Lord, which he so bravely and faithfully follows? Let the voice that has 
confessed the Lord daily be heard in those things which the Lord spoke. Let it be seen whether there is any 
further degree to which he can be advanced in the Church. There is nothing in which a confessor can do 
more good to the brethren than that, while the reading of the Gospel is heard from his lips, every one who 
hears should imitate the faith of the reader. He should have been associated with Aurelius in reading; with 
whom, moreover, he was associated in the alliance of divine honour; with whom, in all the insignia of virtue 
and praise, he had been united. Equal both, and each like to the other, in proportion as they were sublime in 
glory, in that proportion they were humble in modesty. As they were lifted up by divine condescension, so 
they were lowly in their own peacefulness and tranquillity, and equally affording examples to every one of 

virtues and character, and fitted botii for conflict and for peace; praisewortiiy in tiie former for strengtii, in tiie 
latter for modesty. 

5. In such servants the Lord rejoices; in confessors of this kind He glories, -whose way and conversation is 
so advantageous to the announcement of their glory, that it affords to others a teaching of discipline. For this 
purpose Christ has willed them to remain long here in the Church; for this purpose He has kept them safe, 
snatched from the midst of death, -a kind of resurrection, so to speak, being wrought on their behalf; so that, 
while nothing is seen by the brethren loftier in honour, nothing more lowly in humility, the way of life of the 
brotherhood s may accompany these same persons. Know, then, that these for the present are appointed 
readers, because it was fitting that the candle should be placed in a candlestick, whence it may give light to 
all, and that their glorious countenance should be established in a higher place, where, beheld by all the 
surrounding brotherhood, they may give an incitement of glory to the beholders. But know that I have 
already purposed the honour of the presbytery for them, that so they may be honoured with the same 
presents as the presbyters, and may share the monthly divisions(l) in equalled quantities, to sit with us 
hereafter in their advanced and strengthened years; although in nothing can he seem to be inferior in the 
qualities of age who has consummated his age by the dignity of his glory. I bid you, brethren, beloved and 
earnestly longed-for, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE XXXIV.(2) 

TO THE SAME, ABOUT THE ORDINATION OF NUMIDICUS AS PRESBYTER. 

ARGUMENT. --CYPRIAN TELLS THE CLERGY AND PEOPLE THAT NUMIDICUS HAS BEEN 
ORDAINED BY HIM PRESBYTER; AND BRIEFLY COMMENDS HIS WORTH. 

Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, and to the whole people, his brethren, very dear and longed-for, 
greeting. That which belongs, dear-est brethren, both to the common joy and to the greatest glory of our 
Church ought to be told to you; for you must know that I have been admonished and instructed by divine 
condescension, that Numidicus the presbyter should be appointed in the number of Carthaginian 
presbyters, and should sit with us among the clergy,-a man illustrious by the brightest light of confession, 
exalted in the honour both of virtue and of faith; who by his exhortation sent before himself an abundant 
number of martyrs, slain by stones and by the flames, and who beheld with joy his wife abiding by his side, 
burned (I should rather say, preserved) together with the rest. He himself, half consumed, overwhelmed with 
stones, and left for dead, -when afterwards his daughter, with the anxious consideration of affection, sought 
for the corpse of her father,-was found half dead, was drawn out and revived, and remained unwillingly(3) 
from among the companions whom he himself had sent before. But the reason of his remaining behind, as 
we see, was this: that the Lord might add him to our clergy, and might adorn with glorious priests the number 
of our presbyters that had been desolated by the lapse of some. (4) And when God permits, he shall be 
advanced to a larger office in his region, when, by the Lord's protection, we have come into your presence 
once more. In the meantime, let what is revealed be done, that we receive this gift of God with thanksgiving, 
hoping from the Lord's mercy more ornaments of the same kind, that so the strength of His Church being 
renewed. He may make men so meek and lowly to flourish in the honour of our assembly. I bid you, 
brethren, very dear and longed-for, ever heartily farewell. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLES XXXV & 
XXXVI.-TO THE CLERGY 

EPISTLE XXXV.(5) 

TO THE CLERGY, CONCERNING THE CARE OF THE POOR AND STRANGERS. 

ARGUMENT. --HE CAUTIONS THEM AGAINST NEGLECTING THE WIDOWS, THE SICK, OR 
THE POOR, OR STRANGERS. 

Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his beloved brethren, greeting. In safety, by God's grace, I greet 
you, beloved brethren, desiring soon to come to you, and to satisfy the wish as well of myself and you, as of 
all the brethren. It behoves me also, however, to have regard to the common peace, and, in the meantime, 
although with weariness of spirit, to be absent from you, lest my presence should provoke the jealousy and 
violence of the heathens, and I should be the cause of breaking the peace, who ought rather to be careful 
for the quiet of all. When, therefore, you write that matters are arranged, and that I ought to come, or if the 
Lord should condescend to intimate it to me before, then I will come to you. For where could I be better or 
more joyful than there where the Lord willed me both to believe and to grow up? I request that you will 
diligently take care of the widows, and of the sick, and of all the poor. Moreover, you may supply the 
expenses for strangers, if any should be indigent, from my own portion, which I have left with Rogatianus, our 
fellow-presbyter;(6) which portion, lest it should be all appropriated, I have supplemented by sending to the 
same by Naricus the acolyte another share, so that the sufferers may be more largely and promptly dealt 
with. I bid you, beloved brethren, ever heartily farewell; and have me in remembrance. Greet your 
brotherhood in my name, and tell them to be mindful of me. 

EPISTLE XXXVI. (7) 

TO THE CLERGY, BIDDING THEM SHOW EVERY KINDNESS TO THE CONFESSORS IN 
PRISON. 

ARGUMENT. -HE EXHORTS HIS CLERGY THAT EVERY KINDNESS AND CARE SHOULD 
BE EXERCISED TOWARDS THE CONFESSORS, AS WELL TOWARDS THOSE WHO WERE 
ALIVE, AS THOSE WHO DIED, IN PRISON; THAT THE DAYS OF THEIR DEATH SHOULD 
BE CAREFULLY NOTED, FOR THE PURPOSE OF CELEBRATING THEIR MEMORY 
ANNUALLY; AND, FINALLY, THAT THEY SHOULD NOT FORGET THE POOR ALSO. 

1 . Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his brethren, greeting. Although I know, dearest brethren, that you 
have frequently been admonished in my letters to manifest all care for those who with a glorious voice have 
confessed the Lord, and are confined in prison; yet, again and again, I urge it upon you, that no 
consideration be wanting to them to whose glory there is nothing wanting. And I wish that the circumstances 
of the place and of my station would permit me to present myself at this time with them; promptly and gladly 
would I fulfil all the duties of love towards our most courageous brethren in my appointed ministry. But I 
beseech you, let your diligence be the representative of my duty, and do all those things which behove to 
be done in respect of those whom the divine condescension has rendered illustrious in such merits of their 
faith and virtue. Let there be also a more zealous watchfulness and care bestowed upon the bodies of all 
those who, although they were not tortured in prison, yet depart thence by the glorious exit of death. For 
neither is their virtue nor their honour too little for them also to be allied with the blessed martyrs. As far as 
they could, they bore whatever they were prepared and equipped to bear. He who under the eyes of God 
has offered himself to tortures and to death, has suffered whatever he was willing to suffer; for it was not he 
that was wanting to the tortures, but the tortures that were wanting to him. "Whosoever shall confess me 
before men, him will I also confess before my Father which is in heaven, "(1) saith the Lord. They have 
confessed Him "He that endureth to the end, the same shall be saved, "(2) saith the Lord. They have 
endured and have carried the uncorrupted and unstained merits of their virtues through, even unto the end. 
And, again, it is written, "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life. "(3) They have 

persevered in their faitiifulness, and stedfastness, and invincibleness, even unto deatii. Wiien to tiie 
willingness and the confession of the name in prison and in chains is added also the conclusion of dying, 
the glory of the martyr is consummated. 

2. Finally, also, take note of their days on which they depart, that we may celebrate their commemoration 
among the memorials of the martyrs, (4) although Tertullus, our most faithful and devoted brother, who, in 
addition to the other solicitude and care which he shows to the brethren in all service of labour, is not wanting 
besides in that respect in any care of their bodies, has written, and does write and intimate to me the days, in 
which our blessed brethren in prison pass by the gate of a glorious death to their immortality; and there are 
celebrated here by us oblations and sacrifices for their commemorations, which things, with the Lord's 
protection, we shall soon celebrate with you. Let your care also (as I have already often written) and your 
diligence not be wanting to the poor,-to such, I mean, as stand fast in the faith and bravely fight with us, and 
have not left the camp of Christ; to whom, indeed, we should now show a greater love and care, in that they 
are neither constrained by poverty nor prostrated by the tempest of persecution, but faithfully serve with the 
Lord, and have given an example of faith to the other poor. I bid you, brethren beloved, and greatly 
longed-for, ever heartily farewell; and remember me. Greet the brotherhood in my name. Fare ye well. 

EPISTLES XXXVII &XXXVIII.-BETWEEN CYPRIAN & 
CALDONIUS, HERCULANUS, AND OTHERS, ABOUT 
THE EXCOMMUNICATION OF FELICISSIMUS 

EPISTLE XXXVII. (5) 

TO CALDONIUS, HERCULANUS, AND OTHERS, ABOUT THE EXCOMMUNICATION OF 
FELICISSIMUS. 

ARGUMENT. -FELICISSIMUS, TOGETHER WITH HIS COMPANIONS IN SEDITION, IS TO 
BE RESTRAINED FROM THE COMMUNION OF ALL. 

1. Cyprian to Caldonius and Herculanus, his colleagues, also to Rogatianus and Numidicus, his 
fellow-presbyters, greeting. I have been greatly grieved, dearest brethren, at the receipt of your letter, that 
although I have always proposed to myself and wished to keep all our brotherhood safe, and to preserve 
the flock unharmed, as charity requires, you tell me now that Felicissimus has been attempting many things 
with wickedness and craft; so that, besides his old frauds and plundering, of which I had formerly known a 
good deal, he has now, moreover, tried to divide with the bishop a portion of the people; that is, to separate 
the sheep from the shepherd, and sons from their parents, and to scatter the members of Christ. And 
although I sent you as my substitutes to discharge the necessities of our brethren, with funds, and if any, 
moreover, wished to exercise their crafts, to assist their wishes with such an addition as might be sufficient, 
and at the same time also to take note of their ages and conditions and deserts,-that I also, upon whom 
falls the charge of knowing all of them thoroughly, might promote any that were worthy and humble and 
meek to the offices of the ecclesiastical administration;-he has interfered, and directed that no one should 
be relieved, and that those things which I had desired should not be ascertained by careful examination; he 
has also threatened our brethren, who had first approached to be relieved, with a wicked exercise of power, 
and with a violent dread that those who desired to obey me should not communicate with him in death. (1) 

2. And since, after all these things, neither moved by the honour of my station, nor shaken by your authority 
and presence, but of his own impulse, disturbing the peace of the brethren he hath rushed forth with many 
more, and asserted himself as a leader of a faction and chief of a sedition with a hasty madness-in which 
respect, indeed, I congratulate several of the brethren that they have withdrawn from this boldness, and 
have rather chosen to consent with you, so that they may remain with the Church, their mother, and receive 
their stipends from the bishop who dispenses them, which, indeed, I know for certain, that others also will 
peaceably do, and will quickly withdraw from their rash error,-in the meantime, since Felicissimus has 
threatened that they should not communicate with him in death(2) who had obeyed us, that is, who 
communicated with us, let him receive the sentence which he first of all declared, that he may know that he is 
excommunicated by us; inasmuch as he adds to his frauds and rapines, which we have known by the 
clearest truth, the crime also of adultery, which our brethren, grave men, have declared that they have 
discovered, and have asseverated that they will prove; all which things we shall then judicially examine, 
when, with the Lord's permission, we shall assemble in one place with many of our colleagues. But 
Augendus also, who, considering neither his bishop nor his Church, has equally associated himself with him 
in this conspiracy and faction, if he should further persevere with him, let him bear the sentence which that 
factiou and impetuous man has provoked on himself. Moreover, whoever shall ally himself with his 
conspiracy and faction, let him know that he shall no» communicate in the Church with us, since of his own 
accord he has preferred to be separated from the Church. Read this letter of mine to our brethren, and also 
transmit it to Carthage to the clergy, the names being added of those who have joined themselves with 
Felicissimus. I bid you, beloved brethren, ever heartily farewell; and remember me. Fare ye well. 

EPISTLE XXXVIII. (3) 

THE LETTER OF CALDONIUS, HERCULANUS, AND OTHERS, ON THE 
EXCOMMUNICATION OF FELICISSIMUS WITH HIS PEOPLE. 

ARGUMENT. -CALDONIUS, HERCULANUS, AND OTHERS CARRY INTO EFFECT WHAT 
THE PRECEDING LETTER HAD BIDDEN THEM. 

Caldonius, with Herculanus and Victor, iiis colleagues, also with Rogatianus and Numidicus, presbyters. (4) 
We have rejected Felicissimus and Augendus from communion; also Repostus from among the exiles, and 
Irene of the Blood-stained ones;(5) and Paula the sempstress; which you ought to know from my 
subscription; also we have rejected Sophronius and Soliassus (budinarius),(6)-himself also one of the 
exiles. 

EPISTLE XXXIX.-CYPRIAN TO THE PEOPLE, 
CONCERNING FIVE SCHISMATIC PRESBYTERS OF 
THE FACTION OF FELICISSIMUS 

EPISTLE XXXIX. (7) 

TO THE PEOPLE, CONCERNING FIVE SCHISMATIC PRESBYTERS OF THE FACTION OF 
FELICISSIMUS. 

ARGUMENT. --IN LIKE MANNER, AS IN THE EPISTLE BUT ONE BEFORE THIS, CYPRIAN 
TOLD THE CLERGY, SO NOW HE TELLS THE PEOPLE, THAT FELICISSIMUS IS TO BE 
AVOIDED, TOGETHER WITH FIVE PRESBYTERS OF HIS FACTION, WHO NOT ONLY 
GRANTED PEACE TO THE LAPSED WITHOUT ANY DISCRIMINATION, BUT STIRRED UP 
SEDITION AND SCHISM AGAINST HIMSELF. 

1. Cyprian to the whole people, greeting. Although, dearest brethren, Virtius,(8) a most faithful and upright 
presbyter, and also Rogatianus and Numidicus, presbyters, confessors, and illustrious by the glory of the 
divine condescension, and also the deacons, good men and devoted to the ecclesiastical administration in 
all its duties, with the other ministers, afford you the full attention of their presence, and do not cease to 
confirm individuals by their assiduous exhortations, and, moreover, to govern and reform the minds of the 
lapsed by their wholesome counsels, yet, as much as I can, I admonish, and as I can, I visit you with my 
letters. By my letters I say, dearest brethren; for the malignity and treachery of certain of the presbyters has 
accomplished this, that I should not be allowed to come to you before Easter-day; since mindful of their 
conspiracy, and retaining that ancient venom against my episcopate, that is, against your suffrage and 
God's judgment, they renew their old attack upon me, and once more begin their sacrilegious machinations 
with their accustomed craft. And, indeed, of God's providence, neither by our wish nor desire, nay, although 
we were forgiving and silent, they have suffered the punishment which they had deserved; so that, not cast 
out by us, they of their own accord have cast themselves out. They themselves, before their own 
conscience, have passed sentence on themselves in accordance with your suffrages and the divine. 
These conspirators and evil men of their own accord have driven themselves from the Church. 

2. Now it has appeared whence came the faction of Felicissimus; on what root and by what strength it stood. 
These men supplied in former times encouragements and exhortations to certain confessors, not to agree 
with their bishop, not to maintain the ecclesiastical discipline with faith and quietness according to the Lord's 
precepts, not to keep the glory of their confession with an uncorrupt and unspotted conversation. And lest it 
should be too little to have corrupted the minds of certain confessors, and to have wished to arm a portion of 
our broken fraternity against God's priesthood, they have now turned their attention with their envenomed 
deceitfulness to the ruin of the lapsed, to turn away from the healing of their wound the sick and the wounded, 
and those who, by the misfortune of their fall, are less fit and less sturdy to take stronger counsel; and invite 
them, by the falsehood of a fallacious peace, to a fatal rashness, leaving off prayers and supplications, 
whereby, with long and continual satisfaction, the Lord is to be appeased. 

3. But I pray you, brethren, watch against the snares of the devil, and, taking care for your own salvation, be 
diligently on your guard against this death-bearing fallacy. This is another persecution and another 
temptation. Those five presbyters are none other than the five leaders who were lately associated with the 
magistrates in an edict, that they might overthrow our faith, that they might turn away the feeble hearts of the 
brethren to their deadly nets by the prevarication of the truth. Now the same scheme, the same overturning, 
is again brought about by the five presbyters, linked with Felicissimus, to the destruction of salvation, that 
God should not be besought, and that he who has denied Christ should not appeal for mercy to the same 
Christ whom he had denied; that after the fault of the crime, repentance also should be taken away; and that 
the Lord should not be appeased through bishops and priests, but that the Lord's priests being, forsaken, a 
new tradition of a sacrilegious appointment should arise, contrary to the evangelical discipline. And 
although it was once arranged as well by us as by the confessors and the city(1) clergy, and moreover by 
all the bishops appointed either in our province or beyond the sea, (2) that no novelty should be introduced 
in respect of the case of the lapsed unless we all assembled into one place, and our counsels being 

compared, should decide upon a moderate sentence, tempered alike with discipline and with 
mercy;-against this our counsel they have rebelled, and all priestly authority and power is destroyed by 
factious conspiracies. 

4. What sufferings do I now endure, dearest brethren, that I myself am not able to come to you at the present 
juncture, that I myself cannot approach you each one, that I myself cannot exhort you according to the 
teaching of the Lord and of His Gospel! An exile of, now, two years(3) was not sufficient, and a mournful 
separation from you, from your countenance, and from your sight,-continual grief and lamentation, which, in 
my loneliness without you, breaks me to pieces with my constant mourning, nor my tears flowing day and 
night, that there is not even an opportunity for the priest, whom you made with so much love and eagerness, 
to greet you, nor to be enfolded in your embraces. This greater grief is added to my worn spirit, that in the 
midst of so much solicitude and necessity I am not able myself to hasten to you, since, by the threats and by 
the snares of perfidious men, we are anxious that on our coming a greater tumult may not arise there; and 
so, although the bishop ought to be careful for peace and tranquillity in all things, he himself should seem to 
have afforded material for sedition, and to have embittered persecution anew. Hence, however, beloved 
brethren, I not only admonish but counsel you, not rashly to trust to mischievous words, nor to yield an easy 
consent to deceitful sayings, nor to take darkness for light, night for day, hunger for food, thirst for drink, 
poison for medicine, death for safety. Let not the age nor the authority deceive you of those who, answering 
to the ancient wickedness of the two elders;(4) as they attempted to corrupt and violate the chaste 
Susannah, (5) are thus also attempting, with their adulterous doctrines, to corrupt the chastity of the Church 
and violate the truth of the Gospel. 

5. The Lord cries aloud, saying, "Hearken not unto the words of the false prophets, for the visions of their 
own hearts deceive them. They speak, but not out of the mouth of the Lord. They say to them that despise 
the word of the Lord, Ye shall have peace. "(1) They are now offering peace who have not peace 
themselves. They are promising to bring back and recall the lapsed into the Church, who themselves have 
departed from the Church. There is one God, and Christ is one, and there is one Church, and one chair 
founded upon the rock by the word of the Lord. (2) Another altar cannot be constituted nor a new priesthood 
be made, except the one altar and the one priesthood. Whosoever gathereth elsewhere, scattereth. 
Whatsoever is appointed by human madness, so that the divine disposition is violated, is adulterous, is 
impious, is sacrilegious. Depart far from the contagion of men of this kind, and flee from their words, 
avoiding them as a cancer and a plague, as the Lord warns you and says, "They are blind leaders of the 
blind. But if the blind lead the blind, they shall both fall into the ditch. "(3) They intercept your prayers, which 
you pour forth with us to God day and night, to appease Him with a righteous satisfaction. They intercept 
your tears with which you wash away the guilt of the sin you have committed; they intercept the peace which 
you truly and faithfully ask from the mercy of the Lord; and they do not know that it is written, "And that 
prophet, or that dreamer of dreams, that hath spoken to turn you away from the Lord your God, shall be put 
to death. "(4) Let no one, beloved brethren, make you to err from the ways of the Lord; let no one snatch you. 
Christians, from the Gospel of Christ; let no one take sons of the Church away from the Church; let them 
perish alone for themselves who have wished to perish; let them remain outside the Church alone who have 
departed from the Church; let them anoia be without bishops who have rebelled against bishops; let them 
alone undergo the penalties of their conspiracies who formerly, according to your votes, and now according 
to God's judgment, have deserved to undergo the sentence of their own conspiracy and malignity. 

6. The Lord warns us in His Gospel, saying, "Ye reject the commandment of God, that ye may establish your 
own tradition. "(5) Let them who reject the commandment of God and endeavour to keep their own tradition 
be bravely and firmly rejected by you; let one downfall be sufficient for the lapsed; let no one by his fraud 
hurl down those who wish to rise; let no one cast down more deeply and depress those who are down, on 
whose behalf we pray that they may be raised up by God's hand and arm; let no one turn away from all 
hope of safety those who are half alive and entreating that they may receive their former health; let no one 
extinguish every light of the way of salvation to those that are wavering in the darkness of their lapse. The 
apostle instructs us, saying, "If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to the wholesome words of our 
Lord Jesus Christ and His doctrine, he is lifted up with foolishness: from such withdraw thyself."(6) And again 
he says, "Let no man deceive you with vain words; for because of these things cometh the wrath of God 
upon the children of disobedience. Be not ye therefore partakers with them. "(7) There is no reason that you 
should be deceived with vain words, and begin to be partakers of their depravity. Depart from such, I entreat 
you, and acquiesce in our counsels, who daily pour out for you continual prayers to the Lord, who desire that 
you should be recalled to the Church by the clemency of the Lord, who pray for the fullest peace from God, 
first for the mother, and then for her children. Join also your petitions and prayers with our prayers and 
petitions; mingle your tears with our wailings. Avoid the wolves who separate the sheep from the shepherd; 
avoid the envenomed tongue of the devil, who from the beginning of the world, always deceitful and lying, 
lies that he may deceive, cajoles that he may injure, promises good that he may give evil, promises life that 

he may put to death. Now also his words are evident, and his poisons are plain. He promises peace, in 
order that peace may not possibly be attained; he promises salvation, that he who has sinned may not 
come to salvation; he promises a Church, when he so contrives that he who believes him may utterly perish 
apart from the Church. 

7. It is now the occasion, dearly beloved brethren, both for you who stand fast to persevere bravely, and to 
maintain your glorious stability, which you kept in persecution with a continual firmness.; and if any of you by 
the circumvention of the adversary have fallen, that in this second temptation you should faithfully take 
counsel for your hope and your peace; and in order that the Lord may pardon you, that you should not 
depart from the priests of the Lord, since it is written, "And the man that will do presumptuously, and will not 
hearken unto the priest or unto the judge that shall be in those days, even that man shall die."(1) Of this 
persecution this is the latest and final temptation, which itself also, by the Lord's protection, shall quickly 
pass away; so that I shall be again presented to you after Easter-day with my colleagues, who, being 
present, we shall be able as well to arrange as to complete the matters which require to be done according 
to your judgment and to the general advice of all of us as it has been decided before. (2) But if anybody, 
refusing to repent and to make satisfaction to God, shall yield to the party of Felicissimus and his satellites, 
and shall join himself to the heretical faction, let him know that he cannot afterwards return to the Church and 
communicate with the bishops and the people of Christ. I bid you, dearest brethren, ever heartily farewell, 
and that you plead with me in continual prayer that the mercy of God may be entreated. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLES XL, XLI & 
XLII.-TO CORNELIUS 

EPISTLE XL.(3) 

TO CORNELIUS, ON HIS REFUSAL TO RECEIVE NOVATIAN'S ORDINATION. (4) 

ARGUMENT. --THE MESSENGERS SENT BY NOVATIAN TO INTIMATE HIS ORDINATION 
TO THE CHURCH OF CARTHAGE ARE REJECTED BY CYPRIAN. 

1 . Cyprian to Cornelius, iiis brotiier, greeting. Tiiere iiave come to us, beloved brother, sent by Novatian, 
Maximus the presbyter, and Augendus the deacon, and a certain Machaeus and Longinus. But, as we 
discovered, as well from the letters which they brought with them, as from their discourse and declaration, 
that Novatian had been made bishop; disturbed by the wickedness of an unlawful ordination made in 
opposition to the Catholic Church, we considered at once that they must be restrained from communion with 
us; and having, in the meanwhile, refuted and repelled the things which they pertinaciously and obstinately 
endeavoured to assert, I and several of my colleagues, who had come together to me, were awaiting the 
arrival of our colleagues Caldonius and Fortunatus, whom we had lately sent to you as ambassadors, and 
to our fellow-bishops, who were present at your ordination, (5) in order that, when they came and reported the 
truth of the matter, the wickedness of the adverse party might be quelled through them, by greater authority 
and manifest proof. But there came, in addition, Pompeius and Stephanus, our colleagues, who themselves 
also, by way of instructing us thereon, put forward manifest proofs and testimonies in conformity with their 
gravity and faithfulness, so that it was not even necessary that those who had come, as sent by Novatian, 
should be heard any further. And when in our solemn assembly(6) they burst in with invidious abuse and 
turbulent clamour, demanding that the accusations, which they said that they brought and would prove, 
should be publicly investigated by us and by the people, we said that it was not consistent with our gravity to 
suffer the honour of our colleague, who had already been chosen and ordained and ap-proved by the 
laudable sentence of many, to be called into question any further by the abusive voice of rivals. And 
because it would be a long business to collect into a letter the matters in which they have been refuted and 
repressed, and in which they have been manifested as having caused heresy by their unlawful attempts, 
you shall hear everything most fully from Primitivus our co-presbyter, (7) when he shall come to you. 

2. And lest their raging boldness should ever cease, they are striving here also to distract the members of 
Christ into schismatical parties, and to cut and tear the one body of the Catholic Church, so that, running 
about from door to door, through the houses of many, or from city to city, through certain districts, they seek 
for companions in their obstinacy and error to join to themselves in their schism. To whom we have once 
given this reply, nor shall we cease to command them to lay aside their pernicious dissensions and 
disputes, and to be aware that it is an impiety to forsake their Mother; and to acknowledge and understand 
that when a bishop(8) is once made and approved by the testimony and judgment of his colleagues and the 
people, another can by no means be appointed. (9) Thus, if they consult their own interest peaceably and 
faithfully, if they confess themselves to be maintainors of the Gospel of Christ, they must return to the Church. 

I bid you, dearest brother, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE XLI.(10) 

TO CORNELIUS, ABOUT CYPRIAN'S APPROVAL OF HIS ORDINATION, AND 
CONCERNING FELICISSIMUS. 

ARGUMENT. -CYPRIAN EXCUSES HIMSELF FOR NOT HAVING WITHOUT HESITATION 
BELIEVED IN THE ORDINATION OF CORNELIUS, UNTIL HE RECEIVED THE LETTERS OF 
HIS COLLEAGUES CALDONIUS AND FORTUNATUS, WHICH FULLY TESTIFIED TO ITS 
LEGITIMACY; AND INCIDENTALLY REPEATS, IN RESPECT OF THE CONTRARY FACTION 
OF THE NOVATIAN PARTY, THAT HE DID NOT IN THE VERY FIRST INSTANCE GIVE HIS 
ADHESION TO THAT, BUT RATHER TO CORNELIUS, EVEN TO THE EXTENT OF 

REFUSING TO RECEIVE ACCUSATIONS AGAINST HIM. 

1 . Cyprian to Cornelius iiis brotiier, greeting. As was fitting for God's servants, and especially for upright and 
peaceable priests, dearest brother, we recently sent our colleagues Caldonius and Fortunatus, that they 
might, not only by the persuasion of our letters, but by their presence and the advice of all of you, strive and 
labour with all their power to bring the members of the divided body into the unity of the Catholic Church, and 
associate them into the bond of Christian charity. But since the obstinate and inflexible pertinacity of the 
adverse party has not only rejected the bosom and the embrace of its root and Mother, but even, with a 
discord spreading and reviving itself worse and worse, has appointed a bishop for itself, and, contrary to 
the sacrament once delivered of the divine appointment and of Catholic Unity, has made an adulterous and 
opposed head outside the Church; having received your letters as well as those of our colleagues, at the 
coining also of our colleagues Pompeius and Stephanus, good men and very dear to us, by whom all these 
things were undoubtedly alleged and proved to us with general gladness, (1) in conformity with the 
requirements alike of the sanctity and the truth of the divine tradition and ecclesiastical institution, we have 
directed our letters to you. Moreover, bringing these same things trader the notice of our several colleagues 
throughout the province, we have bidden also that our brethren, with letters from them, be directed to you. 

2. This has been done, although our mind and intention had been already plainly declared to the brethren, 
and to the whole of the people in this place, when, having received letters lately from both parties, we read 
your letters, and intimated your ordination to the episcopate, in the ears of every one. Moreover, 
remembering the common honour, and having respect for the sacerdotal gravity and sanctity, we 
repudiated those things which from the other party had been heaped together with bitter virulence into a 
document transmitted to us; alike considering and weighing, that in so great and so religious an assembly 
of brethren, in which God's priests were sitting together, and His altar was set, they ought neither to be read 
nor to be heard. For those things should not easily be put forward, nor carelessly and rudely published, 
which may move a scandal by means of a quarrelsome pen in the minds of the hearers, and confuse 
brethren, who are placed far apart and dwelling across the sea, with uncertain opinions. Let those beware, 
who, obeying either their own rage or lust, and unmindful of the divine law and holiness, rejoice to throw 
abroad in the meantime things which they cannot prove; and although they may not be successful in 
destroying and ruining innocence, are satisfied with scattering stains upon it with lying reports and false 
rumours. Assuredly, we should exert ourselves, as it is fitting for prelates and priests to do, that such things, 
when they are written by any, should be repudiated as far as we are concerned. For otherwise, what will 
become of that which we learn and which we declare to be laid down in Scripture: "Keep thy tongue from 
evil, and thy lips from speaking guile?"(2) And elsewhere: "Thy mouth abounded in malice, and thy tongue 
embraced deceit. Thou safest and spakest against thy brother, and slanderedst thine own mother's son. "(3) 
Also whist the apostle says: "Let no corrupt communication proceed from thy mouth, but that which is good 
to the edifying of faith, that it may minister grace unto the hearers. "(4) Further, we show what the right course 
of conduct to pursue is, (5) if, when such things are written by the calumnious temerity of some, we do not 
allow them to be read among us: and therefore, dearest brother, when such letters came to me against you, 
even though they were the letters of your co-presbyter sitting with you, (6) as they breathed a tone of religious 
simplicity, and did not echo with any barkings of curses and revilings, I ordered them to be read to the 
clergy and the people. 

3. But in desiring letters from our colleagues, (7) who were present at your ordination at that place, we did not 
forget the ancient usage, nor did we seek for any novelty. For it was sufficient for you to announce yourself 
by letters(8) to have been made bishop, unless there had been a dissenting faction on the other side, who 
by their slanderous and calumnious fabrications disturbed the minds and perplexed the hearts of our 
colleagues, as well as of several of the brethren. To set this matter at rest, we judged it necessary to obtain 
thence the strong and decided authority of our colleagues who wrote to us; and they, declaring the 
testimony of their letters to be fully deserved by your character, and life, and teaching, have deprived even 
your rivals, and those who delight either in novelty or evil, of every scruple of doubt or of difference; and, 
according to our advice weighed in wholesome reason, the minds of the brethren tossing about in this sea 
have sincerely and decidedly approved your priesthood. For this, my brother, we especially both labour 
after, and ought to labour after, to be careful to maintain as much as we can the unity delivered by the Lord, 
and through His apostles to us their successors, and, as far as in us lies, to gather into the Church the 
dispersed and wandering sheep which the wilful faction and heretical temptation of some is separating from 
their Mother; those only being left outside, who by their obstinacy and madness have persisted, and have 
been unwilling to return to us; who themselves will have to give an account to the Lord of the dissension and 
separation made by them, and of the Church that they have forsaken. 

4. Bill, so far as pertains to the cause of certain presbyters here, and of Felicissimus, that you may know 
what has been done here, our colleagues have sent you letters subscribed by their own hand, that you may 

learn, when you have heard the parties, from their letters what they have thought and what they have 
pronounced. But you will do better,(1) brother, if you will also bid copies of the letters which I had sent lately 
by our colleagues Caldonius and Fortunatus to you, to he read for the common satisfaction, which I had 
written concerning the same Felicissimus and his presbytery to the clergy there, and also to the people, to 
be read to the brethren there; declaring your ordination, and the course of the whole transaction, that so as 
well there as here the brotherhood may be informed of all things by us. Moreover, I have here transmitted 
also copies of the same by Mettius the sub-deacon, sent by me, and by Nicephorus the acolyte. I bid you, 
dearest brother, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE XLII.(2) 

TO THE SAME, ON HIS HAVING SENT LETTERS TO THE CONFESSORS WHOM 
NOVATIAN HAD SEDUCED. 

ARGUMENT. --THE ARGUMENT OF THIS LETTER SUFFICIENTLY APPEARS FROM THE 
TITLE. IT IS MANIFEST THAT THIS LETTER AND THE FOLLOWING WERE SENT BY ONE 
MESSENGER. 

Cyprian to Cornelius his brother, greeting. I have though it both obligatory on me, and necessary for you, 
dearest brother, to write a short letter to the confessors who are there with you, and, seduced by the 
obstinacy and depravity of Novatian and Novatus,(3) have departed from the Church; in which letter I might 
induce them, for the sake of our mutual affection, to return to their Mother, that is, to the Catholic Church. This 
letter I have first of all entrusted to you by Mettius the sub-deacon for your perusal, lest any one should 
pretend that I had written otherwise than according to the contents of my letter. I have, moreover, charged the 
same Mettius sent by me to you, that he should be guided by your decision; and if you should think that this 
letter should be given to the confessors, then that he should deliver it. I bid you, dearest brother, ever 
heartily farewell. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE XLIII.-TO THE 
ROMAN CONFESSORS, THAT THEY SHOULD RETURN 
TO UNITY 

L 

d 

EPISTLE XL!!!. (4) 

TO THE ROMAN CONFESSORS, THAT THEY SHOULD RETURN TO UNITY. 

ARGUMENT. --HE EXHORTS THE ROMAN CONFESSORS WHO HAD BEEN SEDUCED BY 
THE FACTION OF NOVATIAN AND NOVATUS, TO RETURN TO UNITY. 

Cyprian to Maximus and Nicostratus, and the other confessors, greeting. As you have frequently gathered 
from my letters, beloved, what honour I have ever observed in my mode of speaking for your confession, 
and what love for the associated brotherhood; believe, I entreat you, and acquiesce in these my letters, 
wherein I both write and with simplicity and fidelity consult for you, and for your doings, and for your praise. 
For it weighs me down and saddens me, and the intolerable grief of a smitten, almost prostrate, spirit seizes 
me, when I find that you there, contrary to ecclesiastical order, contrary to evangelical law, contrary to the 
unity of the Catholic institution, had consented that another bishop should be made. (5) That is what is neither 
right nor allowable to be done; that another church should be set up; that Christ's members should be torn 
asunder; that the one mind and body of the Lord's flock should be lacerated by a divided emulation. I 
entreat that in you, at all events, that unlawful rending of our brotherhood may not continue; but remembering 
both your confession and the divine tradition, you may return to the Mother whence you have gone forth; 
whence you came to the glory of confession with the rejoicing of the same Mother. And think not that you are 
thus maintaining the Gospel of Christ when you separate yourselves from the flock of Christ, and from His 
peace and concord; since it is more fitting for glorious and good soldiers to sit down within their own camp, 
and so placed within to manage and provide for those things which are to be dealt with in common. For as 
our unanimity and concord ought by no means to be divided, and because we cannot forsake the Church 
and go outside her to come to you, we beg and entreat you with what exhortations we can, rather to return to 
the Church your Mother, and to our brotherhood. I bid you, dearest brethren, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLES XLIV TO XLVIII.-BETWEEN CYPRIAN AND 
CORNELIUS 

A 

EPISTLE XLIV.(1) 

TO CORNELIUS, CONCERNING POLYCARP THE ADRUMETINE. 

ARGUMENT. --HE EXCUSES HIMSELF IN THIS LETTER FOR WHAT HAD OCCURRED, IN 
THAT, DURING THE TIME THAT HE WAS AT ADRUMETUM, LETTERS HAD BEEN SENT 
THENCE BY THE CLERGY OF POLYCARP, NOT TO CORNELIUS, BUT TO THE ROMAN 
CLERGY, NOTWITHSTANDING THAT PREVIOUSLY POLYCARP HIMSELF HAD WRITTEN 
RATHER TO CORNELIUS. IT APPEARS TOLERABLY PLAIN FROM THE CONTEXT ITSELF 
THAT THIS WAS WRITTEN AFTER THE PRECEDING ONES. 

1. Cyprian to Cornelius iiis brotiier, greeting. I iiave read your letters, dearest brother, which you sent by 
Primitivus our co-presbyter, in which I perceived that you were annoyed that, whereas letters from the 
Adrumetine colony in the name of Polycarp were directed to you, yet after Liberalis and I came to that place, 
letters began to be directed thence to the presbyters and to the deacons. 

2. In respect of which I wish you to know, and certainly to believe, that it was done from no levity or contempt. 
But when several of our colleagues who had assembled into one place had determined that, while our 
co-bishops Caldonius and Fortunatus were sent as ambassadors to you, all things should be in the 
meantime suspended as they were, until the same colleagues of ours, having reduced matters there to 
peace, or, having discovered their truth, should return to us; the presbyters and deacons abiding in the 
Adrumetine colony; in the absence of our co-bishop Polycarp, were ignorant of what had been decided in 
common by us. But when we came before them, and our purpose was understood, they themselves also 
began to observe what the others did, so that the agreement of the churches abiding there was in no 
respect broken. 

3. Some persons, however, sometimes disturb men's minds and spirits by their words, in that they relate 
things otherwise than is the truth. For we, who furnish every person who sails hence with a plan that they may 
sail without any of-fence, know that we have exhorted them to acknowledge and hold the root and matrix of 
the Catholic Church. (2) But since our province is wide-spread, and has Numidia and Mauritania attached to 
it; lest a schism made in the city should confuse the minds of the absent with uncertain opinions, we 
decided-having obtained by means of the bishops the truth of the matter, and having got a greater authority 
for the proof of your ordination, and so at length every scruple being got rid of from the breast of every 
one-that letters should be sent you by all who were placed anywhere in the province; as in fact is done, that 
so the whole of our colleagues might decidedly approve of and maintain both you and your communion, 
that is as well to the unity of the Catholic Church as to its charity. That all which has by God's direction come 
to pass, and that our design has under Providence been forwarded, we rejoice. 

4. For thus as well the truth as the dignity of your episcopate has been established in the most open light, 
and with the most manifest and substantial approval; so that from the replies of our colleagues, who have 
thence written to us, and from the account and from the testimonies of our co-bishops Pompeius, and 
Stephanus, and Caldonius, and Fortunatus, both the needful cause and the right order, and moreover the 
glorious innocence, of your ordination might be known by all. That we, with the rest of our colleagues, may 
steadily and firmly administer this office, and keep it in the concordant unanimity of the Catholic Church, the 
divine condescension will accomplish; so that the Lord who condescends to elect and appoint for Himself 
priests in His Church, may protect them also when elected and appointed by His good-will and help, 
inspiring them to govern, and supplying both vigour for restraining the contumacy of the wicked, and 
gentleness for cherishing the penitence of the lapsed. I bid you, dearest brother, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE XLV.(3) 

CORNELIUS TO CYPRIAN, ON THE RETURN OF THE CONFESSORS TO UNITY. 

ARGUMENT. --CORNELIUS INFORMS CYPRIAN OF THE SOLEMN RETURN OF THE 
CONFESSORS TO THE CHURCH, AND DESCRIBES IT. 

1 . Cornelius to Cyprian iiis brotiier, greeting. In proportion to the solicitude and anxiety that we sustained in 
respect of those confessors who had been circumvented and almost deceived and alienated from the 
Church by the craft and malice of that wily and subtle man, (4) was the joy with which we were affected, and 
the thanks which we gave to Almighty God and to our Lord Christ, when they, acknowledging their error, and 
perceiving the poisoned cunning of the malignant man, as if of a serpent, came back, as they with one heart 
profess, with singleness of will to the Church from which they had gone forth. And first, indeed, our brethren of 
approved faith, loving peace and desiring unity, announced that the swelling pride of these men was 
already soothed;(1) yet there was no fitting assurance to induce us easily to believe that they were 
thoroughly changed. But afterwards, Urbanus and Sidonius the confessors came to our presbyters, 
affirming that Maximus the confessor and presbyter, equally with themselves, desired to return into the 
Church; but since many things had preceded this which they had contrived, of which you also have been 
made aware from our co-bishops and from my letters, so that faith could not hastily be reposed in them, we 
determined to hear from their own mouth and confession those things which they had sent by the 
messengers. And when they came, and were required by the presbyters to give an account of what they 
had done, and were charged with having very lately repeatedly sent letters full of calumnies and 
reproaches, in their name, through all the churches, and had disturbed nearly all the churches; they affirmed 
that they had been deceived, and that they had not known what was in those letters; that only through being 
misled they had also committed schismatical acts, and been the authors of heresy, so that they suffered 
hands to be imposed on him as if upon a bishop. (2) And when these and other matters had been charged 
upon them, they entreated that they might be done away and altogether discharged from memory. 

2. The whole of this transaction therefore being brought before me, I decided that the presbytery(3) should 
be brought together; (for there were present five bishops, who were also present to-day;) so that by 
well-grounded counsel it might be determined with the consent of all what ought to be observed in respect of 
their persons. And that you may know the feeling of all, and the advice of each one, I decided also to bring 
to your knowledge our various opinions, which you will read subjoined. When these things were done, 
Maximus, Urbanus, Sidonius, and several brethren who had joined themselves to them, came to the 
presbytery, desiring with earnest prayers that what had been done before might fall into oblivion, and no 
mention might be made of it; and promising that henceforth, as though nothing had been either done or said, 
all things on both sides being forgiven, they would now exhibit to God a heart clean and pure, following the 
evangelical word which says, "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. "(4) What remained 
was, that the people should be informed of all this proceeding, that they might see those very men 
established in the Church whom they had long seen and mourned as wanderers and scattered. Their will 
being known, a great concourse of the brotherhood was assembled. There was one voice from all, giving 
thanks to God; all were expressing the joy of their heart by tears, embracing them as if they had this day 
been set free from the penalty of the dungeon. And to quote their very own words,-"We," they say, "know 
that Cornelius is bishop of the most holy Catholic Church elected by Almighty God, and by Christ our Lord. 
We confess our error; we have suffered imposture; we were deceived by captious perfidy and loquacity. 
For although we seemed, as it were, to have held a kind of communion with a man who was a schismatic 
and a heretic, yet our mind was always sincere in the Church. For we are not ignorant that there is one God; 
that there is one Christ the Lord whom we have confessed, and one Holy Spirit; and that in the Catholic 
Church there ought to be one bishop."(5) Were we not rightly induced by that confession of theirs, (6) to allow 
that what they had confessed before the power of the world they might approve when established in the 
Church? Wherefore we bade Maximus the presbyter to take his own place; the rest we received with great 
approbation of the people. But we remitted all things to Almighty God, in whose power all things are 
reserved. 

3. These things therefore, brother, written to you in the same hour, at the same moment, we have transmitted; 
and I have sent away at once Nicephorus the acolyte, hastening to descend to embarkation, that so, no 
delay being made, you might, as if you had been present among that clergy and in that assembly of 
people, give thanks to Almighty God and to Christ our Lord. But we believe-nay, we confide in it for 
certain-that the others also who have been ranged in this error will shortly return into the Church when they 
see their leaders acting with us. I think, brother, that you ought to send these letters also to the other 
churches, that all may know that the craft and prevarication of this schismatic and heretic are from day to day 
being reduced to nothing. Farewell, dearest brother. 

EPISTLE XLVI.(1) 

CYPRIAN'S ANSWER TO CORNELIUS, CONGRATULATING HIM ON THE RETURN OF THE 
CONFESSORS FROM SCHISM. 

ARGUMENT. --HE CONGRATULATES HIM ON THE RETURN OF THE CONFESSORS TO 
THE CHURCH, AND REMINDS HIM HOW MUCH THAT RETURN BENEFITS THE 
CATHOLIC CHURCH. 

1. Cyprian to Cornelius iiis brotiier, greeting. I profess tiiat I botii iiave rendered and do render tiie greatest 
tlianl<s witiiout ceasing, dearest brotiier, to God tlie Fatlier Aimiglity, and to His Clirist tlie Lord and our God 
and Saviour, tliattlie Cliurcli is tlius divinely protected, and its unity and holiness is not constantly nor 
altogether corrupted by the obstinacy of perfidy and heretical wickedness. For we have read your letter, 
and have exultingly received the greatest joy from the fulfilment of our common desire; to wit, that Maximus 
the presbyter, and Urbanus, the confessors, with Sidonius and Macarius, have re-entered into the Catholic 
Church, that is, that they have laid aside their error, and given up their schismatical, nay, their heretical 
madness, and have sought again in the soundness of faith the home of unity and truth; that whence they had 
gone forth to glory, thither they might gloriously return; and that they who had confessed Christ should not 
afterwards desert the camp of Christ, and that they might not tempt the faith of their charity and unity, (2) who 
had not been overcome in strength and courage. Behold the safe and unspotted integrity of their praise; 
behold the uncorrupted and substantial dignity of these confessors, that they have departed from the 
deserters and fugitives, that they have left the betrayers of the faith, and the impugners of the Catholic 
Church. With reason did both the people and the brotherhood receive them when they returned, as you 
write, with the greatest joy; since in the glory of confessors who had maintained their glory, and returned to 
unity, there is none who does not reckon himself a partner and a sharer. 

2. We can estimate the joy of that day(3) from our own feelings. For if, in this place, the whole number of the 
brethren rejoiced at your letter which you sent concerning their confession, and received this tidings of 
common rejoicing with the greatest alacrity, what must have been the joy there when the matter itself, and the 
general gladness, was carried on tinder the eyes of all? For since the Lord in His Gospel says that there is 
the highest "joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth,"(4) how much greater is the joy in earth, no less 
than in heaven, over confessors who return with their glory and with praise to the Church of God, and make a 
way of returning for others by the faith and approval of their example? For this error had led away certain of 
our brethren, so that they thought they were following the communion of confessors. When this error was 
removed, light was infused into the breasts of all, and the Catholic Church has been shown to be one, and to 
be able neither to be cut nor divided. Nor can any one now be easily deceived by the talkative words of a 
raging schismatic, since it has been proved that good and glorious soldiers of Christ could not long be 
detained without the Church by the deceitfulness and perfidy of others. I bid you, dearest brother, ever 
heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE XLVII. (5) 

CORNELIUS TO CYPRIAN, CONCERNING THE FACTION OF NOVATIAN WITH HIS 
PARTY. 

ARGUMENT. -CORNELIUS GIVES CYPRIAN AN ACCOUNT OF THE FACTION OF 
NOVATIAN. (6) 

Cornelius to Cyprian his brother, greeting. That nothing might be wanting to the future punishment of this 
wretched man, when cast down by the powers of God, (on the expulsion by you of Maximus, and Longinus, 
and Machaeus;) he has risen again; and, as I intimated in my former letter which I sent to you by Augendus 
the confessor, I think that Nicostratus, and Novatus, and Evaristus, and Primus, and Dionysius, have already 
come thither. Therefore let care be taken that it be made known to all our co-bishops and brethren, that 
Nicostratus is accused of many crimes, and that not only has he committed frauds and plunders on his 
secular patroness, whose affairs he managed; but, moreover (which is reserved to him for a perpetual 
punishment), he has abstracted no small deposits of the Church; that Evaristus has been the author of a 
schism; and that Zetus has been appointed bishop in his room, and his successor to the people over whom 
he had previously presided. But he contrived greater and worse things by his malice and insatiable 
wickedness than those which he was then always practising among his own people; so that you may know 
what kind of leaders and protectors that schismatic and heretic constantly had joined to his side. I bid you, 
dearest brother, ever heartily fare well. 

EPISTLE XLVIII.(1) 

CYPRIAN'S ANSWER TO CORNELIUS, CONCERNING THE CRIMES OF NOVATUS. 

ARGUMENT. --HE PRAISES CORNELIUS, THAT HE HAD GIVEN HIM TIMELY WARNING, 
SEEING THAT THE DAY AFTER THE GUILTY FACTION HAD COME TO HIM HE HAD 
RECEIVED CORNELIUS' LETTER. THEN HE DESCRIBES AT LENGTH NOVATUS' 
CRIMES, AND THE SCHISM THAT HAD BEFORE BEEN STIRRED UP BY HIM IN AFRICA. 

1 . Cyprian to Cornelius iiis brotiier, greeting. You iiave acted, dearest brotiier, botii witii diligence and love, 
in sending us in haste Nicephorus the acolyte, who both told us the glorious gladness concerning the return 
of the confessors, and most fully instructed us against the new and mischievous devices of Novatian and 
Novatus for attacking the Church of Christ. For whereas on the day before, that mischievous faction of 
heretical wickedness had arrived here, itself already lost and ready to ruin others who should join it, on the 
day after, Nicephorus arrived with your letter. From which we both learnt ourselves, and have begun to teach 
and to instruct others, that Evaristus from being a bishop has now not remained even a layman; but, 
banished from the see and from the people, and an exile from the Church of Christ, he roves about far and 
wide through other provinces, and, himself having made shipwreck of truth and faith, is preparing for some 
who are like him, as fearful shipwrecks. Moreover, that Nicostratus, having lost the diaconate of sacred 
administrations, because he had abstracted the Church's money by a sacrilegious fraud, and disowned the 
deposits of the widows and orphans, did not wish so much to come into Africa as to escape thither from the 
city, from the consciousness of his rapines and his frightful crimes. And now a deserter and a fugitive from 
the Church, as if to have changed the clime were to change the man, he goes on to boast and announce 
himself a confessor, although he can no longer either be or be called a confessor of Christ who has denied 
Christ's Church. For when the Apostle Paul says, "For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, 
and shall cleave unto his wife; and they two shall be one flesh. This is a great mystery; but I speak 
concerning Christ and the Church;"(2)-when, I say, the blessed apostle says this, and with his sacred voice 
testifies to the unity of Christ with the Church, cleaving to one another with indivisible links, how can he be with 
Christ who is not with the spouse of Christ, and in His Church?(3) Or how does he assume to himself the 
charge of ruling or governing the Church, who has spoiled and wronged the Church of Christ? 

2. For about Novatus there need have been nothing told by you to us, since Novatus ought rather to have 
been shown by us to you, as always greedy of novelty, raging with the rapacity of an insatiable avarice, 
inflated with the arrogance and stupidity of swelling pride; always known with bad repute to the bishops 
there; always condemned by the voice of all the priests as a heretic and a perfidious man; always 
inquisitive, that he may betray: he flatters for the purpose of deceiving, never faithful that he may love; a torch 
and fire to blow up the flames of sedition; a whirlwind and tempest to make shipwrecks of the faith; the foe of 
quiet, the adversary of tranquillity, the enemy of peace. Finally, when Novatus withdrew thence from among 
you, that is, when the storm and the whirlwind departed, calm arose there in part, and the glorious and good 
confessors who by his instigation had departed from the Church, after he retired from the city, returned to the 
Church. This is the same Novatus who first sowed among us the flames of discord and schism; who 
separated some of the brethren here from the bishop; who, in the persecution itself, was to our people, as it 
were, another persecution, to overthrow the minds of the brethren. He it is who, without my leave or 
knowledge, of his own factiousness and ambition appointed his attendant Felicissimus a deacon, and with 
his own tempest sailing also to Rome to overthrow the Church, endeavoured to do similar and equal things 
there, forcibly separating a part of the people from the clergy, and dividing the concord of the fraternity that 
was firmly knit together and mutually loving one another. Since Rome from her greatness plainly ought to 
take precedence of Carthage, he there committed still greater and graver crimes. (4) He who in the one 
place had made a deacon contrary to the Church, in the other made a bishop. Nor let any one be surprised 
at this in such men. The wicked are always madly carried away by their own furious passions; and after they 
have committed crimes, they are agitated by the very consciousness of a depraved mind. Neither can 
those remain in God's Church, who have not maintained its divine and ecclesiastical discipline, either in the 
conversation of their life or the peace of their character. Orphans despoiled by him, widows defrauded, 
moneys moreover of the Church withheld, exact from him those penalties which we behold inflicted in his 
madness. His father also died of hunger in the street, and afterwards even in death was not buried by him. 
The womb of his wife was smitten by a blow of his heel; and in the miscarriage that soon followed, the 
offspring was brought forth, the fruit of a father's murder. And now does he dare to condemn the hands of 
those who sacrifice, when he himself is more guilty in his feet, by which the son, who was about to be born, 
was slain? 

3. He long ago feared this consciousness of crime. On account of this he regarded it as certain that he 

would not only be turned out of the presbytery, but restrained from communion; and by the urgency of the 
brethren, the day of investigation was coming on, on which his cause waste be dealt with before us, if the 
persecution had net prevented. He, welcoming this, with a sort of desire of escaping and evading 
condemnation, committed all these crimes, and wrought all this stir; so that he who was to be ejected and 
excluded from the Church, anticipated the judgment of the priests by a voluntary departure, as if to have 
anticipated the sentence were to have escaped the punishment. 

4. But in respect to the other brethren, over whom we grieve that they were circumvented by him, we labour 
that they may avoid the mischievous neighbourhood of the crafty impostor, that they may escape the 
deadly nets of his solicitations, that they may once more seek the Church from which he deserved by divine 
authority to be expelled. Such indeed, with the Lord's help, we trust may return by His mercy, for one cannot 
perish unless it is plain that he must perish, since the Lord in His Gospel says, "Every planting which my 
heavenly Father hath not planted shall be rooted up."(1) He alone who has not been planted in the precepts 
and warnings of God the Father, can depart from the Church: he alone can forsake the bishops(2) and abide 
in his madness with schismatics and heretics. But the mercy of God the Father, and the indulgence of Christ 
our Lord, and our own patience, will unite the rest with us. I bid you, dearest brother, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLES XLIX & L.-BETWEEN CYPRIAN & MAXIMUS 
AND THE OTHER CONFESSORS ABOUT THEIR 
RETURN FROM SCHISM 

EPISTLE XLIX.(3) 

MAXIMUS AND THE OTHER CONFESSORS TO CYPRIAN, ABOUT THEIR RETURN FROM 
SCHISM. 

ARGUMENT. --THEY INFORM CYPRIAN THAT THEY HAD RETURNED TO THE CHURCH. 

Maximus, Urbanus, Sidonius, and Macharius, to Cyprian their brotiier, greeting. We are certain, dearest 
brotiier, tiiat you also rejoice togetiier witii us witii equal earnestness, that we having taken advice, and 
especially, considering the interests and the peace of the Church, having passed by all other matters, and 
reserved them to God's judgment, have made peace with Cornelius our bishop, as well as with the whole 
clergy. (4) You ought most certainly to know from these our letters that this was done with the joy of the whole 
Church, and even with the forward affection of the brethren. We pray, dearest brother, that for many years 
you may fare well. 

EPISTLE L.(5) 

FROM CYPRIAN TO THE CONFESSORS, CONGRATULATING THEM ON THEIR RETURN 
FROM SCHISM. 

ARGUMENT. -CYPRIAN CONGRATULATES THE ROMAN CONFESSORS ON THEIR 
RETURN INTO THE CHURCH, AND REPLIES TO THEIR LETTERS. 

1. Cyprian to Maximus the presbyter, also to Urbanus, and Sidonius, and Maturest, his brethren, greeting. 
When I read your letters, dearest brethren, that you wrote to me about your return, and about the peace of 
the Church, and the brotherly restoration, I confess that I was as greatly overjoyed as I had before been 
overjoyed when I learnt the glory of your confession, and thankfully received tidings of the heavenly and 
spiritual renown of your warfare. For this, moreover, is another confession of your faith and praise; to confess 
that the Church is one, and not to become a sharer in other men's error, or rather wickedness; to seek anew 
the same camp whence you went forth, whence with the most vigorous strength you leapt forth to wage the 
battle and to subdue the adversary. For the trophies from the battle-field ought to be brought back thither 
whence the arms for the field had been received, lest the Church of Christ should not retain those same 
glorious warriors whom Christ had furnished for glory. Now, however, you have kept in the peace of the Lord 
the fitting tenor of your faith and the law of undivided charity and concord, and have given by your walk an 
example of love and peace to others; so that the truth of the Church, and the unity of the Gospel mystery 
which is held by us, are also linked together by your consent and bond; and confessors of Christ do not 
become the leaders of error, after having stood forth as praiseworthy originators of virtue and honour. 

2. Let others consider how much they may congratulate you, or how much each one may glory for himself: I 
confess that I congratulate you more, and I more boast of you to others, in respect of this your peaceful 
return and charity. For you ought in simplicity to hear what was in my heart. I grieved vehemently, and I was 
greatly afflicted, that I could not hold communion with those whom once I had begun to love. After the 
schismatical and heretical error laid hold of you, on your going forth from prison, it seemed as if your glory 
had been left in the dungeon. For there the dignity of your name seemed to have stayed behind when the 
soldiers of Christ did not return from the prison to the Church, although they had gone into the prison with the 
praise and congratulations of the Church. 

3. For although there seem to be tares in the Church, yet neither our faith nor our charity ought to be hindered, 
so that because we see that there are tares in the Church we ourselves should withdraw from the Church: we 
ought only to labour that we may be wheat, that when the wheat shall begin to be gathered into the Lord's 
barns, we may receive fruit for our labour and work. The apostle in his epistle says, "In a great house there 

are not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of wood and of earth, and some to honour and some to 
dishonour."(1) Let us strive, dearest brethren, and labour as much as we possibly can, that we may be 
vessels of gold or silver. But to the Lord alone it is granted to break the vessels of earth, to whom also is 
given the rod of iron. The servant cannot be greater than his lord, nor may any one claim to himself what the 
Father has given to the Son alone, so as to think that he can take the fan for winnowing and purging the 
threshing-floor, or can separate by human judgment all the tares from the wheat. That is a proud obstinacy 
and a sacrilegious presumption which a depraved madness assumes to itself. And while some are always 
assuming to themselves more dominion than meek justice demands, they perish from the Church; and while 
they insolently extol themselves, blinded by their own swelling, they lose the light of truth. For which reason 
we also, keeping moderation, and considering the Lord's balances, and thinking of the love and mercy of 
God the Father, have long and carefully pondered with ourselves, and have weighed what was to be done 
with due moderation. 

4. All which matters you can look into thoroughly, if you will read the tracts(2) which I have lately read here, 
and have, for the sake of our mutual love, transmitted to you also for you to read; wherein there is neither 
wanting for the lapsed, censure which may rebuke, nor medicine which may heal. Moreover, my feeble 
ability has expressed as well as it could the unity of the Catholic Church. (3) Which treatise I now more and 
more trust will be pleasing to you, since you now read it in such a way as both to approve and love it; 
inasmuch as what we have written in words you fulfil in deeds, when you return to the Church in the unity of 
charity and peace. I bid you, dearest brethren, and greatly longed-for, ever heartily farewell. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE LI.-TO 
ANTONIANUS ABOUT CORNELIUS AND NOVATIAN 

EPISTLE LI. (4) 

TO ANTONIANUS ABOUT CORNELIUS AND NOVATIAN. 

ARGUMENT. --WHEN ANTONIANUS, HAVING RECEIVED LETTERS FROM NOVATIAN, 
HAD BEGUN TO BE DISPOSED IN HIS MIND TOWARDS HIS PARTY, CYPRIAN CONFIRMS 
HIM IN HIS FORMER OPINION, NAMELY, THAT OF CONTINUING TO HOLD COMMUNION 
WITH HIS BISHOP AND SO WITH THE CATHOLIC CHURCH. HE EXCUSES HIMSELF FOR 
HIS OWN CHANGE OF OPINION IN RESPECT OF THE LAPSED, AND AT THE END HE 
EXPLAINS WHEREIN CONSISTS THE NOVATIAN HERESY. (5) 

1 . Cyprian to Antonianus his brotiier, greeting. I received your first letters, dearest brotiier, firmly maintaining 
the concord of the priestly college, and adhering to the Catholic Church, in which you intimated that you did 
not hold communion with Novatian, but followed my advice, and held one common agreement with 
Cornelius our co-bishop. (6) You wrote, moreover, for me to transmit a copy of those same letters to 
Cornelius our colleague, so that he might lay aside all anxiety, and know at once that you held communion 
with him, that is, with the Catholic Church. (7) 

2. But subsequently there arrived other letters of yours sent by Quintus our co-presbyter, in which I observed 
that your mind, influenced by I the letters of Novatian, had begun to waver. For although previously you had 
settled your opinion and consent firmly, you desired in these letters that I should write to you once more what 
heresy Novatian had introduced, or on what grounds Cornelius holds communion with Trophimus and the 
sacrificers. In which matters, indeed, if you are anxiously careful, from solicitude for the faith, and are 
diligently seeking out the truth of a doubtful matter, the hesitating anxiety of a mind undecided in the fear of 
God, is not to be blamed. 

3. Yet, as I see that after the first opinion expressed in your letter, you have been disturbed subsequently by 
letters of Novatian, I assert this first of all, dearest brother, that grave men, and men who are once 
established upon the strong rock with solid firmness, are not moved, I say not with a light air, but even with a 
wind or a tempest, lest their mind, changeable and uncertain, be frequently agitated hither and thither by 
various opinions, as by gusts of wind rushing on them, and so be turned from its purpose with some 
reproach of levity. That the letters of Novatian may not do this with you, nor with any one, I will set before you, 
as you have desired, my brother, an account of the matter in few words. And first of all indeed, as you also 
seem troubled about what I too have done, I must clear my own person and cause in your eyes, lest any 
should think that I have lightly withdrawn from my purpose, and while at first and at the commencement I 
maintained evangelical vigour, yet subsequently I seem to have turned my mind from discipline and from its 
former severity of judgment, so asto think that those who have stained their conscience with certificates, or 
have offered abominable sacrifices, are to have peace made easy to them. Both of which things have been 
done by me, not without long-balanced and pondered reasons. 

4. For when the battle was still going on, and the struggle of a glorious contest was raging in the persecution, 
the courage of the soldiers had to be excited with every exhortation, and with full urgency, and especially the 
minds of the lapsed had to be roused with the trumpet call, as it were, of my voice, that they might pursue the 
way of repentance, not only with prayers and lamentations; but, since an opportunity was given of repeating 
the struggle and of regaining salvation, that they might be reproved by my voice, and stimulated rather to 
the ardour of confession and the glory of martyrdom. Finally, when the presbyters and deacons had written 
to me about some persons, that they were without moderation and were eagerly pressing forward to receive 
communion; replying to them in my letter which is still in existence, (1) then I added also this: "If these are so 
excessively eager, they have what they require in their own power, the time itself providing for them more 
than they ask: the battle is still being carried on, and the struggle is daily celebrated: if they truly and 
substantially repent of what they have done, and the ardour of their faith prevails, he who cannot be delayed 
may be crowned." But I put off deciding what was to be arranged about the case of the lapsed, so that when 
quiet and tranquillity should be granted, and the divine indulgence should allow the bishops to assemble 

into one place, then the advice gathered from the comparison of all opinions being communicated and 
weighed, we might determine what was necessary to be done. But if any one, before our council, (2) and 
before the opinion decided upon by the advice of all, should rashly wish to communicate with the lapsed, he 
himself should be withheld from communion. 

5. And this also I wrote very fully to Rome, to the clergy who were then still acting without a bishop, and to the 
confessors, Maximus the presbyter, and the rest who were then shut up in prison, but are now in the Church, 
joined with Cornelius. You may know that I wrote this from their reply, for in their letter they wrote thus: 
"However, what you have yourself also declared in so important a matter is satisfactory to us, that the peace 
of the Church must first be maintained; then, that an assembly for counsel being gathered together, with 
bishop, presbyters, deacons, and confessors, as well as with the laity who stand fast, we should deal with 
the case of the lapsed. "(3) It was added also-Novatian then writing, and reciting with his own voice what he 
had written, and the presbyter Moyses, then still a confessor, but now a martyr, subscribing-that peace 
ought to be granted to the lapsed who were sick and at the point of departure. Which letter was sent 
throughout the whole world, and was brought to the knowledge of all the churches and all the brethren. (4) 

6. According, however, to what had been before decided, when the persecution was quieted, and 
opportunity of meeting was afforded; a large number of bishops, whom their faith and the divine protection 
had preserved in soundness and safety, we met together; and the divine Scriptures being brought forward s 
on both sides, we balanced the decision with wholesome moderation, so that neither should hope of 
communion and peace be wholly denied to the lapsed, lest they should fail still more through desperation, 
and, because the Church was closed to them, should, like the world, live as heathens; nor yet, on the other 
hand, should the censure of the Gospel be relaxed, so that they might rashly rush to communion, but that 
repentance should be long protracted, and the paternal clemency be sorrowfully besought, and the cases, 
and the wishes, and the necessities of individuals be examined into, according to what is contained in a little 
book, which I trust has come to you, in which the several heads of our decisions are collected. And lest 
perchance the number of bishops in Africa should seem unsatisfactory, we also wrote to Rome, to Cornelius 
our colleague, concerning this thing, who himself also holding a council with very many bishops, concurred 
in the same opinion as we had held, with equal gravity and wholesome moderation. (1) 

7. Concerning which it has now become necessary to write to you, that you may know that I have done 
nothing lightly, but, according to what I had before comprised in my letters, had put off everything to the 
common determination of our council, and indeed communicated with no one of the lapsed as yet, so long 
as there still was an opening by which the lapsed might receive not only pardon, but also a crown. Yet 
afterwards, as the agreement of our college, and the advantage of gathering the fraternity together and of 
healing their wound required, I submitted to the necessity of the times, and thought that the safety of the 
many must be provided for; and I do not now recede from these things which have once been determined in 
our council by common agreement, although many things are ventilated by the voices of many, and lies 
against God's priests uttered from the devil's mouth, and tossed about everywhere, to the rupture of the 
concord of Catholic unity. But it behoves you, as a good brother and a fellow-priest like-minded, not easily 
to receive what malignants and apostates may say, but carefully to weigh what your colleagues, modest 
and grave men, may do, from an investigation of our life and teaching. 

8. I come now, dearest brother, to the character of Cornelius our colleague, that with us you may more justly 
know Cornelius, not from the lies of malignants and detractors, but from the judgment of the Lord God, who 
made him a bishop, and from the testimony of his fellow-bishops, the whole number of whom has agreed 
with an absolute unanimity throughout the whole world. For,-a thing which with laudable announcement 
commends our dearest Cornelius to God and Christ, and to His Church, and also to all his fellow-priests,-he 
was not one who on a sudden attained to the episcopate; but, promoted through all the ecclesiastical 
offices, and having often deserved well of the Lord in divine administrations, he ascended by all the grades 
of religious service to the lofty summit of the Priesthood. Then, moreover, he did not either ask for the 
episcopate itself, nor did he wish it; nor, as others do when the swelling of their I arrogance and pride inflates 
them, did he seize upon it;(2) but quiet otherwise, and meek and such as those are accustomed to be who 
are chosen of God to this office, having regard to the modesty of his virgin continency, and the humility of his 
inborn and guarded veneration, he did not, as some do, use force to be made a bishop, but he himself 
suffered compulsion, so as to be forced to receive the episcopal office. And he was made bishop by very 
many of our colleagues who were then present in the city of Rome, who sent to us letters concerning his 
ordination, honourable and laudatory, and remarkable for their testimony in announcement of him. 
Moreover, Cornelius was made bishop by the judgment of God and of His Christ, by the testimony of almost 
all the clergy, by the suffrage of the people who were then present, and by the assembly of ancient priests 
and good men, when no one had been made so before him, when the place of Fabian, that is, when the 
place of Peter(3) and the degree of the sacerdotal throne was vacant; which being occupied by the will of 
God, and established by the consent of all of us, whosoever now wishes to become a bishop, must needs 

be made from without; and he cannot have the ordination of the Church who does not hold the unity of the 
Church. Whoever he may be, although greatly boasting about himself, and claiming very much for himself, 
he is profane, he is an alien, he is without. And as after the first there cannot be a second, whosoever is 
made after one who ought to be alone, is not second to him, but is in fact none at all. 

9. Then afterwards, when he had undertaken the episcopate, not obtained by solicitation nor by extortion, 
but by the will of God who makes priests; what a virtue there was in the very undertaking of his episcopate, 
what strength of mind, what firmness of faith,-a thing that we ought with simple heart both thoroughly to look 
into and to praise,-that he intrepidly sate at Rome in the sacerdotal chair at that time when a tyrant, odious 
to God's priests, was threatening things that can, and cannot be spoken, inasmuch as he would much more 
patiently and tolerantly hear that a rival prince was raised up against himself than that a priest of God was 
established at Rome. Is not this man, dearest brother, to be commended with the highest testimony of virtue 
and faith? Is not he to be esteemed among the glorious confessors and martyrs, who for so long a time sate 
awaiting the manglers of his body and the avengers of a ferocious tyrant, who, when Cornelius resisted their 
deadly edicts, and trampled on their threats and sufferings and tortures by the vigour of his faith, would either 
rush upon him with the sword, or crucify him, or scorch him with fire, or rend his bowels and his limbs with 
some unheard-of kind of punishment? Even though the majesty and goodness of the protecting Lord 
guarded, when made, the priest whom He willed to be made; yet Cornelius, in what pertains to his devotion 
and fear, suffered(3) whatever he could suffer, and conquered the tyrant first of all by his priestly office, who 
was afterwards conquered in arms and in war. 

1 0. But in respect to certain discreditable and malignant things that are bandied about concerning him, I 
would not have you wonder when you know that this is always the work of the devil, to wound God's servants 
with lies, and to defame a glorious name by false opinions, so that they who are bright in the light of their own 
conscience may be tarnished by the reports of others Moreover, you are to know that our colleagues have 
investigated, and have certainly discovered that he has been blemished with no stain of a certificate, as 
some intimate; neither has he mingled in sacrilegious communion with the bishops who have sacrificed, but 
has merely associated with us those whose cause had been heard, and whose innocence was approved. 

1 1 . For with respect to Trophimus also, of whom you wished tidings to be written to you, the case is not as 
the report and the falsehood of malignant people had conveyed it to you. For, as our predecessors often 
did, our dearest brother, in bringing together the brethren, yielded to necessity; and since a very large part 
of the people had withdrawn with Trophimus, now when Trophimus returned to the Church, and atoned for, 
and with the penitence of prayer confessed, his former error, and with perfect humility and satisfaction 
recalled the brotherhood whom he had lately taken away, his prayers were heard; and not only Trophimus, 
but a very great number of brethren who had been with Trophimus, were admitted into the Church of the 
Lord, who would not all have returned to the Church unless they had come in Trophimus' company. 
Therefore the matter being considered there with several colleagues,' Trophimus was received, for whom 
the return of the brethren and salvation restored to many made atonement. Yet Trophimus was admitted in 
such a manner as only to communicate as a layman, not, according to the information given to you by the 
letters of the malignants, in such a way as to assume the place of a priest. 

12. But, moreover, in respect of what has been told you, that Cornelius communicates everywhere with those 
who have sacrificed, this intelligence has also arisen from the false reports of the apostates. For neither can 
they praise us who depart from us, nor ought we to expect to please them, who, while they displease us, and 
revolt against the Church, violently persist in soliciting brethren away from the Church. Wherefore, dearest 
brethren, do not with facility either hear or believe whatever is currently rumoured against Cornelius and 
about me. 

1 3. For if any are seized with sicknesses, help is given to them in danger, as it has been decided. Yet after 
they have been assisted, and peace has been granted to them in their danger, they cannot be suffocated 
by us, or destroyed, (2) or by our force or hands urged on to the result of death; as if, because peace is 
granted to the dying, it were necessary that those who have received peace should die; although the token 
of divine love and paternal lenity appears more in this way, that they, who in peace given to them receive 
the pledge of life, are moreover here bound to life by the peace they have received. And therefore, if with 
peace received, a reprieve is given by God, no one ought to complain of the priests for this, when once it 
has been decided that brethren are to be aided in peril. Neither must you think, dearest brother, as some 
do, that those who receive certificates are to be put on a par with those who have sacrificed; since even 
among those who have sacrificed, the condition and the case are frequently different. For we must not place 
on a level one who has at once leapt forward with good-will to the abominable sacrifice, and one who, after 
long struggle and resistance, has reached that fatal result under compulsion; one who has betrayed both 
himself and all his connections, and one who, himself approaching the trial in behalf of all, has protected his 
wife and his children, and his whole family, by himself undergoing the danger; one who has compelled his 
inmates or friends to the crime, and one who has spared inmates and servants, and has even, received 

many brethren who were departing to banishment and flight, into his house and hospitality; showing and 
offering to the Lord many souls living and safe to entreat for a single wounded one. 

14. Since, then, there is much difference(3) between those who have sacrificed, what a want of mercy it is, 
and how bitter is the hardship, to associate those who have received certificates, with those who have 
sacrificed, when he by whom the certificate has been received may say, "I had previously read, and had 
been made aware by the discourse of the bishop, (4) that we must not sacrifice to idols, that the servant of 
God ought not to worship images; and therefore, in order that I might not do this which was net lawful, when 
the opportunity of receiving a certificate was offered, which itself also I should not have received, unless the 
opportunity had been put before me, I either went or charged some other person going to the magistrate, to 
say that I am a Christian, that I am not allowed to sacrifice, that I cannot come to the devil's altars, and that I 
pay a price for this purpose, that I may not do what is not lawful for me to do." Now, however, even he who is 
stained with having received a certificate,-after he has learnt from our admonitions that he ought not even to 
have done this, and that although his hand is pure, and no contact of deadly food has polluted his lips, yet 
his conscience is nevertheless polluted, weeps when he hears us, and laments, and is now admonished of 
the thing wherein he has sinned, and having been deceived, not so much by guilt as by error, bears witness 
that for another time he is instructed and prepared. 

15. If we reject the repentance of those who have some confidence in a conscience that may be tolerated; at 
once with their wife, with their children, whom they had kept safe, they are hurried by the devil's invitation into 
heresy or schism; and it will be attributed to us in the day of judgment, that we have not cared for the 
wounded sheep, (1) and that on account of a single wounded one we have lost many sound ones. And 
whereas the Lord left the ninety and nine that were whole, and sought after the one wandering and weary, 
and Himself carried it, when found, upon His shoulders, we not only do not seek the lapsed, but even drive 
them away when they come to us; and while false prophets are not ceasing to lay waste and tear Christ's 
flock, we give an opportunity to dogs and wolves, so that those whom a hateful persecution has not 
destroyed, we ruin by our hardness and inhumanity. And what will become, dearest brother, of what the 
apostle says: "I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many, that they may 
be saved. Be ye followers of me, as I also am of Christ."(2) And again: "To the weak I became as weak, that 

I might gain the weak."(3) And again: "Whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one 
member rejoice, all the members rejoice with it. "(4) 

16. The principle of the philosophers and stoics is different, dearest brother, who say that all sins are equal, 
and that a grave man ought not easily to be moved. But there is a wide difference between Christians and 
philosophers. And when the apostle says, "Beware, lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain 
deceit, "(5) we are to avoid those things which do not come from God's clemency, but are begotten of the 
presumption of a too rigid philosophy. Concerning Moses, moreover, we find it said in the Scriptures, "Now 
the man Moses was very meek;"(6) and the Lord in His Gospel says, "Be ye merciful, as your Father also 
had mercy upon you;"(7) and again, "They that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick."(8) 
What medical skill can he exercise who says, "I cure the sound only, who have no need of a physician?" 
We ought to give our assistance, our healing art, to those who are wounded; neither let us think them dead, 
but rather let us regard them as lying half alive, whom we see to have been wounded in the fatal 
persecution, and who, if they had been altogether dead, would never from the same men become 
afterwards both confessors and martyrs. (9) 

17. But since in them there is that, which, by subsequent repentance, may be strengthened into faith; and by 
repentance strength is armed to virtue, which could not be armed if one should fall away through despair; if, 
hardly and cruelly separated from the Church, he should turn himself to Gentile ways and to worldly works, 
or, if rejected by the Church, he should pass over to heretics and schismatics; where, although he should 
afterwards be put to death on account of the name, still, being placed outside the Church, and divided from 
unity and from charity, he could not in his death be crowned. And therefore it was decided, dearest brother, 
the case of each individual having been examined into, that the receivers of certificates should in the 
meantime be admitted, that those who had sacrificed should be assisted at death, because there is no 
confession in the place of the departed, (10) nor can any one be constrained by us to repentance, if the fruit 
of repentance be taken away. If the battle should come first, strengthened by us, he will be found ready 
armed for the battle; but if sickness should press hard upon him before the battle, he departs with the 
consolation of peace and communion. 

18. Moreover, we do not prejudge when the Lord is to be the judge; save that if He shall find the repentance 
of the sinners full and sound. He will then ratify what shall have been here determined by us. If, however, any 
one should delude us with the pretence of repentance, God, who is not mocked, and who looks into man's 
heart, will judge of those things which we have imperfectly looked into, and the Lord will amend the sentence 
of His servants; while yet, dearest brother, we ought to remember that it is written, "A brother that helpeth a 
brother shall be exalted;"(1 1) and that the apostle also has said, "Let all of you severally have regard to 

yourselves, lest ye also be tempted. Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ;"(1) also 
that, rebuking the haughty, and breaking down their arrogance, he says in his epistle, "Let him thatthinketh 
he standeth, take heed lest he fall;"(2) and in another place he says, "Who art thou that judgest another 
man's servant? To his own master he standeth or falleth; yea, he shall stand, for God is able to make him 
stand. "(3) John also proves that Jesus Christ the Lord is our Advocate and Intercessor for our sins, saying, 
"My little children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not. And if any man sin, we have an Advocate with 
the Father, Jesus Christ the Supporter: and He is the propitiation for our sins. "(4) And Paul also, the apostle, 
in his epistle, has written, "If, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us; much more, being now justified by 
His blood, we shall be saved from wrath through Him. "(5) 

19. Considering His love and mercy, we ought not to be so bitter, nor cruel, nor inhuman in cherishing the 
brethren, but to mourn with those that mourn, and to weep with them that weep, and to raise them up as much 
as we can by the help and comfort of our love; neither being too ungentle and pertinacious in repelling their 
repentance; nor, again, being too lax and easy in rashly yielding communion. Lo! a wounded brother lies 
stricken by the enemy in the field of battle. There the devil is striving to slay him whom he has wounded; 
here Christ is exhorting that he whom He has redeemed may not wholly perish. Whether of the two do we 
assist? On whose side do we stand? Whether do we favour the devil, that he may destroy, and pass by our 
prostrate lifeless brother, as in the Gospel did the priest and Levite; or rather, as priests of God and Christ, 
do we imitate what Christ both taught and did, and snatch the wounded man from the jaws of the enemy, that 
we may preserve him cured for God the judge?(6) 

20. And do not think, dearest brother, that either the courage of the brethren will be lessened, or that 
martyrdoms will fail for this cause, that repentance is relaxed to the lapsed, and that the hope of peace is 
offered to the penitent. The strength of the truly believing remains unshaken; and with those who fear and 
love God with their whole heart, their integrity continues steady and strong. For to adulterers even a time of 
repentance is granted by us, and peace is given. Yet virginity is not therefore deficient in the Church, nor 
does the glorious design of continence languish through the sins of others. The Church, crowned with so 
many virgins, flourishes; and chastity and modesty preserve the tenor of their glory. Nor is the vigour of 
continence broken down because repentance and pardon are facilitated to the adulterer. It is one thing to 
stand for pardon, another thing to attain to glory: it is one thing, when cast into prison, not to go out thence 
until one has paid the uttermost farthing; another thing at once to receive the wages of faith and courage. It is 
one thing, tortured by long suffering for sins, to be cleansed and long purged by fire;(7) another to have 
purged all sins by suffering. It is one thing, in fine, to be in suspense till the sentence of God at the day of 
judgment; another to be at once crowned by the Lord. 

21 . And, indeed, among our predecessors, some of the bishops here in our province thought that peace 
was not to be granted to adulterers, and wholly closed the gate of repentance against adultery. Still they did 
not withdraw from the assembly of their co-bishops, nor break the unity of the Catholic Church(8) by the 
persistency of their severity or censure; so that, because by some peace was granted to adulterers, he who 
did not grant it should be separated from the Church. While the bond of concord remains, and the undivided 
sacrament of the Catholic Church endures, every bishop disposes and directs his own acts, and will have to 
give an account of his purposes to the Lord. (9) 

22. But I wonder that some are so obstinate as to think that repentance is not to be granted to the lapsed, or 
to suppose that pardon is to be denied to the penitent, when it is written, "Remember whence thou art fallen, 
and repent, and do the first works, "(10) which certainly is said to him who evidently has fallen, and whom the 
Lord exhorts to rise up again by his works, because it is written, "Alms do deliver from death, "(1 1) and not, 
assuredly, from that death which once the blood of Christ extinguished, and from which the saving grace of 
baptism and of our Redeemer has delivered us, but from that which subsequently creeps in through sins. 
Moreover, in another place time is granted for repentance; and the Lord threatens him that does not repent: 
"I have," saith He, "many things against thee, because thou sufferest thy wife Jezebel, which calleth herself a 
prophetess, to teach and to seduce my servants to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed to idols; 
and I gave her a space to repent, and she will not repent of her fornication. Behold, I will cast her into a bed, 
and them that commit adultery with her into great tribulation, except they repent of their deeds;"(1) whom 
certainly the Lord would not exhort to repentance, if it were not that He promises mercy to them that repent. 
And in the Gospel He says, "I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that 
repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just persons that need no repentance. "(2) For since it is written, 
"God did not make death, neither hath He pleasure in the destruction of the living, "(3) assuredly He who wills 
that none should perish, desires that sinners should repent, and by repentance should return again to life. 
Thus also He cries by Joel the prophet, and says, "And now, thus saith the Lord your God, Turn ye even to 
me with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning; and rend your heart, and not 
your garments, and return unto the Lord your God; for He is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of 
great kindness, and repenteth Him of the evil appointed. "(4) In the Psalms, also, we read as well the rebuke 

as the clemency of God, threatening at the same time as He spares, punishing that He may correct; and 
when He has corrected, preserving. "I will visit," He says, "their transgressions with the rod, and their iniquity 
with stripes. Nevertheless, my loving-kindness will I not utterly take from them. "(5) 

23. The Lord also in His Gospel, setting forth the love of God the Father, says, "What man is there of you, 
whom, if his son ask bread, will he give him a stone? or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent? If ye then, 
being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much I more shall your heavenly Father give 
good things to them that ask Him?"(6) The Lord is here comparing the father after the flesh, and the eternal 
and liberal love of God the Father. But if that evil father upon earth, deeply offended by a sinful and evil son, 
yet if he should see the same son afterwards reformed, and, the sins of his former life being put away, 
restored to sobriety and morality and to the discipline of innocence by the sorrow of his repentance, both 
rejoices and gives thanks, and with the eagerness of a father's exultation, embraces the restored one, 
whom before he had cast out; how much more does that one and true Father, good, merciful, and 
loving-yea. Himself Goodness and Mercy and Love-rejoice in the repentance of His own sons! nor 
threatens punishment to those who are now repenting, or mourning and lamenting, but rather promises 
pardon and clemency. Whence the Lord in the Gospel calls those that mourn, blessed; because he who 
mourns calls forth mercy. (7) He who is stubborn and haughty heaps up wrath against himself, and the 
punishment of the coming judgment. And therefore, dearest brother, we have decided that those who do not 
repent, nor give evidence of sorrow for their sins with their whole heart, and with manifest profession of their 
lamentation, are to be absolutely restrained from the hope of communion and peace if they begin to beg for 
them in the midst of sickness and peril; because it is not repentance for sin, but the warning of urgent death, 
that drives them to ask; and he is not worthy to receive consolation in death who has not reflected that he 
was about to die. 

24. In reference, however, to the character of Novatian, dearest brother, of whom you desired that 
intelligence should be written you what heresy he had introduced; know that, in the first place, we ought not 
even to be inquisitive as to what he teaches, so long as he teaches out of the pale of unity. Whoever he may 
be, and whatever he may be, he who is not in the Church of Christ is not a Christian. Although he may boast 
himself, and announce his philosophy or eloquence with lofty words, yet he who has not maintained 
brotherly love or ecclesiastical unity has lost even what he previously had been. Unless he seems to you to 
be a bishop, who-when a bishop has been made in the Church by sixteen(8) co-bishops-strives by bribery 
to be made an adulterous and extraneous bishop by the hands of deserters; and although there is one 
Church, divided by Christ throughout the whole world into many members, and also one episcopate diffused 
through a harmonious multitude of many bishops;(9) in spite of God's tradition, in spite of the combined and 
everywhere compacted unity of the Catholic Church, is endeavouring to make a human church, and is 
sending his new apostles through very many cities, that he may establish some new foundations of his own 
appointment. And although there have already been ordained in each city, and through all the provinces, 
bishops old in years, sound in faith, proved in trial, proscribed in persecution, (this one) dares to create over 
these other and false bishops: as if he could either wander over the whole world with the persistence of his 
new endeavour, or break asunder the structure of the ecclesiastical body, by the propagation of his own 
discord, not knowing that schismatics are always fervid at the beginning, but that they cannot increase nor 
add to what they have unlawfully begun, but that they immediately fail together with their evil emulation. But 
he could not hold the episcopate, even if he had before been made bishop, since he has cut himself off 
from the body of his fellow-bishops, and from the unity of the Church; since the apostle admonishes that we 
should mutually sustain one another, and not withdraw from the unity which God has appointed, and says, 
"Bearing with one another in love, endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. "(1) He 
then who neither maintains the unity of the Spirit nor the bond of peace, and separates himself from the band 
of the Church, and from the assembly of priests, can neither have the power nor the honour of a bishop, 
since he has refused to maintain either the unity or the peace of the episcopate. (2) 

25. Then, moreover, what a swelling of arrogance it is, what oblivion of humility and gentleness, what a 
boasting of his own arrogance, that any one should either dare, or think that he is able, to do what the Lord 
did not even grant to the apostles; that he should think that he can discern the tares from the wheat, or, as if it 
were granted to him to bear the fan and to purge the threshing-floor, should endeavour to separate the chaff 
from the wheat; and since the apostle says, "But in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and of 
silver, but also of wood and of earth, "(3) should think to choose the vessels of gold and of silver, to despise, 
to cast away, and to condemn the vessels of wood and of clay; while the vessels of wood are not burnt up 
except in the day of the Lord by the flame of the divine burning, and the vessels of clay are only broken by 
Him to whom is given the rod of iron. 

26. Or if he appoints himself a searcher and judge of the heart and reins, let him in all cases judge equally. 
And as he knows that it is written, "Behold, thou art made whole; sin no more, lest a worse thing happen unto 
thee, "(4) let him separate the fraudulent and adulterers from his side and from his company, since the case 

of an adulterer is by far both graver and worse than that of one who has taken a certificate, because the 
latter has sinned by necessity, the former by free will: the latter, thinking that it is sufficient for him that he has 
not sacrificed, has been deceived by an error; the former, a violator of the matrimonial tie of another, or 
entering a brothel, into the sink and filthy gulf of the common people, has befouled by detestable impurity a 
sanctified body and God's temple, as says the apostle: "Every sin that a man doeth is without the body, but 
he that committeth fornication sinneth against his own body. "(5) And yet to these persons themselves 
repentance is granted, and the hope of lamenting and atoning is left, according to the saying of the same 
apostle: "I fear lest, when I come to you, I shall bewail many of those who have sinned already, and have not 
repented of the uncleanness, and fornication, and lasciviousness which they have committed. "(6) 

27. Neither let the new heretics flatter themselves in this, that they say that they do not communicate with 
idolaters; although among them there are both adulterers and fraudulent persons, who are held guilty of the 
crime of idolatry, according to the saying of the apostle: "For know this with understanding, that no 
whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, whose guilt is that of idolatry, hath any inheritance in 
the kingdom of Christ and of God. "(7) And again: "Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth; 
putting off fornicaflon, uncleanness, and evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which are the service of 
idols: for which things' sake cometh the wrath of God. "(8) For as our bodies are members of Christ, and we 
are each a temple of God, whosoever violates the temple of God by adultery, violates God; and he who, in 
committing sins, does the will of the devil, serves demons and idols. For evil deeds do not come from the 
Holy Spirit, but from the prompting of the adversary, and lusts born of the unclean spirit constrain men to act 
against God and to obey the devil. Thus it happens that if they say that one is polluted by another's sin, and 
if they con tend, by their own asseveration, that the idolatry of the delinquent passes over to one who is not 
guilty according to their own word; they cannot be excused from the crime of idolatry, since from the 
apostolic proof it is evident that the adulterers and defrauders with whom they communicate are idolaters. 
But with us, according to our faith and the given rule of divine preaching, agrees the principle of truth, that 
every one is himself held fast in his own sin; nor can one become guilty for another, since the Lord forewarns 
us, saying, "The righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall 
be upon him. "(9) And again: "The fathers shall not die for the children, and the children shall not die for the 
fathers. Every one shall die in his own sin. "(10) Reading and observing this, we certainly think that no one is 
to be restrained from the fruit of satisfacflon, and the hope of peace, since we know, according to the faith of 
the divine Scriptures, God Himself being their author, and exhorting in them, both that sinners are brought 
back to repentance, and that pardon and mercy are not denied to penitents. (1) 

28. And oh, mockery of a deceived fraternity! Oh, vain deception of miserable and senseless mourners! Oh, 
ineffectual and profitless tradiflon of hereflcal insfltuflon! to exhort to the repentance of atonement, and to 
take away the healing from the atonement; to say to our brethren, "Mourn and shed tears, and groan day 
and night, and labour largely and frequently for the washing away and cleansing of your sin; but, after all 
these things, you shall die without the pale of the Church. Whatsoever things are necessary to peace, you 
shall do, but none of that peace which you seek shall you receive!" Who would not perish at once? Who 
would not fall away, from very desperaflon? Who would not turn away his mind from all design of 
lamentaflon? Do you think that the husbandman could labour if you should say, "Till the field with all the skill 
of husbandry, diligently persevere in its cultivation; but you shall reap no harvest, you shall press no 
vintage, you shall receive no fruits of your olive-yard, you shall gather no apples from the trees;" or if, urging 
upon any one the possession and use of ships, you were to say, "Purchase, my brother, material from 
excellent woods; inweave your keel with the strongest and chosen oak; labour on the rudder, the ropes, the 
sails, that the ship may be constructed and fitted; but when you have done this, you shall never behold the 
result from its doings and its voyages?" 

29. This is to shut up and to cut off the way of grief and of repentance; so that while in all Scripture the Lord 
God sooths those who return to Him and repent, repentance itself is taken away by our hardness and 
cruelty, which intercepts the fruits of repentance. But if we find that none ought to be restrained from 
repenflng, and that peace may be granted by His priests to those who entreat and beseech the Lord's 
mercy, inasmuch as He is merciful and loving, the groaning of those who mourn is to be admitted, and the 
fruit of repentance is not to be denied to those who grieve. And because in the place of the departed there is 
no confession, neither can confession be made there, (2) they who have repented from their whole heart, 
and have asked for it, ought to be received within the Church, and to be kept in it for the Lord, who will of a 
surety judge, when He comes to His Church, those whom He shall find within it. But apostates and deserters, 
or adversaries and enemies, and those who lay waste the Church of Christ, cannot, even if outside the 
Church they have been slain for His name, according to the apostle, be admitted to the peace of the Church, 
since they have neither kept the unity of the spirit nor of the Church. 

30. These few things for the present, out of many, dearest brother, I have run over as briefly as I could, that I 
might thereby both satisfy your desire, and might link you more and more closely to the society of our 

college and body. (3) But if there should arise to you an opportunity and power of coming to us, we shall be 
able to confer more fully together, and to consider more fruitfully and more at large the things which make for 
a salutary agreement. I bid you, dearest brother, ever heartily farewell. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE LII.-TO 
FORTUNATUS AND HIS OTHER COLLEAGUES, 
CONCERNING THOSE WHO HAD BEEN OVERCOME 
BYTORTUES 

EPISTLE Lll.(4) 

TO FORTUNATUS AND HIS OTHER COLLEAGUES, CONCERNING THOSE WHO HAD 
BEEN OVERCOME BYTORTUES. 

ARGUMENT. --CYPRIAN BEING CONSULTED BY HIS COLLEAGUES, WHETHER CERTAIN 
LAPSED PERSONS WHO HAD BEEN OVERPOWERED BY TORTURE SHOULD BE 
ADMITTED TO COMMUNION, REPLIES, THAT INASMUCH AS THEY HAD ALREADY 
REPENTED FOR THE SPACE OF THREE YEARS, HE THOUGHT THEY SHOULD BE 
RECEIVED; BUT AS AFTER THE FESTIVAL OF EASTER THERE WOULD BE A COUNCIL 
OF BISHOPS WITH HIM, HE WOULD THEN CONSIDER THE MATTER WITH THEM. 

1. Cyprian to Fortunatus, Ahymnus, Optatus, Privatianus, Donatulus, and Felix, iiis bretiiren, greeting, You 
iiave written to me, dearest bretiiren, tliat wlien you were in tlie city of Capsa for tlie purpose of ordaining a 
bisliop, Superius, our brotlier and colleague brought before you, that Minus, Clementianus, and Florus, our 
brethren, who had been previously laid hold of in the persecution, and confessing the name of the Lord, had 
overcome the violence of the magistracy, and the attack of a raging populace, afterwards, when they were 
tortured before the proconsul with severe sufferings, were vanquished by the acuteness of the torments, and 
fell, through their lengthened agonies, from the degree of glory to which in the full virtue of faith they were 
tending, and after this grave lapse, incurred not willingly but of necessity, had not yet ceased their 
repentance for the space of three years: of whom you thought it right to consult whether it was well to receive 
them now to communion. 

2. And indeed, in respect of my own opinion, I think that the Lord's mercy will not be wanting to those who are 
known to have stood in the ranks of battle, to have confessed the name,(1) to have overcome the violence 
of the magistrates and the rush of the raging populace with the persistency of unshaken faith, to have 
suffered imprisonment, to have long resisted, amidst the threats of the proconsul and the warring of the 
surrounding people, torments that wrenched and tore them with protracted repetition; so that in the last 
moment to have been vanquished by the infirmity of the flesh, may be extenuated by the plea of preceding 
deserts. And it may be sufficient for such to have lost their glory, but that we ought not, moreover, to close the 
place of pardon to them, and deprive them of their Father's love and of our communion; to whom we think it 
may be sufficient for entreating the mercy of the Lord, that for three years continually and sorrowfully, as you 
write, they have lamented with excessive penitential mourning. Assuredly I do not think that peace is 
incautiously and over-hastily granted to those, who by the bravery of their warfare, have not, we see, been 
previously wanting to the battle; and who, if the struggle should come on anew, might be able to regain their 
glory. For when it was decided in the council that penitents in peril of sickness should be assisted, and have 
peace granted to them, surely those ought to precede in receiving peace whom we see not to have fallen 
by weakness of mind, but who, having engaged in the conflict, and being wounded, have not been able to 
sustain the crown of their confession through weakness of the flesh; especially since, in their desire to die, 
they were not permitted to be slain, but the tortures wrenched their wearied frames long enough, not to 
conquer their faith, which is unconquerable, but to exhaust the flesh, which is weak. 

3. Since, however, you have written for me to give full consideration to this matter with many of my 
colleagues; and so great a subject claims greater and more careful counsel from the conference of many; 
and as now almost all, during the first celebrations of Easter, are dwelling at home with their brethren: when 
they shall have completed the solenmity to be celebrated among their own people, and have begun to 
come to me, I will consider it more at large with each one, so that a decided opinion, weighed in the council 
of many priests, on the subject on which you have consulted me, may be established among us, and may 
be written to you. I bid you, dearest brethren, ever heartily farewell. (2) 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLES LIN & LIV.-TO 
CORNELIUS 

A 

EPISTLE Llll.(3) 

TO CORNELIUS, CONCERNING GRANTING PEACE TO THE LAPSED. 

ARGUMENT. --CYPRIAN ANNOUNCES THIS DECREE OF THE BISHOPS IN THE NAME OF 
THE WHOLE SYNOD TO FATHER CORNELIUS; AND THEREFORE THIS LETTER IS NOT 
SO MUCH THE LETTER OF CYPRIAN HIMSELF, AS THAT OF THE ENTIRE AFRICAN 
SYNOD. (4) 

Cyprian, Liberalis, Caldonius, Nicomedes, Caecilius, Junius, IVIarrutius, Felix, Successus, Faustinus, 
Fortunatus, Victor, Saturninus, anotiier Saturninus, Rogatianus, Tertullus, Lucianus, Eutyciies, Amplus, 
Sattius, Secundinus, anotiier Saturninus, Aurelius, Priscus, Herculanus, Victoricus, Quintus, Honoratus, 
IVlontanus, Hortensianus, Verianus, Iambus, Donatus, Pompeius, Polycarpus, Demetrius, another Donatus, 
Privatianus, another Fortunatus, Rogatus and Monulus, to Cornelius their brother,(5) greeting. (6) 

1 . We had indeed decided some time ago, dearest brother, having mutually taken counsel one with 
another, that they who, in the fierceness of persecution, had been overthrown by the adversary, and had 
lapsed, and had polluted themselves with unlawful sacrifices, should undergo a long and full repentance; 
and if the risk of sickness should be urgent, should receive peace on the very point of death. For it was not 
right, neither did the love of the Father nor divine mercy allow, that the Church should be closed to those that 
knock, or the help of the hope of salvation be denied to those who mourn and entreat, so that when they 
pass from this world, they should be dismissed to their Lord without communion and peace; since He 
Himself who gave the law, that things which were bound on earth should also be bound in heaven, allowed, 
moreover, that things might be loosed there which were here first loosed in the Church. But now, when we 
see that the day of another trouble is again beginning to draw near, and are admonished by frequent and 
repeated intimations that we should be prepared and armed for the struggle which the enemy announces to 
us, that we should also prepare the people committed to us by divine condescension, by our exhortations, 
and gather together from all parts all the soldiers of Christ who desire arms, and are anxious for the battle 
within the Lord's camp: trader the compulsion of this necessity, we have decided that peace is to be given 
to those who have not withdrawn from the Church of the Lord, but have not ceased from the first day of their 
lapse to repent, and to lament, and to beseech the Lord; and we have decided that they ought to be armed 
and equipped for the battle which is at hand. 

2. For we must comply with fitting intimations and admonitions, that the sheep may not be deserted in danger 
by the shepherds, but that the whole flock may be gathered together into one place, and the Lord's army 
may be arrived for the contest of the heavenly warfare. For the repentance of the mourners was reasonably 
prolonged for a more protracted time, help only being afforded to the sick in their departure, so long as 
peace and tranquillity prevailed, which permitted the long postponement of the tears of the mourners, and 
late assistance in sickness to the dying. But now indeed peace is necessary, not for the sick, but for the 
strong; nor is communion to he granted by us to the dying, but to the living, that we may not leave those 
whom we stir up and exhort to the battle unarmed and naked, but may fortify them with the protection of 
Christ's body and blood. And, as the Eucharist is appointed for this very purpose that it may be a safeguard 
to the receivers, it is needful that we may arm those whom we wish to be safe against the adversary with the 
protection of the Lord's abundance. For how do we teach or provoke them to shed their blood in confession 
of His name, if we deny to those who are about to enter on the warfare the blood of Christ? Or how do we 
make them fit for the cup of martyrdom, if we do not first admit them to drink, in the Church, the cup of the 
Lord(1) by the right of communion? 

3. We should make a difference, dearest brother, between those who either have apostatized, and, having 
returned to the world which they have renounced, are living heathenish lives, or, having become deserters 
to the heretics, are daily taking up parricidal arms against the Church; and those who do not depart from the 
Church's threshold, and, constantly and sorrowfully imploring divine and paternal consolation, profess that 
they are now prepared for the battle, and ready to stand and fight bravely for the name of their Lord and for 

their own salvation. In these times we grant peace, not to those who sleep, but to those who watch. We grant 
peace, not amid indulgences, but amid arms. We grant peace, not for rest, but for the field of battle. If, 
according to what we hear, and desire, and believe of them, they shall stand bravely, and shall overthrow 
the adversary with us in the encounter, we shall not repent of having granted peace to men so brave. Yea, it 
is the great honour and glory of our episcopate to have granted peace to martyrs, so that we, as priests, 
who daily celebrate the sacrifices of God, may prepare offerings and victims for God. But if-which may the 
Lord avert from our brethren-any one of the lapsed should deceive, seeking peace by guile, and at the 
time of the impending struggle receiving peace without any purpose of doing battle, he betrays and 
deceives himself, hiding one thing in his heart and pronouncing another with his voice. We, so far as it is 
allowed to us to see and to judge, look upon the face of each one; we are not able to scrutinize the heart 
and to inspect the mind. Concerning these the Discerner and Searcher of hidden things judges, and He will 
quickly come and judge of the secrets and hidden things of the heart. But the evil ought not to stand in the 
way of the good, but rather the evil ought to be assisted by the good. Neither is peace, therefore, to be 
denied to those who are about to endure martyrdom, because there are some who will refuse it, since for 
this purpose peace should be granted to all who are about to enter upon the warfare, that through our 
ignorance he may not be the first one to be passed over, who in the struggle is to be crowned. 

4. Nor let any one say, "that he who accepts martyrdom is baptized in his own blood, and peace is not 
necessary to him from the bishop, since he is about to have the peace of his own glory, and about to 
receive a greater reward from the condescension of the Lord." First of all, he cannot be fitted for martyrdom 
who is not armed for the contest by the Church; and his spirit is deficient which the Eucharist received does 
not raise and stimulate. For the Lord says in His Gospel: "But when they deliver you up, take no thought what 
ye shall speak; for it shall be given you in that hour what ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the 
Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you. "(2) Now, since He says that the Spirit of the Father speaks in 
those who are delivered up and set in the confession of His name, how can he be found prepared or fit for 
that confession who has not first, in the reception of peace, received the Spirit of the Father, who, giving 
strength to His servants. Himself speaks and confesses in us? Then, besides-if, having forsaken 
everything that he has, a man shall flee, and dwelling in hiding-places and in solitude, shall fall by chance 
among thieves, or shall die in fever and in weakness, will it not be charged upon us that so good a soldier, 
who has forsaken all that he hath, and contemning his house, and his parents, and his children, has 
preferred to follow his Lord, dies without peace and without communion? Will not either inactive negligence 
or cruel hardness be ascribed to us in the day of judgment, that, pastors though we are, we have neither 
been willing to take care of the sheep trusted and committed to us in peace, nor to arm them in battle? 
Would not the charge be brought against us by the Lord, which by His prophet He utters and says? "Behold, 
ye consume the milk, and ye clothe you with the wool, and ye kill them that are fed; but ye feed not my flock. 
The weak have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye comforted 
that which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which strayed, neither have ye sought that which 
was lost, and that which was strong ye wore out with labour. And my sheep were scattered, because there 
were no shepherds: and they became meat to all the beasts of the field; and there was none who sought 
after them, nor brought them back. Therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold, I am against the shepherds; and I 
will require my sheep of their hand, and cause them to cease from feeding my sheep; neither shall they feed 
them any more: and I will deliver my sheep from their mouth, and I will feed them with judgment."(1) 

5. Lest, then, the sheep committed to us by the Lord be demanded back from our mouth, wherewith we deny 
peace, wherewith we oppose to them rather the severity of human cruelty than the benignity of divine and 
paternal love; we have determined(2) by the suggestion of the Holy Spirit and the admonition of the Lord, 
conveyed by many and manifest visions, because the enemy is foretold and shown to be at hand, to gather 
within the camp the soldiers of Christ, to examine the cases of each one, and to grant peace to the lapsed, 
yea, rather to furnish arms to those who are about to fight. And this, we trust, will please you in contemplation 
of the paternal mercy. But if there be any (one) of our colleagues who, now that the contest is urgent, thinks 
that peace should not be granted to our brethren and sisters, he shall give an account to the Lord in the day 
of judgment, either of his grievous rigour or of his inhuman hardness. We, as befitted our faith and charity 
and solicitude, have laid before you what was in our own mind, namely, that the day of contest has 
approached, that a violent enemy will soon rise up against us, that a struggle is coming on, not such as it 
has been, but much more serious and fierce. This is frequently shown to us from above; concerning this we 
are often admonished by the providence and mercy of the Lord, of whose help and love we who trust in Him 
may be secure, because He who in peace foretells to His soldiers that the battle will come, will give to them 
when they are warring victory in the encounter. We bid you, dearest brother, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE LIV.(3) 

TO CORNELIUS, CONCERNING FORTUNATUS AND FELICISSIMUS, OR AGAINST THE 
HERETICS. 

ARGUMENT. --CYPRIAN CHIEFLY WARNS CORNELIUS IN THIS LETTER NOT TO HEAR 
THE CALUMNIES OF FELICISSIMUS AND FORTUNATUS AGAINST HIM, AND NOT TO BE 
FRIGHTENED BY THEIR THREATS, BUT TO BE OF A BRAVE SPIRIT, AS BECOMES 
GOD'S PRIESTS IN OPPOSITION TO HERETICS; NAMELY, THOSE WHO, AFTER THE 
CUSTOM PREVAILING AMONG HERETICS, BEGAN THEIR HERESY AND SCHISMS WITH 
THE CONTEMPT OF ONE BISHOP IN THE CHURCH. (4) 

1 . I have read your letter, dearest brother, which you sent by Saturus our brother the acolyte, abundantly full 
of fraternal love and ecclesiastical discipline and priestly reproof; in which you signified that Felicissimus,(5) 
no new enemy of Christ, but long ago excommunicated for his very many and grave crimes, and 
condemned not only by my judgment, but also by that of very many of my fellow-bishops, has been rejected 
by you there, and that when he came attended by a band and faction of desperadoes, he was driven from 
the Church with the full rigour with which it behoves a bishop to act. From which Church long ago he was 
driven, with others like himself, by the majesty of God and the severity of Christ our Lord and Judge; that the 
author of schism and disagreement, the fraudulent user of money entrusted to him, the violator of virgins, the 
destroyer and corrupter of many marriages, should not, by the dishonour of his presence and his immodest 
and incestuous contact, violate further the spouse of Christ, hitherto uncorrupt, holy, modest. 

2. But yet, when I read your other letter, brother, which you subjoined to your first one, I was considerably 
surprised at observing that you were in some degree disturbed by the threats and terrors of those who had 
come, when, according to what you wrote, they had attacked and threatened you with the greatest 
desperation, that if you would not receive the letters which they had brought, they would read them publicly, 
and would utter many base and disgraceful things, and such as were worthy of their mouth. But if the matter 
is thus, dearest brother, that the audacity of the most wicked men is to be dreaded, and that what evil men 
cannot do rightly and equitably, they may accomplish by daring and desperation, there is an end of the 
vigour of the episcopacy, and of the sublime and divine power of governing the Church; nor can we continue 
any longer, or in fact now be Christians, if it is come to this, that we are to be afraid of the threats or the snares 
of outcasts. For both Gentiles and Jews threaten, and heretics and all those, of whose hearts and minds the 
devil has taken possession, daily attest their venomous madness with furious voice. We are not, therefore, 
to yield because they threaten; nor is the adversary and enemy on that account greater than Christ, 
because he claims for himself and assumes so much in the world. There ought to abide with us, dearest 
brother, an immoveable strength of faith; and against all the irruptions and onsets of the waves that roar 
against us, a steady and unshaken courage should plant itself as with the fortitude and mass of a resisting 
rock. Nor does it matter whence comes the terror or the danger to a bishop, who lives subject to terrors and 
dangers, and is nevertheless made glorious by those very terrors and dangers. For we ought not to 
consider and regard the mere threats of the Gentiles or of the Jews, when we see that the Lord Himself was 
deserted by His brethren, and was betrayed by him whom He Himself had chosen among His apostles; 
that also in the beginning of the world it was none other than a brother who slew righteous Abel, and an 
angry brother pursued the fleeing Jacob, and the youthful Joseph was sold by the act of his brethren. In the 
Gospel also we read that it was foretold that our foes should rather be of our own household, and that they 
who have first been associated in the sacrament of unity(1) shall be they who shall betray one another. It 
makes no difference who delivers up or who rages, since God permits those to be delivered up whom He 
appoints to be crowned. For it is no ignominy to us to suffer from our brethren what Christ suffered, nor is it 
glory to them to do what Judas did. But what insolence it is in them, what swelling and inflated and vain 
boasting on the part of these threateners, there to threaten me in my absence, when here they have me 
present in their power! I do not fear their reproaches with which they daily wound themselves and their own 
life; I do not tremble at their clubs and stones and swords, which they brandish with parricidal words: as far 
as lies in their power such men are homicides before God. Yet they are not able to slay unless the Lord 
have allowed them to slay; and although I must die but once, yet they daily slay me by their hatred, their 
words, and their villanies. 

3. But, dearest brother, ecclesiastical discipline is not on that account to be forsaken, nor priestly censure to 
be relaxed, because we are disturbed with reproaches or are shaken with terrors; since Holy Scripture 
meets and warns us, saying, "But he who presumes and is haughty, the man who boasts of himself, who 
hath enlarged his soul as hell, shall accomplish nothing. "(2) And again: "And fear not the words of a sinful 
man, for his glory shall be dung and worms. To-day he is lifted up, and to-morrow he shall not be found, 
because he is turned into his earth, and his thought shall perish. "(3) And again: "I have seen the wicked 
exalted, and raised above the cedars of Libanus: I went by, and, lo, he was not; yea, I sought him, and his 

place was not found. "(4) Exaltation, and puffing up, and arrogant and haughty boastfulness, spring not from 
the teaching of Christ who teaches humility, but from the spirit of Antichrist, whom the Lord rebukes by His 
prophet, saying, "For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will place my throne above the 
stars of God: I will sit on a lofty mountain, above the lofty mountains to the north: I will ascend above the 
clouds; I will be like the Most High. "(5) And he added, saying, "Yet thou shalt descend into hell, to the 
foundations of the earth; and they that see thee shall wonder at thee. "(6) Whence also divine Scripture 
threatens a like punishment to such in another place, and says, "For the day of the Lord of hosts shall be 
upon every one that is injurious and proud, and upon every one that is lifted up, and lofty. "(7) By his mouth, 
therefore, and by his words, is every one at once betrayed; and whether he has Christ in his heart, or 
Antichrist, is discerned in his speaking, according to what the Lord says in His Gospel, "O generation of 
vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good things? for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth 
speaketh. A good man out of the good treasure bringeth forth good things; and an evil man out of the evil 
treasure bringeth forth evil things. "(1) Whence also that rich sinner who implores help from Lazarus, then laid 
in Abraham's bosom, and established in a place of comfort, while he, writhing in torments, is consumed by 
the heats of burning flame, suffers most punishment of all parts of his body in his mouth and his tongue, 
because doubtless in his mouth and his tongue he had most sinned. (2) 

4. For since it is written, "Neither shall revilers inherit the kingdom of God, "(3) and again the Lord says in His 
Gospel, "Whosoever shall say to his brother. Thou fool; and whosoever shall say, Raca, shall be in danger 
of the Gehenna of fire, "(4) how can they evade the rebuke of the Lord the avenger, who heap up such 
expressions, not only on their brethren, but also on the priests, to whom is granted such honour of the 
condescension of God, that whosoever should not obey his priest, and him that judgeth here for the time, 
was immediately to be slain? In Deuteronomy the Lord God speaks, saying, "And the man that will do 
presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the priest or to the judge, whosoever he shall be in those days, 
that man shall die; and all the people, when they hear, shall fear, and shall do no more wickedly. "(5) 
Moreover, to Samuel when he was despised by the Jews, God says; "They have not despised thee, but 
they have despised me. "(6) And the Lord also in the Gospel says, "He that heareth you, heareth me, and 
Him that sent me; and he that rejecteth you, rejecteth me; and he that rejecteth me, rejecteth Him that sent 
me. "(7) And when he had cleansed the leprous man, he said, "Go, show thyself to the priest."(8) And when 
afterwards, in the time of His passion. He had received a buffet from a servant of the priest, and the servant 
said to Him, "Answerest thou the high priest so?"(9) the Lord said nothing reproachfully against the high 
priest, nor detracted anything from the priest's honour; but rather asserting His own innocence, and showing 
it. He says, "If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil; but if well, why smitestthou me?"(10) Also 
subsequently, in the Acts of the Apostles, the blessed Apostle Paul, when it was said to him, "Revilest thou 
God's priest?"(11)-although they had begun to be sacrilegious, and impious, and bloody, the Lord having 
already been crucified, and had no longer retained anything of the priestly honour and authority-yet Paul, 
considering the name itself, however empty, and the shadow, as it were, of the priest, said, "I wist not, 
brethren, that he was the high priest: for it is written. Thou shalt not speak evil of the ruler of thy, people. "(12) 

5. When, then, such and so great examples, and many others, are precedents whereby the priestly authority 
and power by the divine condescension is established, what kind of people, think you, are they who, being 
enemies of the priests, and rebels against the Catholic Church, are frightened neither by the threatening of a 
forewarning Lord, nor by the vengeance of coming judgment? For neither have heresies arisen, nor have 
schisms originated, from any other source than from this, that God's priest is not obeyed; nor do they 
consider that there is one person for the time priest in the Church, and for the time judge in the stead of 
Christ;(13) whom, if, according to divine teaching, the whole fraternity should obey, no one would stir up 
anything against the college of priests; no one, after the divine judgment, after the suffrage of the people, 
after the consent of the co-bishops, would make himself a judge, not now of the bishop, but of God. No one 
would rend the Church by a division of the unity of Christ.(14) No one, pleasing himself, and swelling with 
arrogance, would found a new heresy, separate and without, unless any one be of such sacrilegious daring 
and abandoned mind, as to think that a priest is made without God's judgment, when the Lord says in His 
Gospel, "Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them does not fall to the ground without the will 
of your Father."(1 5) When He says that not even the least things are done without God's will, does any one 
think that the highest and greatest things are done in God's Church either without God's knowledge or 
permission, and that priests-that is. His stewards-are not ordained by His decree? This is not to have faith, 
whereby we live; this is not to give honour to God, by whose direction and decision we know and believe 
that all things are ruled and governed. Undoubtedly there are bishops made, not by the will of God, but they 
are such as are made outside of the Church-such as are made contrary to the ordinance and tradition of the 
Gospel, as the Lord Himself in the twelve prophets asserts, saying, "They have set up a king for 
themselves, and not by me. "(16) And again: "Their sacrifices are as the bread of mourning; all that eat 
thereof shall be polluted. "(1) And the Holy Spirit also cries by Isaiah, and says, "Woe unto you, children that 

are deserters. Thus saith the Lord, Ye have taken counsel, but not of me; and ye have made a covenant, 
but not of my Spirit, that ye may add sin to sin. "(2) 

6. But-I speal< to you as being provol<ed; I speal< as grieving; I speal< as constrained-when a bishop is 
appointed into the place of one deceased, when he is chosen in time of peace by the suffrage of an entire 
people, when he is protected by the help of God in persecution, faithfully linked with all his colleagues, 
approved to his people by now four years' experience in his episcopate; observant of discipline in time of 
peace; in time of disturbance, proscribed with the name of his episcopate applied and attached to him; so 
often asked for in the circus "for the lions;" in the amphitheatre, honoured with the testimony of the divine 
condescension; even in these very days on which I have written this letter to you, on account of the 
sacrifices which, by proclaimed edict, the people were commanded to celebrate, demanded anew in the 
circus "for the lions" by the clamour of the populace;-when such a one, dearest brother, is seen to be 
assailed by some desperate and reckless men, and by those who have their place outside the Church, it is 
manifest who assails him: not assuredly Christ, who either appoints or protects his priests; but he who, as the 
adversary of Christ and the foe to His Church, for this purpose persecutes with his malice the ruler of the 
Church, that when the pilot is removed, he may rage more atrociously and more violently with a view to the 
Church's dispersion. 

7. Nor ought it, my dearest brother, to disturb any one who is faithful and mindful of the Gospel, and retains 
the commands of the apostle who forewarns us; if in the last days certain persons, proud, contumacious, 
and enemies of God's priests, either depart from the Church or act against the Church, since both the Lord 
and His apostles have previously foretold that there should be such. Nor let any one wonder that the 
servant placed over them should be forsaken by some, when His own disciples forsook the Lord Himself, 
who performed such great and wonderful works, and illustrated the attributes of God the Father by the 
testimony of His doings. And yet He did not rebuke them when they went away, nor even severely threaten 
them; but rather, turning to His apostles. He said, "Will ye also go away?"(3) manifestly observing the law 
whereby a man left to his own liberty, and established in his own choice, himself desires for himself either 
death or salvation. Nevertheless, Peter,(4) upon whom by the same Lord the Church had been built, 
speaking one for all, and answering with the voice of the Church, says, "Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou 
hast the words of eternal life; and we believe, and are sure that Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living 
God:"(5) signifying, doubtless, and showing that those who departed from Christ perished by their own fault, 
yet that the Church which believes on Christ, and holds that which it has once learned, never departs from 
Him at all, and that those are the Church who remain in the house of God; but that, on the other hand, they are 
not the plantation planted by God the Father, whom we see not to be established with the stability of wheat, 
but blown about like chaff by the breath of the enemy scattering them, of whom John also in his epistle says, 
"They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, no doubt they would have 
continued with us. "(6) Paul also warns us, when evil men perish out of the Church, not to be disturbed, nor to 
let our faith be lessened by the departure of the faithless. "For what," he says, "if some of them have 
departed from the faith? Hath their unbelief made the faith of God of none effect? God forbid! For God is true, 
but every man a liar."(7) 

8. For our own part, it befits our conscience, dearest brother, to strive that none should perish going out of the 
Church by our fault; but if any one, of his own accord and by his own sin, should perish, and should be 
unwilling to repent and to return to the Church, that we who are anxious for their well-being should be 
blameless in the day of judgment, and that they alone should remain in punishment who refused to be 
healed by the wholesomeness of our advice. Nor ought the reproaches of the lost to move us in any degree 
to depart from the right path and from the sure rule, since also the apostle instructs us, saying, "If I should 
please men, I should not be the servant of Christ."(8) There is a great difference whether one desires to 
deserve well of men or of God. If we seek to please men, the Lord is offended. But if we strive and labour 
that we may please God, we ought to contemn human reproaches and abuse. 

9. But that I did not immediately write to you, dearest brother, about Fortunatus, that pseudo-bishop, 
constituted by a few, and those, inveterate heretics, the matter was not such as ought at once and hastily to 
be brought under your notice, as if it were great or to be feared; especially since you already know well 
enough the name of Fortunatus, who is one of the five presbyters who some time back deserted from the 
Church, and were lately excommunicated by the judgment of our fellow-bishops, (1) men both numerous and 
entitled to the greatest respect, who on this matter wrote to you last year. Also you would recognise 
Felicissimus, the standard-bearer of sedition, who himself also is comprised in those same letters long ago 
written to you by our co-bishops, (1) and who not only was excommunicated by them here, but moreover was 
lately driven from the Church by you there. Since I was confident that these things were in your knowledge, 
and knew for certain that they abode in your memory and discipline, I did not think it necessary that the 
follies of heretics should be told you quickly and urgently. For indeed it ought not to pertain to the majesty or 
the dignity of the Catholic Church, to concern itself with what the audacity of heretics and schismatics may 

attempt among themselves. For Novatian's party is also said to have now made Maximus the 
presbyter-who was lately sent to us as an ambassador for Novatian, and rejected from communion with 
us-their false bishop in that place; and yet I had not written to you about this, since all these things are 
slighted by us; and I had sent to you lately the names of the bishops appointed there, who with wholesome 
and sound discipline govern the brethren in the Catholic Church. (2) And this certainly, therefore, it was 
decided by the advice of all of us to write to you, that there might be found a short method of destroying error 
and of finding out truth, that you and our colleagues might know to whom to write, and reciprocally, from 
whom it behoved you to receive letters; but if any one, except those whom we have comprised in our letter, 
should dare to write to you, you would know either that he was polluted by sacrifice, or by receiving a 
certificate, or that he was one of the heretics, and therefore perverted and profane. Nevertheless, having 
gained an opportunity, by means of a very great friend and a clerk, I have written to you by Felicianus the 
acolyte, whom you had sent with Perseus our colleague, among other matters which were to be brought 
under your notice from their party, about that Fortunatus also. But while our brother Felicianus is either 
retarded there by the wind or is detained by receiving other letters from us, he has been forestalled by 
Felicissimus hastening to you. For thus wickedness always hastens, as if by its speed it could prevail 
against innocence. 

10. But I intimated to you, my brother, by Felicianus, that there had come to Carthage, Privatus, an old heretic 
in the colony of Lambesa, many years ago condemned for many and grave crimes by the judgment of 
ninety bishops, and severely remarked upon in the letters of Fabian and Donatus, also our predecessors, 
as is not hidden from your knowledge;(3) who, when he said that he wished to plead his cause before us in 
the council which we held on the Ides of May then past, and was not permitted, made for himself that 
Fortunatus a pretended bishop, worthy of his college. And there had also come with him a certain Felix, 
whom he himself had formerly appointed a pseudo-bishop outside the Church, in heresy. But Jovinus also, 
and Maximus, were present as companions with the proved heretic,(4) condemned for wicked sacrifices 
and crimes proved against them by the judgment of nine bishops, our colleagues, and again 
excommunicated also by many of us last year in a council. And with these four was also joined Repostus of 
Suturnica, who not only fell himself in the persecution, but cast down by sacrilegious persuasion the greatest 
part of his people. These five, with a few who either had sacrificed, or had evil consciences, concurred in 
desiring Fortunatus as a false bishop for themselves, that so, their crimes agreeing, the ruler should be such 
as those who are ruled. 

1 1 . Hence also, dearest brother, you may now know the other falsehoods which desperate and abandoned 
men have there spread about, that although, of the sacrificers, or of the heretics, there were not more than 
five false bishops who came to Carthage, and appointed Fortunatus as the associate of their madness; yet 
they, as children of the devil, and full of lies, dared, as you write, to boast that there were present twenty-five 
bishops; which falsehood they boasted here also before among our brethren, saying that twenty-five 
bishops would come from Numidia to make a bishop for them. After they were detected and confounded in 
this their lie (only five who had made shipwreck coming together, and these being excommunicated by us), 
they sailed to Rome with the reward of their lies, as if the truth could not sail after them, and convict their lying 
tongues by proof of the certainty. And this, my brother, is real madness, not to think nor to know that lies do 
not long deceive, that the night only lasts so long as until the day brightens; but that when the day is clear 
and the sun has arisen, the darkness and gloom give place to light, and the robberies which were going on 
through the night cease. In fine, ifyou were to seek the names from them, they would have none which they 
could even falsely give. For such among them is the penury even of wicked men, that neither of sacrificers 
nor of heretics can there be collected twenty-five for them; and yet, for the sake of deceiving the ears of the 
simple and the absent, the number is exaggerated by a lie, as if, even if this number were true, either the 
Church would be overcome by heretics, or righteousness by the unrighteous. 

12. Nor does it behove me, dearest brother, to do like things to them, and to go through in my discourse 
those things which they have committed, and still commit, since we have to consider what it becomes God's 
priests to utter and to write. Nor ought grief to speak among us so much as shame, and I ought not to seem 
provoked rather to heap together reproaches than crimes and sins. Therefore I am silent upon the deceits 
practised in the Church. I pass over the conspiracies and adulteries, and the various kinds of crimes. That 
circumstance alone, however, of their wickedness, in which the cause is not mine, nor man's, but God's, I do 
not think must be withheld; that from the very first day of the persecution, while the recent crimes of the guilty 
were still hot, and not only the devil's altars, but the very hands and the mouths of the lapsed, were still 
smoking with the abominable sacrifices, they did not cease to communicate with the lapsed, and to interfere 
with their repentance. God cries, "He that sacrificeth unto any gods, save unto the Lord only, shall be rooted 
out."(1) And in the Gospel the Lord says, "Whosoever shall deny me, him will I deny. "(2) And in another 
place the divine indignation and anger are not silent, saying, "To them hast thou poured out a drink-offering, 
and to them hast thou offered a meat-offering. Shall I not be angry with these things? saith the Lord. "(3) And 

they interfere that God may not be entreated, who Himself declares that He is angry; they interpose that 
Christ may not be besought with prayers and satisfactions, who professes that him who denies Him He will 
deny. 

13. In the very time of persecution we wrote letters on this matter, but we were not attended to. A full council 
being held, we decreed, not only with our consent, but also with our threatening, that the brethren should 
repent, (4) and that none should rashly grant peace to those who did not repent. And those sacrilegious 
persons rush with impious madness against God's priests, departing from the Church; and raising their 
parricidal arms against the Church, in order that the malice of the devil may consummate their work,(5) take 
pains that the divine clemency may not heal the wounded in His Church. They corrupt the repentance of the 
wretched men by the deceitfulness of their lies, that it may not satisfy an offended God-that he who has 
either blushed or feared to be a Christian before, may not afterwards seek Christ his Lord, nor he return to 
the Church who had departed from the Church. Efforts are used that the sins may not be atoned for with just 
satisfactions and lamentations, that the wounds may not be washed away with tears. True peace is done 
away by the falsehood of a false peace; the healthful bosom of a mother is closed by the interference of the 
stepmother, that weeping and groaning may not be heard from the breast and from the lips of the lapsed. 
And beyond this, the lapsed are compelled with their tongues and lips, in the Capitol(6) wherein before they 
had sinned, to reproach the priests-to assail with contumelies and with abusive words the confessors and 
virgins, and those righteous men who are most eminent for the praise of the faith, and most glorious in the 
Church. By which things, indeed, it is not so much the modesty and the humility and the shame of our people 
that are smitten, as their own hope and life that are lacerated. For neither is it he who hears, but he who utters 
the reproach, that is wretched; nor is it he who is smitten by his brother, but he who smites a brother, that is a 
sinner under the law; and when the guilty do a wrong to the innocent, they suffer the injury who think that they 
are doing it. Finally, their mind is smitten by these things, and their spirit is dull, and their sense of right is 
estranged: it is God's wrath that they do not perceive their sins, lest repentance should follow as it is written, 
"And God gave them the spirit of torpor,"(7) that is, that they may not return and be healed, and be made 
whole after their sins by just prayers and satisfactions. Paul the apostle in his epistle lays it down, and says, 
"They received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. And for this cause God shall send them 
strong delusion, that they should believe a lie: that they all might be judged who believed not the truth, but 
had pleasure in unrighteousness. "(8) The highest degree of happiness is, not to sin; the second, to 
acknowledge our sins. In the former, innocence flows pure and unstained to preserve us; in the latter, there 
comes a medicine to heal us. Both of these they have lost by offending God, both because the grace is lost 
which is received from the sanctification of baptism, and repentance comes not to their help, whereby the sin 
is healed. Think you, brother, that their wickednesses against God are trifling, their sins small and 
moderate-since by their means the majesty of an angry God is not besought, since the anger and the fire 
and the day of the Lord is not feared-since, when Antichrist is at hand the faith of the militant people is 
disarmed by the taking away of the power of Christ and His fear? Let the laity see to it how they may amend 
this.(1) A heavier labour is incumbent on the priests in asserting and maintaining the majesty of God, that we 
seem not to neglect anything in this respect, when God admonishes us, and says, "And now, O ye priests, 
this commandment is for you. If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto my name, 
saith the Lord, I will even send a curse upon you, and I will curse your blessing. "(2) Is honour, then, given to 
God when the majesty and decree of God are so condemned, that when He declares that He is indignant 
and angry with those who sacrifice, and when He threatens eternal penalties and perpetual punishments, it 
is proposed by the sacrilegious, and said. Let not the wrath of God be considered, let not the judgment of 
the Lord be feared, let not any knock at the Church of Christ; but repentance being done away with, and no 
confession of sin being made, the bishops being despised and trodden underfoot, let peace be 
proclaimed by the presbyters in deceitful words; and lest the lapsed should rise up, or those placed without 
should return to the Church, let communion be offered to those who are not in communion? 

14. To these also it was not sufficient that they had withdrawn from the Gospel, that they had taken away from 
the lapsed the hope of satisfaction and repentance, that they had taken away those involved in frauds or 
stained with adulteries, or polluted with the deadly contagion of sacrifices, lest they should entreat God, or 
make confession of their crimes in the Church, from all feeling and fruit of repentance; that they had set up(3) 
outside for themselves-outside the Church, and opposed to the Church, a conventicle of their abandoned 
faction, when there had flowed together a band of creatures with evil consciences, and unwilling to entreat 
and to satisfy God. After such things as these, moreover, they still dare-a false bishop having been 
appointed for them by, heretics-to set sail and to bear letters from schismatic and profane persons to the 
throne of Peter, and to the chief church whence priestly unity takes its source;(4) and not to consider that 
these were the Romans whose faith was praised in the preaching of the apostle, to whom faithlessness 
could have no access. (5) But what was the reason of their coming and announcing the making of the 
pseudo-bishop in opposition to the bishops? For either they are pleased with what they have done, and 

persist in tiieir wicl<edness; or, if tiiey are displeased and retreat, tiiey l<now wiiitiier tiiey may return. For, as 
it lias been decreed by all of us(6)-and is equally fair and just-that the case of every one should be heard 
there where the crime has been committed; and a portion of the flock has been assigned to each individual 
pastor, which he is to rule and govern, having to give account of his doing to the Lord; it certainly behoves 
those over whom we are placed not to run about nor to break up the harmonious agreement of the bishops 
with their crafty and deceitful rashness, but there to plead their cause, where they may be able to have both 
accusers and witnesses of their crime; unless perchance the authority of the bishops constituted in Africa 
seems to a few desperate and abandoned men to be too little, (7) who have already judged concerning 
them, and have lately condemned, by the gravity of their judgment, their conscience bound in many bonds 
of sins. Already their case has been examined, already sentence concerning them has been pronounced; 
nor is it fitting for the dignity of priests to be blamed for the levity of a changeable and inconstant mind, when 
the Lord teaches and says, "Let your communication be. Yea, yea; Nay, nay. "(8) 

15. If the number of those who judged concerning them last year be reckoned with the presbyters and 
deacons, then there were more present to the judgment and hearing than are those very same persons who 
now seem to be associated with Fortunatus. For you ought to know, dearest brother, that after he was made 
a pseudo-bishop by the heretics, he was at once deserted by almost all. For those to whom in past time 
delusions were offered, and deceitful words were given, to the effect that they were to return to the Church 
together; after they saw that a false bishop was made there, learned that they had been fooled and 
deceived, and are daily returning and knocking at the door of the Church; while we, meanwhile, by whom 
account is to be given to the Lord, are anxiously weighing and carefully examining who ought to be received 
and admitted into the Church. For some are either hindered by their crimes to such a degree, or they are so 
obstinately and firmly opposed by their brethren, that they cannot be received at all except with offence and 
risk to a great many. For neither must some putridities be so collected and brought together, that the parts 
which are sound and whole should be injured; nor is that pastor serviceable or wise who so mingles the 
diseased and affected sheep with his flock as to contaminate the whole flock with the infection of the clinging 
evil. (Do not pay attention to their number.(1) For one who fears God is better than a thousand impious sons, 
as the Lord spoke by the prophet, saying, "O son, do not delight in ungodly sons, though they multiply to 
thee, except the fear of the Lord be with them. "(2)) Oh, if you could, dearest brother, be with us here when 
those evil and perverse men return from schism, you would see what labour is mine to persuade patience to 
our brethren, that they should calm their grief of mind, and consent to receive and heal the wicked. For as 
they rejoice and are glad when those who are endurable and less guilty return, so, on the other hand, they 
murmur and are dissatisfied as often as the incorrigible and violent, and those who are contaminated either 
by adulteries or by sacrifices, and who, in addition to this, are proud besides, so return to the Church, as to 
corrupt the good dispositions within it. Scarcely do I persuade the people; nay, I extort it from them, that they 
should suffer such to be admitted. And the grief of the fraternity is made the more just, from the fact that one 
and another who, notwithstanding the opposition and contradiction of the people, have been received by 
my facility, have proved worse than they had been before, and have not been able to keep the faith of their 
repentance, because they had not come with true repentance. 

16. But what am I to say of those who have now sailed to you with Felicissimus, guilty of every crime, as 
ambassadors sent by Fortunatus the pseudo-bishop, bringing to you letters as false as he himself is false, 
whose letters they bring, as his conscience is full of sins, as his life is execrable, as it is disgraceful; so that, 
even if they were in the Church, such people ought to be expelled from the Church. In addition, since they 
have known their own conscience, they do not dare to come to us or to approach to the I threshold of the 
Church, but wander about, without her, through the province, for the sake of circumventing and defrauding the 
brethren; and now, being sufficiently known to all, and everywhere excluded for their crimes, they sail thither 
also to you. For they cannot have the face to approach to us, or to stand before us, since the crimes which 
are charged upon them by the brethren are most grievous and grave. If they wish to undergo our judgment, 
let them come. Finally, if they can find any excuse or defence, let us see what thought they have of making 
satisfaction, what fruit of repentance they bring forward. The Church is neither closed here to any one, nor is 
the bishop denied to any. Our patience, and facility, and humanity are ready for those who come. I entreat all 
to return into the Church. I beg all our fellow-soldiers to be included within the camp of Christ, and the 
dwelling-place of God the Father. I remit everything. I shut my eyes to many things, with the desire and the 
wish to gather together the brotherhood. Even those things which are committed against God I do not 
investigate with the full judgment of religion. I almost sin myself, in remitting sins(3) more than I ought. I 
embrace with prompt and full love those who return with repentance, confessing their sin with lowly and 
unaffected atonement. (4) 

17. But if there are some who think that they can return to the Church not with prayers but with threats, or 
suppose that they can make a way for themselves, not with lamentation and atonements, but with terrors, let 
them take it for certain that against such the Church of the Lord stands closed; nor does the camp of Christ, 

unconquered and firm with tiie Lord's protection, yield to tiireats. Tiie priest of God iiolding fast tiie Gospel 
and keeping Christ's precepts may be slain; he cannot be conquered. Zacharias, God's priest, suggests 
and furnishes to us examples of courage and faith, who, when he could not be terrified with threats and 
stoning, was slain in the temple of God, at the same time crying out and saying, what we also cry out and 
say against the heretics, "Thus saith the Lord, Ye have forsaken the ways of the Lord, and the Lord will 
forsake you. "(5) For because a few rash and wicked men forsake the heavenly and wholesome ways of the 
Lord, and not doing holy things are deserted by the Holy Spirit, we also ought not therefore to be unmindful 
of the divine tradition, so as to think that the crimes of madmen are greater than the judgments of priests; or 
conceive that human endeavours can do more to attack, than divine protection avails to defend. 

18. Is the dignity of the Catholic Church, dearest brother, to be laid aside, is the faithful and uncorrupted 
majesty of the people placed within it,(1) and the priestly authority and power also, all to be laid aside for 
this, that those who are set without the Church may say that they wish to judge concerning a prelate in the 
Church? heretics concerning a Christian? wounded men about a whole man? maimed concerning a sound 
man? lapsed concerning one who stands fast? guilty concerning their judge? sacrilegious men concerning 
a priest? What is left but that the Church should yield to the Capitol, and that, while the priests depart and 
remove the Lord's altar, the images and idols should pass over with their altars into the sacred and 
venerable assembly of our clergy, and a larger and fuller material for declaiming against us and abusing us 
be afforded to Novatian; if they who have sacrificed and have publicly denied Christ should begin not only 
to be entreated and admitted without penance done, but, moreover, in addition, to domineer by the power of 
their terror? 

19. If they desire peace, let them lay aside their arms. If they make atonement, why do they threaten? or if 
they threaten, let them know that they are not feared by God's priests. For even Antichrist, when he shall 
begin to come, shall not enter into the Church because he threatens; neither shall we yield to his arms and 
violence, because he declares that he will destroy us if we resist. Heretics arm us when they think that we 
are terrified by their threatenings; nor do they cast us down on our face, but rather they lift us up and inflame 
us, when they make peace itself worse to the brethren than persecution. And we desire, indeed, that they 
may not fill up with crime what they speak in madness, that they who sin with perfidious and cruel words may 
not also sin in deeds. We pray and beseech God, whom they do not cease to provoke and exasperate, that 
He will soften their hearts, that they may lay aside their madness, and return to soundness of mind; that their 
breasts, covered over with the darkness of sins, may acknowledge the light of repentance, and that they 
may rather seek that the prayers and supplications of the priest may be poured out on their behalf, than 
themselves pour out the blood of the priest. But if they continue in their madness, and cruelly persevere in 
these their parricidal deceits and threats, no priest of God is so weak, so prostrate, and so abject, so 
inefficient by the weakness of human infirmity, as not to be aroused against the enemies and impugners of 
God by strength from above; as not to find his humility and weakness animated by the vigour and strength of 
the Lord who protects him. It matters nothing to us by whom, or when we are slain, since we shall receive 
from the Lord the reward of our death and of our blood. Their concision(2) is to be mourned and lamented, 
whom the devil so blinds, that, without considering the eternal punishments of Gehenna, they endeavour to 
imitate the coming of Antichrist, who is now approaching. 

20. And although I know, dearest brother, from the mutual love which we owe and manifest one towards 
another, that you always read my letters to the very distinguished clergy who preside with you there, (3) and 
to your very holy and large congregation, (4) yet now I both warn and ask you to do by my request what at 
other times you do of your own accord and courtesy; that so, by the reading of this my letter, if any contagion 
of envenomed speech and of pestilent propagation has crept in there, it may be all purged out of the ears 
and of the hearts of the brethren, and the sound and sincere affection of the good may be cleansed anew 
from all the filth of heretical disparagement. 

21. But for the rest, let our most beloved brethren firmly decline, and avoid the words and conversations of 
those whose word creeps onwards like a cancer; as the apostle says, "Evil communications corrupt good 
manners. "(5) And again: "A man that is an heretic, after one admonition, reject: knowing that he that is such is 
subverted, and sinneth, being condemned of himself."(6) And the Holy Spirit speaks by Solomon, saying, 
"A perverse man carrieth perdition in his mouth; and in his lips he hideth a fire. "(7) Also again, he warneth us, 
and says, "Hedge in thy ears with thorns, and hearken not to a wicked tongue. "(8) And again: "A wicked 
doer giveth heed to the tongue of the unjust; but a righteous man does not listen to lying lips. "(9) And 
although I know that our brotherhood there, (10) assuredly fortified by your foresight, and besides sufficiently 
cautious by their own vigilance, cannot be taken nor deceived by the poisons of heretics, and that the 
teachings and precepts of God prevail with them only in proportion as the fear of God is in them; yet, even 
although needlessly, either my solicitude or my that Antichrist is near, prepares the soldiers for the battle, not 
only by the urgency of his speech and his words, but by the example of his faith and courage. 

3. We understand, dearest brother, and we perceive with the whole light of our heart, the salutary and holy 

plans of the divine majesty, wiience tiie sudden persecution lately arose there-whence the secular power 
suddenly broke forth against the Church of Christ and the bishop Cornelius, the blessed martyr, and all of 
you; so that, for the confusion and beating down of heretics, the Lord might show[1] which was the Church 
-which is its one bishop chosen by divine appointment-which presbyters are associated with the bishop in 
priestly honour-which is the united and true people of Christ, linked together in the love of the Lord's 
flock-who they were whom the enemy would harass; whom, on the other hand, the devil would spare as 
being his own. For Christ's adversary does not persecute and attack any except Christ's camp and soldiers; 
heretics, once prostrated and made his own, he despises and passes by. He seeks to cast down those 
whom he sees to stand. 

4. And I wish, dearest brother, that the power were now given us to be with you there on your return, that we 
ourselves, who love you with mutual love, might, being present with the rest, also receive the very joyous 
fruit of your coming. What exultation among all the brethren there; what running together and embracing of 
each one as they arrive! Scarcely can you be satisfied with the kisses of those who cling to you; scarcely 
can the very faces and eyes of the people be satiated with seeing. At the joy of your coming the 
brotherhood there has begun to recognise what and how great a joy will follow when Christ shall come. For 
because His advent will quickly approach, a kind of representation has now gone before in you; that just as 
John, His forerunner and preparer of His way, came and preached that Christ had come, so, now that a 
bishop returns as a confessor of the Lord, and His priest, it appears that the Lord also is now returning. But I 
and my colleagues, and all the brotherhood, send this letter to you in the stead of us, dearest brother; and 
setting forth to you by our letter our joy, we express the faithful inclination of our love here also in our 
sacrifices and our prayers, not ceasing to give thanks to God the Father, and to Christ His Son our Lord; and 
as well to pray as to entreat, that He who is perfect, and makes perfect, will keep and perfect in you the 
glorious crown of your confession, who perchance has called you back for this purpose, that your glory 
should not be hidden, if the martyrdom of your confession should be consummated away from home. For 
the victim which affords an example to the brotherhood both of courage and of faith, ought to be offered up 
when the brethren are present. We bid you, dearest brother, ever heartily farewell. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE LVIII.-TO FIDUS, 
ON THE BAPTISM OF INFANTS J 

EPISTLE LVIII.[2] 

TO FIDUS, ON THE BAPTISM OF INFANTS. 

ARGUMENT. --IN THIS LETTER CYPRIAN IS NOT ESTABLISHING ANY NEW DECREE; 
BUT KEEPING MOST FIRMLY THE FAITH OF THE CHURCH, FOR THE CORRECTION OF 
THOSE WHO THOUGHT THAT AN INFANT MUST NOT BE BAPTIZED BEFORE THE 
EIGHTH DAY AFTER ITS BIRTH, HE DECREED WITH SOME OF HIS FELLOW-BISHOPS, 
THAT AS SOON AS IT WAS BORN IT MIGHT PROPERLY BE BAPTIZED. HE TAKES 
OCCASION, HOWEVER, TO REFUSE TO RECALL THE PEACE THAT HAD BEEN 
GRANTED TO ONE VICTOR, ALTHOUGH IT HAD BEEN GRANTED AGAINST THE 
DECREES OF SYNODS CONCERNING THE LAPSED; BUT FORBIDS THERAPIUS THE 
BISHOP TO DO IT IN OTHER CASES. [3] 

1 . Cyprian, and others his colleagues who were present in council, in number sixty-six, to Fidus their brother, 
greeting. We have read your letter, dearest brother, in which you intimated concerning Victor, formerly a 
presbyter, that our colleague Therapius, rashly at a too early season, and with over-eager haste, granted 
peace to him before he had fully repented, and had satisfied the Lord God, against whom he had sinned; 
which thing rather disturbed us, that it was a departure from the authority of our decree, [4] that peace should 
be granted to him before the legitimate and full time of satisfaction, and without the request and 
consciousness of the people-no sickness rendering it urgent, and no necessity compelling it. But the 
judgment being long weighed among us, it was considered sufficient to rebuke Therapius our colleague for 
having done this rashly, and to have instructed him that he should not do the like with any other. Yet we did 
not think that the peace once granted in any wise by a priest s of God was to be taken away, and for this 
reason have allowed Victor to avail himself of the communion granted to him. 

2. But in respect of the case of the infants, which you say ought not to be baptized within the second or third 
day after their birth, and that the law of ancient circumcision should be regarded, so that you think that one 
who is just born should not be baptized and sanctified within the eighth day, we all thought very differently in 
our council. For in this course which you thought was to betaken, no one agreed; but we all rather judge that 
the mercy and grace of God is not to be refused to any one born of man. For as the Lord says in His Gospel, 
"The Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them,"[1] as far as we Can, We must strive 
that, if possible, no soul be lost. For what is wanting to him who has once been formed in the womb by the 
hand of God? To us, indeed, and to our eyes, according to the worldly course of days, they who are born 
appear to receive an increase. But whatever things are made by God, are completed by the majesty and 
work of God their Maker. 

3. Moreover, belief in divine Scripture declares to us, that among all, whether infants or those who are older, 
there is the same equality of the divine gift. Elisha, beseeching God, so laid himself upon the infant son of 
the widow, who was lying dead, that his head was applied to his head, and his face to his face, and the 
limbs of Elisha were spread over and joined to each of the limbs of the child, and his feet to his feet. If this 
thing be considered with respect to the inequality of our birth and our body, an infant could not be made 
equal with a person grown up and mature, nor could its little limbs fit anti be equal to the larger limbs of a 
man. But in that is expressed the divine and spiritual equality, that all men are like and equal, since they 
have once been made by Cool; and our age may have a difference in the increase of our bodies, 
according to the world, but not according to God; unless that very grace also which is given to the baptized 
is given either less or more, according to the age of the receivers, whereas the Holy Spirit is not given with 
measure, but by the love and mercy of the Father alike to all. For God, as He does not accept the person, 
so does not accept the age; since He shows Himself Father to all with well-weighed equality for the 
attainment of heavenly grace. 

4. For, with respect to what you say, that the aspect of an infant in the first days after its birth is not pure, so 
that any one of us would still shudder at kissing it,[2] we do not think that this ought to be alleged as any 

impediment to iieavenly grace. For it is written, "To tiie pure all things are pure. "[3] Nor ought any of us to 
shudder at that which God hath condescended to make. For although the infant is still fresh from its birth, yet 
it is not such that any one should shudder at kissing it in giving grace and in making peace; since in the kiss 
of an infant every one of us ought for his very religions sake, to consider the still recent hands of God 
themselves, which in some sort we are kissing, in the man lately formed and freshly born, when we are 
embracing that which God has made. For in respect of the observance of the eighth day in the Jewish 
circumcision of the flesh, a sacrament was given beforehand in shadow and in usage; but when Christ 
came, it was fulfilled in truth. For because the eighth day, that is, the first day after the Sabbath, was to be that 
on which the Lord should rise again, and should quicken us, and give us circumcision of the spirit, the eighth 
day, that is, the first day after the Sabbath, and the Lord's day, went before in the figure; which figure ceased 
when by and by the truth came, and spiritual circumcision was given to us. 

5. For which reason we think that no one is to be hindered from obtaining grace by that law which was 
already ordained, and that spiritual circumcision ought not to be hindered by carnal circumcision, but that 
absolutely every man is to be admitted to the grace of Christ, since Peter also in the Acts of the Apostles 
speaks, and says, "The Lord hath said to me that I should call no man common or unclean. "[4] But if 
anything could hinder men from obtaining grace, their more heinous sins might rather hinder those who are 
mature and grown up and older. But again, if even to the greatest sinners, and to those who had sinned 
much against God, when they subsequently believed, remission of sins is granted-and nobody is hindered 
from baptism and from grace-how much rather ought we to shrink from hindering an infant, who, being lately 
born, has not sinned, except in that, being born after the flesh according to Adam, [5] he has contracted the 
contagion of the ancient death at its earliest birth, who approaches the more easily on this very account to 
the reception of the forgiveness of sins-that to him are remitted, not his own sins, but the sins of another. 

6. And therefore, dearest brother, this was our opinion in council, that by us no one ought to he hindered from 
baptism and from the grace of God, who is merciful and kind and loving to all. Which, since it is to he 
observed and maintained in respect of all, we think is to be even more observed in respect of infants and 
newly-born persons, who on this very account deserve more from our help and from the divine mercy, that 
immediately, on the very beginning of their birth, lamenting and weeping, they do nothing else but entreat. 
We bid you, dearest brother, ever heartily farewell. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE LIX.-TO THE 
NUMIDIAN BISHOPS, ON THE REDEMPTION OF THEIR 
BRETHREN FROM CAPTIVITY AMONG THE 
BARBARIANS 

EPISTLE LIX.[1] 

TO THE NUMIDIAN BISHOPS, ON THE REDEMPTION OF THEIR BRETHREN FROM 
CAPTIVITY AMONG THE BARBARIANS. 

ARGUMENT. --CYPRIAN BEGINS BY DEPLORING THE CAPTIVITY OF THE BRETHREN, 
OF' WHICH HE HAD HEARD FROM THE NUMIDIAN BISHOPS, AND SAYS THAT HE IS 
SENDING THEM A HUNDRED THOUSAND SESTERCES, CONTRIBUTED BY BRETHREN 
AND SISTERS AND C0LLEAGUES[2] 

1. Cyprian to Januarius, Maximus, Proculus, Victor, IVIodianus, Nemesianus, Nampulus, and Honoratus, iiis 
bretiiren, greeting. Witii excessive grief of mind, and not witiiout tears, dearest, bretiiren, I iiave read your 
letter wiiicii you wrote to me from tiie solicitude of your love, concerning the captivity of our brethren and 
sisters. For who would not grieve at misfortunes of that kind, or who would not consider his brother's grief his 
own, since the Apostle Paul speaks, saying, "Whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or 
one member rejoice, all the members rejoice with it;"[3] and in another place he says, "Who is weak, and I 
am not weak?"[4] Wherefore now also the captivity of our brethren must be reckoned as our captivity, and 
the grief of those who are endangered is to be esteemed as our grief, since indeed there is one body of our 
union; and not love only, but also religion, ought to instigate and strengthen us to redeem the members of 
the brethren. 

2. For inasmuch as the Apostle Paul says again, "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the 
Spirit of God dwelleth in you?"[5]-even although love urged us less to bring help to the brethren, yet in this 
place we must have considered that it was the temples of God which were taken captive, and that we ought 
not by long inactivity and neglect of their suffering to allow the temples of God to be long captive, but to 
strive with what powers we can, and to act quickly by our obedience, to deserve well of Christ our Judge and 
Lord and God. For as the Apostle Paul says, "As many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put 
on Christ,"[6] Christ is to be contemplated in our captive brethren, and He is to be redeemed from the peril of 
captivity who redeemed us from the peril of death; so that He who took us out of the jaws of the devil, who 
abides and dwells in us, may now Himself be rescued and redeemed from the hands of barbarians by a 
sum of money-who redeemed us by His cross and blood-who suffers these things to happen for this 
reason, that our faith may be tried, whether each one of us will do for another what he would wish to be done 
for himself, if he himself were held captive among barbarians. For who that is mindful of humanity, and 
reminded of mutual love, if he be a father, will not now consider that his sons are there; if he be a husband, 
will not think that his wife is there kept captive, with as much grief as shame for the marriage tie? But how 
great is the general grief among all of us, and suffering concerning the peril of virgins who are kept there, on 
whose behalf we must bewail not only the loss of liberty, but of modesty; and must lament the bonds of 
barbarians less than the violence of seducers and abominable places, lest the members dedicated to 
Christ, and devoted for ever in honour of continence by modest, virtue, should be sullied by the Just and 
contagion of the insulter. 

3. Our brotherhood, considering all these things according to your letter, and sorrowfully examining, have all 
promptly and willingly and liberally gathered together supplies of money for the brethren, being always 
indeed, according to the strength of their faith, prone to the work of God, but now even more stimulated to 
salutary works by the consideration of so great a suffering. For since the Lord in His Gospel says, "I was 
sick, and ye visited me, "[7] with how much greater reward for our work will He say now, "I was captive, and 
ye redeemed me!" And since again He says, "I was in prison, and ye came unto me," how much more will it 
be when He begins to say, "I was in the dungeon of captivity, and I lay shut up and bound among 
barbarians, and from that prison of slavery you delivered me," being about to receive a reward from the 

Lord when the day of judgment shall come! Finally, we give you the warmest thanks that you have wished us 
to be sharers in your anxiety, [8] and in so great and necessary a work-that you have offered us fruitful fields 
in which we might cast the seeds of our hope, with the expectation of a harvest of the most abundant fruits 
which will proceed from this heavenly and saving operation. We have then sent you a sum of one hundred 
thousand sesterces, [9] which have been collected here in the Church over which by the Lord's mercy we 
preside, by the contributions of the clergy and people established with us, which you will there dispense with 
what diligence you may. 

4. And we wish, indeed, that nothing of such a kind may happen again, and that our brethren, protected by 
the majesty of the Lord, may be preserved safe from perils of this kind. If, however, for the searching out of 
the love of our mind, and for the testing of the faith of our heart, any such thing should happen, do not delay 
to tell us of it in your letters, counting it for certain that our church and the whole fraternity here beseech by 
their prayers that these things may not happen again; but if they happen, that they will willingly and liberally 
render help. But that you may have in mind in your prayers our brethren and sisters who have laboured so 
promptly and liberally for this needful work, that they may always labour; and that in return for their good work 
you may present them in your sacrifices and prayers, I have subjoined the names of each one; and 
moreover also I have added the names of my colleagues and fellow-priests, who themselves also, as they 
were present, contributed some little according to their power, in their own names and the name of their 
people. And besides our own amount, I have intimated and sent their small sums, all of whom, in conformity 
with the claims of faith and charity, you ought to remember in your supplications and prayers. [1] We bid you, 
dearest brethren, ever heartily farewell, and remember us. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE LX.-TO 
EUCHRATIUS, ABOUT AN ACTOR 

EPISTLE LX.[2] 

TO EUCHRATIUS, ABOUT AN ACTOR. 

ARGUMENT. --HE FORBIDS AN ACTOR, IF HE CONTINUE IN HIS DISGRACEFUL CALLING, 
FROM COMMUNICATING IN THE CHURCH. NEITHER DOES HE ALLOW IT TO BE AN 
EXCUSE FOR HIM, THAT HE HIMSELF DOES NOT PRACTICE THE HISTRIONIC ART, SO 
LONG AS HE TEACHES IT TO OTHERS; NEITHER DOES HE EXCUSE IT BECAUSE OF 
THE WANT OF MEANS, SINCE NECESSARIES MAY BE SUPPLIED TO HIM FROM THE 
RESOURCES OF THE CHURCH; AND THEREFORE, IF THE MEANS OF THE CHURCH 
THERE ARE NOT SUFFICIENT, HE RECOMMENDS HIM TO COME TO CARTHAGE. 

1. Cyprian to Euchratius his brotiier, greeting. From our mutual love and your reverence for me you have 
thought that I should be consulted, dearest brother, as to my opinion concerning a certain actor, who, being 
settled among you, still persists in the discredit of the same art of his; and as a master and teacher, not for 
the instruction, but for the destruction of boys, that which he has unfortunately learnt he also imparts to others: 
you ask whether such a one ought to communicate with us. This, I think, neither befits the divine majesty nor 
the discipline of the Gospel, that the modesty and credit of the Church should be polluted by so disgraceful 
and infamous a contagion. For since, in the law, men are forbidden to put on a woman's garment, and those 
that offend in this manner are judged accursed, how much greater is the crime, not only to take women's 
garments, but also to express base and effeminate and luxurious gestures, by the teaching of an immodest 
art. 

2. Nor let any one excuse himself that he himself has given up the theatre, while he is still teaching the art to 
others. For he cannot appear to have given it up who substitutes others in his place, and who, instead of 
himself alone, supplies many in his stead; against God's appointment, instructing and teaching in what way 
a man may be broken down into a woman, and his sex changed by art, [3] and how the devil who pollutes 
the divine image may be gratified by the sins of a corrupted and enervated body. But if such a one alleges 
poverty and the necessity of small means, his necessity also can be assisted among the rest who are 
maintained by the support of the Church; if he be content, that is, with very frugal but innocent food. And let 
him not think that he is redeemed by an allowance to cease from sinning, since this is an advantage not to 
us, but to himself. What more he may wish he must seek thence, from such gain as takes men away from the 
banquet of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and leads them down, sadly and perniciously fattened in this 
world, to the eternal torments of hunger and thirst; and therefore, as far as you can, recall him from this 
depravity and disgrace to the way of innocence, and to the hope of eternal life, that he may be content with 
the maintenance of the Church, sparing indeed, but wholesome. But if the Church with you is not sufficient for 
this, to afford support for those in need, he may transfer himself to us, and here receive what may be 
necessary to him for food and clothing, and not teach deadly things to others without the Church, but himself 
learn wholesome things in the Church. I bid you, dearest brother, ever heartily farewell. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE LXI.-TO 
POMPONIUS, CONCERNING SOME VIRGINS 

^ 

EPISTLE LXI.[4] 

TO POMPONIUS, CONCERNING SOME VIRGINS. 

ARGUMENT. --CYPRIAN, WITH SOME OF HIS COLLEAGUES, REPLIES TO HIS 
COLLEAGUE POMPONIUS, THAT VIRGINS WHO HAD DETERMINED TO MAINTAIN THEIR 
STATE WITH CONTINENCY AND FIRMNESS, BUT WHO HAD YET SUBSEQUENTLY 
BEEN FOUND IN THE SAME BED WITH MEN, IF THEY WERE STILL FOUND TO BE 
VIRGINS, SHOULD BE RECEIVED INTO COMMUNION AND ADMITTED TO THE CHURCH. 
BUT IF OTHERWISE, SINCE THEY ARE ADULTEROUS TOWARDS CHRIST, THEY 
SHOULD BE COMPELLED TO FULL REPENTANCE, AND THOSE WHO SHOULD 
OBSTINATELY PERSEVERE SHOULD BE EJECTED FROM THE CHURCH. 

1 . Cyprian, Caecilius, Victor, Sedatus, Tertullus, witii tiie presbyters wiio were present witii tiiem, to 
Pomponius tiieir brotiier, greeting. We iiave read, dearest brotiier, your letter wiiicii you sent by Paconius 
our brotiier, asi<ing and desiring us to write again to you, and say wliat we tliouglit of tliose virgins wlio, after 
iiaving once determined to continue in tiieir condition, and firmly to maintain their continency, have 
afterwards been found to have remained in the same bed side by side with men; of whom you say that one 
is a deacon; and yet that the same virgins who have confessed that they have slept with men declare that 
they are chaste. [1] Concerning which matters, since you have desired our advice, l<now that we do not 
depart from the traditions of the Gospel and of the apostles, but with constancy and firmness tal<e counsel 
for our brethren and sisters, and maintain the discipline of the Church by all the ways of usefulness and 
safety, since the Lord speal<s, saying, "And I will give you pastors according to. mine heart, and they shall 
feed you with discipline. "[2] And again it is written; "Whoso despiseth discipline is miserable;[3] and in the 
Psalms also the Holy Spirit admonishes and instructs us, saying, "Keep discipline, lest haply the Lord be 
angry, and ye perish from the right way, when His anger shall quicl<ly burn against you. "[4] 

2. In the first place, therefore, dearest brother, both by overseers and people nothing is to be more eagerly 
sought after, than that we who fear God should l<eep the divine precepts with every observation of 
discipline, and should not suffer our brethren to stray, and to live according to their own fancy and lust;[5] but 
that we should faithfully consult for the life of each one, and not stiffer virgins to dwell with men,-l do not say 
to sleep together, but to live together[6]-since both their weal< sex and their age, still critical, ought to be 
bridled in all things and ruled by us, lest an occasion should be given to the devil who ensnares us, and 
desires to rage over us, to hurt them, since the apostle also says, "Do not give place to the devil. "[7] The 
ship is watchfully to be delivered from perilous places, that it may not be brol<en among the rocks and cliffs; 
the baggage must swiftly be taken out of the fire, before it is burnt up by the flames reaching it. No one who is 
near to danger is long safe, nor will the servant of God be able to escape the devil if he has entangled 
himself in the devil's nets. We must interfere at once with such as these, that they may be separated while 
yet they can be separated in innocence; because by and by they will not be able to be separated by our 
interference, after they have become joined together by a very guilty conscience. IVIoreover, what a number 
of serious mischiefs we see to have arisen hence; and what a multitude of virgins we behold corrupted by 
unlawful and dangerous conjunctions of this kind, to ourgreatgrief of mind! But if they have faithfully 
dedicated themselves to Christ, let them persevere in modesty and chastity, without incurring any evil report, 
and so in courage and steadiness await the reward of virginity. But if they are unwilling or unable to 
persevere, it is better that they should marry, than that by their crimes they should fall into the fire. Certainly 
let them not cause a scandal to the brethren or sisters, since it is written, "If meat cause my brother to offend, 

I will eat no flesh while the world standeth, lest I make my brother to offend. "[8] 

3. Nor let any one think that she can be defended by this excuse, that she may be examined and proved 
whether she be a virgin; since both the hands and the eyes of the midwives are often deceived; and if she 
be found to be a virgin in that particular in which a woman may be so, yet she may have sinned in some 
other part of her body, which may be cor-rupted and yet cannot be examined. Assuredly the mere lying 

together, the mere embracing, the very talking together, and the act of l<issing, and the disgraceful and foul 
slumber of two persons lying together, how much of dishonour and crime does it confess! If a husband come 
upon his wife, and see her lying with another man, is he not angry and raging, and by the passion of his rage 
does he not perhaps take his sword into his hand? And what shall Christ and our Lord and Judge think, when 
He sees His virgin, dedicated to Him, and destined for His holiness, lying with another? How indignant and 
angry is He, and what penalties does He threaten against such unchaste connections! whose spiritual 
sword and the coming day of judgment, that every one of the brethren may be able to escape, we ought with 
all our counsel to provide and to strive. And since it behoves all by all means to keep discipline, [9] much 
more is it right that overseers and deacons should be careful for this, that they may afford an example and 
instruction to others concerning their conversation and character. For how can they direct the integrity and 
continence of others, if the corruptions and teachings of sin begin to proceed from themselves? 

4. And therefore you have acted advisedly and with vigour, dearest brother, in excommunicating the deacon 
who has often abode with a virgin; and, moreover, the others who had been used to sleep with virgins. But if 
they have repented of this their unlawful lying together, and have mutually withdrawn from one another, let 
the virgins meantime be carefully inspected by midwives; and if they should be found virgins, let them be 
received to communion, and admitted to the Church; yet with this threatening, that if subsequently they 
should return to the same men, or if they should dwell together with the same men in one house or under the 
same roof, they should be ejected with a severer censure, nor should such be afterwards easily received 
into the Church. But if any one of them be found to be corrupted, let her abundantly repent, because she who 
has been guilty of this crime is an adulteress, not (indeed) against a husband, but against Christ; and 
therefore, a due time being appointed, let her afterwards, when confession has been made, return to the 
Church. But if they obstinately persevere, and do not mutually separate themselves, let them know that, with 
this their immodest obstinacy, they can never be admitted by us into the Church, lest they should begin to 
set an example to others to go to ruin by their crimes. Nor let them think that the way of life or of salvation is 
still open to them, if they have refused to obey the bishops and priests, since in Deuteronomy the Lord God 
says, "And the man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the priest or judge, whosoever be 
shall be in those days, that man shall die, and all the people shall hear and fear, and do no more 
presumptuously. "[1] God commanded those who did not obey His priests to be slain, and those who did not 
hearken to His judges who were appointed for the time. And then indeed they were slain with the sword, 
when the circumcision of the flesh was yet in force; but now that circumcision has begun to be of the spirit 
among God's faithful servants, the proud and contumacious are slain with the sword of the Spirit, in that they 
are cast out of the Church. For they cannot live out of it, since the house of God is one, and there can be no 
salvation to any except in the Church. But the divine Scripture testifies that the undisciplined perish, because 
they do not listen to, nor obey wholesome precepts; for it says, "An undisciplined man loveth not him that 
correcteth him. But they who hate reproof shall be consumed with disgrace. "[2] 

5. Therefore, dearest brother, endeavour that the undisciplined should not be consumed and perish, that as 
much as you can, by your salutary counsels, you should rule the brotherhood, and take counsel of each one 
with a view to his salvation. Strait and narrow is the way through which we enter into life, but excellent and 
great is the reward when we enter into glory. Let those who have once made themselves eunuchs for the 
kingdom of heaven[3] please God in all things, and not offend God's priests nor the Lord's Church by the 
scandal of their wickedness. And if, for the present, certain of our brethren seem to be made sorry by us, let 
us nevertheless remain in our wholesome persuasion, knowing that an apostle also has said, "Am I 
therefore become your enemy because I tell you the truth?"[4] But if they shall obey us, we have gained our 
brethren, and have formed them as well to salvation as to dignity by our address. But if some of the 
perverse persons refuse to obey, let us follow the same apostle, who says, "If I please men, I should not be 
the servant of Christ. "[5] If we cannot please some, so as to make them please Christ, let us assuredly, as 
far as we can, please Christ our Lord and God, by observing His precepts. I bid you, brother beloved and 
much longed-for. heartily farewell in the Lord. [6] 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE LXII.-TO 
CAECILIUS, ON THE SACRAMENT OF THE CUP OF 
THE LORD 

EPISTLE LXII.[7] 

CAECILIUS, ON THE SACRAMENT OF THE CUP OF THE LORD. 

ARGUMENT. --CYPRIAN TEACHES, IN OPPOSITION TO THOSE WHO USED WATER IN 
THE LORD'S SUPPER, THAT NOT WATER ALONE, BUT WINE MIXED WITH WATER, WAS 
TO BE OFFERED;THAT BY WATER WAS DESIGNATED IN SCRIPTURE, BAPTISM, BUT 
CERTAINLY NOT THE EUCHARIST. BY TYPES DRAWN FROM THE OLD TESTAMENT, 
THE USE OF WINE IN THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORD'S BODY IS ILLUSTRATED; AND 
IT IS DECLARED THAT BY THE SYMBOL OF WATER IS UNDERSTOOD THE CHRISTIAN 
CONGREGATION. 

1. Cyprian to Caecilius his brotiier, greeting. Altiiougii I l<now, dearest brotiier, tiiat very many of tiie bisiiops 
wiio are set overtiie ciiurciies oftiie Lord by divine condescension, tiirougiiout tiie wiiole world, maintain 
tiie plan of evangelical truth, and of the tradition of the Lord, and do not by human and novel institution depart 
from that which Christ our Master both prescribed and did; yet since some, either by ignorance or 
simplicity(l) in sanctifying the cup of the Lord, and in ministering to the people, do not do that which Jesus 
Christ, our Lord and God, the founder and teacher of this sacrifice, did and taught, I have thought it as well a 
religious as a necessary thing to write to you this letter, that, if any one is still kept in this error, he may behold 
the light of truth, and return to the root and origin of the tradition of the Lord. (2) Nor must you think, dearest 
brother, that I am writing my own thoughts or man's; or that I am boldly assuming this to myself of my own 
voluntary will, since I always hold my mediocrity with lowly and modest moderation. But when anything is 
prescribed by the inspiration and command of God, it is necessary that a faithful servant should obey the 
Lord, acquitted by all of assuming anything arrogantly to himself, seeing that he is constrained to fear 
offending the Lord unless he does what he is commanded. 

2. Know then that I have been admonished that, in offering the cup, the tradition of the Lord(2) must be 
observed, and that nothing must be done by us but what the Lord first did on our behalf, as that the cup which 
is offered in remembrance of Him should be offered mingled with wine. For when Christ says, "I am the true 
vine. "(3) the blood of Christ is assuredly not water, but wine; neither can His blood by which we are 
redeemed and quickened appear to be in the cup, when in the cup there is no wine whereby the blood of 
Christ is shown forth, which is declared by the sacrament and testimony of all the Scriptures. 

3. For we find in Genesis also, in respect of the sacrament in Noe, this same thing was to them a precursor 
and figure of the Lord's passion; that he drank wine; that he was drunken; that he was made naked in his 
household; that he was lying down with his thighs naked and exposed; that the nakedness of the father was 
observed by his second son, and was told abroad, but was covered by two, the eldest and the youngest; 
and other matters which it is not necessary to follow out, since this is enough for us to embrace alone, that 
Noe, setting forth a type of the future truth, did not drink water, but wine, and thus expressed the figure of the 
passion of the Lord. 

4. Also in the priest Melchizedek we see prefigured the sacrament of the sacrifice of the Lord, according to 
what divine Scripture testifies, and says, "And Melchizedek, king of Salem, brought forth bread and wine. "(4) 
Now he was a priest of the most high God, and blessed Abraham. And that Melchizedek bore a type of 
Christ, the Holy Spirit declares in the Psalms, saying from the person of the Father to the Son: "Before the 
morning star I begat Thee; Thou art a priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedek;"(5) which order is 
assuredly this coming from that sacrifice and thence descending; that Melchizedek was a priest of the most 
high God; that he offered wine and bread; that he blessed Abraham. For who is more a priest of the most 
high God than our Lord Jesus Christ, who offered a sacrifice to God the Father, and offered that very same 
thing which Melchizedek had offered, that is, bread and wine, to wit. His body and blood? And with respect 
to Abraham, that blessing going before belonged to our people. For if Abraham believed in God, and it was 
accounted unto him for righteousness, assuredly whosoever believes in God and lives in faith is found 

righteous, and already is blessed in faithful Abraham, and is set forth as justified; as the blessed Apostle 
Paul proves, when he says, "Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness. Ye 
know, then, that they which are of faith, these are the children of Abraham. But the Scripture, foreseeing that 
God would justify the Gentiles through faith, pronounced before to Abraham that all nations should be 
blessed in him; therefore they who are of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham. "(6) Whence in the Gospel 
we find that "children of Abraham are raised from stones, that is, are gathered from the Gentiles. "(7) And 
when the Lord praised Zacchaeus, He answered and said "This day is salvation come to this house, 
forasmuch as he also is a son of Abraham. "(8) In Genesis, therefore, that the benediction, in respect of 
Abraham by Melchizedekthe priest, might be duly celebrated, the figure of Christ's sacrifice precedes, 
namely, as ordained in bread and wine; which thing the Lord, completing and fulfilling, offered bread and the 
cup mixed with wine, and so He who is the fulness of truth fulfilled the truth of the image prefigured. 

5. Moreover the Holy Spirit by Solomon shows before the type of the Lord's sacrifice, making mention of the 
immolated victim, and of the bread and wine, and, moreover, of the altar and of the apostles, and says, 
"Wisdom hath builded her house, she hath underlaid her seven pillars; she hath killed her victims; she hath 
mingled her wine in the chalice; she hath also furnished her table: and she hath sent forth her servants, 
calling together with a lofty announcement to her cup, saying. Whoso is simple, let him turn to me; and to 
those that want understanding she hath said. Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have 
mingled for you. "(1) He declares the wine mingled, that is, he foretells with prophetic voice the cup of the 
Lord mingled with water and wine, that it may appear that that was done in our Lord's passion which had 
been before predicted. 

6. In the blessing of Judah also this same thing is signified, where there also is expressed a figure of Christ, 
that He should have praise and worship from his brethren; that He should press down the back of His 
enemies yielding and fleeing, with the hands with which He bore the cross and conquered death; and that 
He Himself is the Lion of the tribe of Judah, and should couch sleeping in His passion, and should rise up, 
and should Himself be the hope of the Gentiles. To which things divine Scripture adds, and says, "He shall 
wash His garment in wine, and His clothing in the blood of the grape. "(2) But when the blood of the grape is 
mentioned, what else is set forth than the wine of the cup of the blood of the Lord? 

7. In Isaiah also the Holy Spirit testifies this same thing concerning the Lord's passion, saying, "Wherefore 
are Thy garments red, and Thy apparel as from the treading of the wine-press full and well trodden?"(3) Can 
water make garments red? or is it water in the wine-press which is trodden by the feet, or pressed out by the 
press? Assuredly, therefore, mention is made of wine, that the Lord's blood may be understood, and that 
which was afterwards manifested in the cup of the Lord might be foretold by the prophets who announced it. 
The treading also, and pressure of the wine-press, is repeatedly dwelt on; because just as the drinking of 
wine cannot be attained to unless the bunch of grapes be first trodden and pressed, so neither could we 
drink the blood of Christ unless Christ had first been trampled upon and pressed, and had first drunk the cup 
of which He should also give believers to drink. 

8. But as often as water is named alone in the Holy Scriptures, baptism is referred to, as we see intimated in 
Isaiah: "Remember not," says he, "the former things, and consider not the things of old. Behold, I will do a 
new thing, which shall now spring forth; and ye shall know it. I will even make a way in the wilderness, and 
rivers in the dry place, to give drink to my elected people, my people whom I have purchased, that they 
might show forth my praise. "(4) There God foretold by the prophet, that among the nations, in places which 
previously had been dry, rivers should afterwards ftow plenteously, and should provide water for the 
elected people of God, that is, for those who were made sons of God by the generation of baptism. (5) 
Moreover, it is again predicted and foretold before, that the Jews, if they should thirst and seek after Christ, 
should drink with us, that is, should attain the grace of baptism. "If they shall thirst," he says, "He shall lead 
them through the deserts, shall bring forth water for them out of the rock; the rock shall be cloven, and the 
water shall flow, and my people shall drink;"(6) which is fulfilled in the Gospel, when Christ, who is the Rock, 
is cloven by a stroke of the spear in His passion; who also, admonishing what was before announced by 
the prophet, cries and says, "If any man thirst, let him come and drink. He that believeth on me, as the 
Scripture saith, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water." And that it might be more evident that the Lord 
is speaking there, not of the cup, but of baptism, the Scripture adds, saying, "But this spake He of the Spirit, 
which they that believe on Him should receive. "(7) For by baptism the Holy Spirit is received; and thus by 
those who are baptized, and have attained to the Holy Spirit, is attained the drinking of the Lord's cup. And 
let it disturb no one, that when the divine Scrip-lure speaks of baptism, it says that we thirst and drink, since 
the Lord also in the Gospel says, "Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness;"(8) 
because what is received with a greedy and thirsting desire is drunk more fully and plentifully. As also, in 
another place, the Lord speaks to the Samaritan woman, saying, "Whosoever drinketh of this water shall 
thirst again; but whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him, shall not thirst for ever."(9) By which is 
also signified the very baptism of saving water, which indeed is once received, and is not again repeated. 

But the cup of the Lord is always both thirsted for and drunl< in the Church. 

9. Nor is there need of very many arguments, dearest brother, to prove that baptism is always indicated by 
the appellation of water, and that thus we ought to understand it, since the Lord, when He came, manifested 
the truth of baptism and the cup in commanding that that faithful water, the water of life eternal, should be 
given to believers in baptism, but, teaching by the example of His own authority, that the cup should be 
mingled with a union of wine and water.(1) For, taking the cup on the eve of His passion. He blessed it, and 
gave it to His disciples, saying, "Drink ye all of this; for this is my blood of the New Testament, which shall be 
shed for many, for the remission of sins. I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until 
that day in which I shall drink new wine with you in the kingdom of my Father."(2) In which portion we find that 
the cup which the Lord offered was mixed, and that that was wine which He called His blood. Whence it 
appears that the blood of Christ is not offered if there be no wine in the cup, nor the Lord's sacrifice 
celebrated with a legitimate consecration unless our oblation and sacrifice respond to His passion. But how 
shall we drink the new wine of the fruit of the vine with Christ in the kingdom of His Father, if in the sacrifice of 
God the Father and of Christ we do not offer wine, nor mix the cup of the Lord by the Lord's own tradition? 

10. Moreover, the blessed Apostle Paul, chosen and sent by the Lord, and appointed a preacher of the 
Gospel truth, lays down these very things in his epistle, saying, "The Lord Jesus, the same night in which He 
was betrayed, took bread; and when He had given thanks. He brake it, and said. This is my body, which 
shall be given for you: do this in remembrance of me. After the same manner also He took the cup, when he 
had supped, saying. This cup is the new testament in my blood: this do, as oft as ye drink it, in 
remembrance of me. For as often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye shall show forth the Lord's 
death until He come. "(3) But if it is both enjoined by the Lord, and the same thing is confirmed and delivered 
by His apostle, that as often as we drink, we do in remembrance of the Lord the same thing which the Lord 
also did, we find that what was commanded is not observed by us, unless we also do what the Lord did; and 
that mixing the Lord's cup in like manner we do not depart from the divine teaching; but that we must not at all 
depart from the evangelical precepts, and that disciples ought also to observe and to do the same things 
which the Master both taught dud did. The blessed apostle in another place more earnestly and strongly 
teaches, saying, "I wonder that ye are so soon removed from Him that called you into grace, unto another 
gospel, which is not another; but there are some that trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ. But 
though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any otherwise than that which we have preached to you, let him 
be anathema. As we said before, so say I now again. If any man preach any other gospel unto you than that 
ye have received, let him be anathema. "(4) 

1 1 . Since, then, neither the apostle himself nor an angel from heaven can preach or teach any otherwise 
than Christ has once taught and His apostles have announced, I wonder very much whence has originated 
this practice, that, contrary to evangelical and apostolical discipline, water is offered in some places in the 
Lord's cup, which water by itself cannot express the blood of Christ. The Holy Spirit also is not silent in the 
Psalms on the sacrament of this thing, when He makes mention of the Lord's cup, and says, "Thy inebriating 
cup, how excellent it is!"(5) Now the cup which inebriates is assuredly mingled with wine, for water cannot 
inebriate anybody. And the cup of the Lord in such wise inebriates, as Noe also was intoxicated drinking 
wine, in Genesis. But because the intoxication of the Lord's cup and blood is not such as is the intoxication of 
the world's wine, since the Holy Spirit said in the Psalm, "Thy inebriating cup," He added, "how excellent it 
is," because doubtless the Lord's cup so inebriates them that drink, that it makes them sober; that it restores 
their minds to spiritual wisdom; that each one recovers from that flavour of the world to the understanding of 
God; and in the same way, that by that common wine the mind is dissolved, and the soul relaxed, and all 
sadness is laid aside, so, when the blood of the Lord and the cup of salvation have been drunk, the memory 
of the old man is laid aside, and there arises an oblivion of the former worldly conversation, and the 
sorrowful and sad breast which before was oppressed by tormenting sins is eased by the joy of the divine 
mercy; because that only is able to rejoice him who drinks in the Church which, when it is drunk, retains the 
Lord's truth.(6). 

12. But how perverse and how contrary it is, that although the Lord at the marriage made wine of water, we 
should make water of wine, when even the sacrament of that thing ought to admonish and instruct us rather 
to offer wine in the sacrifices of the Lord. For because among the Jews there was a want of spiritual grace, 
wine also was wanflng. For the vineyard of the Lord of hosts was the house of Israel; but Christ, when 
teaching and showing that the people of the Genflles should succeed them, and that by the merit of faith we 
should subsequently attain to the place which the Jews had lost, of water made wine; that is. He showed that 
at the marriage of Christ and the Church, as the Jews failed, the people of the naflons should rather flow 
together and assemble: for the divine Scripture in the Apocalypse declares that the waters signify the 
people, saying, "The waters which thou sawest, upon which the whore sitteth, are peoples and multitudes, 
and naflons of the Gentiles, and tongues, "(1) which we evidently see to be contained also in the sacrament 
of the cup. 

13. For because Christ bore us all, in that He also bore our sins, we see that in the water is understood the 
people, but in the wine is showed the blood of Christ. But when the water is mingled in the cup with wine, the 
people is made one with Christ, and the assembly of believers is associated and conjoined with Him on 
whom it believes; which association and conjunction of water and wine is so mingled in the Lord's cup, that 
that mixture cannot any more be separated. Whence, moreover, nothing can separate the Church-that is, 
the people established in the Church, faithfully and firmly persevering in that which they have believed-from 
Christ, in such a way as to prevent their undivided love from always abiding and adhering. Thus, therefore, 
in consecrating the cup of the Lord, water alone cannot be offered, even as wine alone cannot be offered. 
For if any one offer wine only, the blood of Christ is dissociated from us; but if the water be alone, the people 
are dissociated from Christ; but when both are mingled, and are joined with one another by a close union, 
there is completed a spiritual and heavenly sacrament. Thus the cup of the Lord is not indeed water alone, 
nor wine alone, unless each be mingled with the other; just as, on the other hand, the body of the Lord cannot 
be flour alone or water alone, unless both should be united and joined together and compacted in the mass 
of one bread; in which very sacrament our people are shown to be made one, so that in like manner as 
many grains, collected, and ground, and mixed together into one mass, make one bread; so in Christ, who 

is the heavenly bread, we may know that there is one body, with which our number is joined and united. (2) 

14. There is then no reason, dearest brother, for any one to think that the custom of certain persons is to be 
followed, who have thought in thee past that water alone should be offered in the cup of the Lord. For we 
must inquire whom they themselves have followed. For if in the sacrifice which Christ offered none is to be 
followed but Christ, assuredly it behoves us to obey and do that which Christ did, and what He commanded 
to be done, since He Himself says in the Gospel, "If ye do whatsoever I command you, henceforth I call you 
not servants, but friends. "(3) And that Christ alone ought to be heard, the Father also testifies from heaven, 
saying, "This is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye Him. "(4) Wherefore, if Christ alone 
must be heard, we ought not to give heed to what another before us may have I thought was to be done, but 
what Christ, who is before all, first did. Neither is it becoming to follow the practice of man, but the truth of God; 
since God speaks by Isaiah the prophet, and says, "In vain do they worship me, teaching the 
commandments and doctrines of men. "(5) And again the Lord in the Gospel repeals this same saying, and 
says, "Ye reject the commandment of God, that ye may keep your own tradition. "(6) Moreover, in another 
place He establishes it, saying, "Whosoever shall break one of these least commandments, and shall 
teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven. "(7) But if we may not break even the 
least of the Lord's commandments, how much rather is it forbidden to infringe such important ones, so great, 
so pertaining to the very sacrament of our Lord's passion and our own redemption, or to change it by human 
tradition into anything else than what was divinely appointed! For if Jesus Christ, our Lord and God, is 
Himself the chief priest of God the Father, and has first offered Himself a sacrifice to the Father, and has 
commanded this to be done in commemoration of Himself, certainly that priest truly discharges the office of 
Christ, who imitates that which Christ did; and he then offers a true and full sacrifice in the Church to God the 
Father, when he proceeds to offer it according to what he sees Christ Himself to have offered. 

1 5. But the discipline of all religion and truth is overturned, unless what is spiritually prescribed be faithfully 
observed; unless indeed any one should fear in the morning sacrifices, (8) lest by the taste of wine he should 
be redolent of the blood of Christ. Therefore thus the brotherhood is beginning even to be kept back from 
the passion of Christ in persecutions, by learning in the offerings to be disturbed concerning His blood and 
His blood-shedding. Moreover, however, the Lord says in the Gospel, "Whosoever shall be ashamed of 
me, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed. "(9) And the apostle also speaks, saying, "If I pleased men, I 
should not be the servant of Christ."(1 0) But how can we shed our blood for Christ, who blush to drink the 
blood of Christ? 

16. Does any one perchance flatter himself with this notion, that although in the morning, water alone is seen 
to be offered, yet when we come to supper we offer the mingled cup? But when we sup, we cannot call the 
people together to our banquet, so as to celebrate the truth of the sacrament in the presence of all the 
brotherhood. (1) But still it was not in the morning, but after supper, that the Lord offered the mingled cup. 
Ought we then to celebrate the Lord's cup after supper, that so by continual repetition of the Lord's supper(2) 
we may offer the mingled cup? It behoved Christ to offer about the evening of the day, that the very hour of 
sacrifice might show the setting and the evening of the world; as it is written in Exodus, "And all the people of 
the synagogue of the children of Israel shall kill it in the evening. "(3) And again in the Psalms, "Let the lifting 
up of my hands be an evening sacrifice. "(4) But we celebrate the resurrection of the Lord in the morning. 

17. And because we make mention of His passion in all sacrifices (for the Lord's passion is the sacrifice 
which we offer), we ought to do nothing else than what He did. For Scripture says, "For as often as ye eat this 
bread and drink this cup, ye do show forth the Lord's death till He come. "(5) As often, therefore, as we offer 
the cup in commemoration of the Lord and of His passion, let us do what it is known the Lord did. And let this 
conclusion be reached, dear-est brother: if from among our predecessors any have either by ignorance or 

simplicity not observed and l<ept tiiis wiiicii tiie Lord by His example and teaching has instructed us to do, 
he may, by the mercy of the Lord, have pardon granted to his simplicity. But we cannot be pardoned who 
are now admonished and instructed by the Lord to offer the cup of the Lord mingled with wine according to 
what the Lord offered, and to direct letters to our colleagues also about this, so that the evangelical law and 
the Lord's tradition may be everywhere kept, and there be no departure from what Christ both taught and 
did. 

18. To neglect these things any further, and to persevere in the former error, what is it else than to fall under 
the Lord's rebuke, who in the I psalm reproveth, and says, "What hast thou to do to declare my statutes, or 
that thou shouldest take my covenant into thy mouth, seeing thou hatest instruction and castest my words 
behind thee? When thou sawest a thief, thou consentedst with him, and hast been partaker with 
adulterers. "(6) For to declare the righteousness and the covenant of the Lord, and not to do the same that 
the Lord did, what else is it than to cast away His words and to despise the Lord's instruction, to commit not 
earthly, but spiritual thefts and adulteries? While any one is stealing from evangelical truth the words and 
doings of our Lord, he is corrupting and adulterating the divine precepts, as it is written in Jeremiah. He 
says, "What is the chaff to the wheat? Therefore, behold, I am against the prophets, saith the Lord, who steal 
my words every one froth his neighbour, and cause my people to err by their lies and by their lightness. "(7) 
Also in the same prophet, in another place. He says, "She committed adultery with stocks and stones, and 
yet for all this she turned not unto me. "(8) That this theft and adultery may not fall unto us also, we ought to be 
anxiously careful, and fearfully and religiously to watch. For if we are priests of God and of Christ, I do not 
know any one whom we ought rather to follow than God and Christ, since He Himself emphatically says in 
the Gospel, "I am the light of the world; he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light 
of life. "(9) Lest therefore we should walk in darkness, we ought to follow Christ, and to observe his precepts, 
because He Himself told His apostles in another place, as He sent them forth, "All power is given unto me in 
heaven and earth. Go, therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the 
Son, and of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you."(1 0) 
Wherefore, if we wish to walk in the light of Christ, let us not depart from His precepts and monitions, giving 
thanks that, while He instructs for the future what we ought to do. He pardons for the past wherein we in our 
simplicity have erred. And because already His second coming draws near to us. His benign and liberal 
condescension is more and more illuminating our hearts with the light of truth. (11) 

19. Therefore it befits our religion, and our fear, and the place itself, and the office of our priesthood, dearest 
brother, in mixing and offering the cup of the Lord, to keep the truth of the Lord's tradition, and, on the warning 
of the Lord, to correct that which seems with some to have been erroneous; so that when He shall begin to 
come in His brightness and heavenly majesty. He may find that we keep what He admonished us; that we 
observe what He taught; that we do what He did.(1) I bid you, dearest brother, ever heartily farewell. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE LXIII.-TO 
EPICTETUS AND TO THE CONGREGATION OF 
ASSURAE, CONCERNING FORTUNATIANUS, 
FORMERLY THEIR BISHOP 

EPISTLE LXIII.(2) 

TO EPICTETUS AND TO THE CONGREGATION OF ASSURAE, CONCERNING 
FORTUNATIANUS, FORMERLY THEIR BISHOP. 

ARGUMENT. --HE WARNS EPICTETUS AND THE CONGREGATION OF THE ASSURITANS 
NOT TO ALLOW FORTUNATIANUS, A LAPSER, BUT THEIR FORMER BISHOP, TO 
RETURN TO HIS EPISCOPATE, AS WELL FOR OTHER REASONS AS BECAUSE IT HAD 
BEEN DECREED THAT LAPSED BISHOPS SHOULD NOT BE ADMITTED TO THEIR 
FORMER RANK. 

1 . Cyprian to Epictetus his brotiier, and to tiie people establislied at Assurae, greeting. I was gravely and 
grievously disturbed, dearest brethren, at learning that Fortunatianus, formerly bishop among you, after the 
sad lapse of his fall, was now wishing to act as if he were sound, and beginning to claim for himself the 
episcopate. Which thing distressed me; in the first place, on his own account, who, wretched man that he is, 
being either wholly blinded in the darkness of the devil, or deceived by the sacrilegious persuasion of 
certain persons; when he ought to be making atonement, and to give himself to the work of entreating the 
Lord night and day, by tears, and supplications, and prayers, dares still to claim to himself the priesthood 
which he has betrayed, as if it were right, from the altars of the devil, to approach to the altar of God. Or as if 
he would not provoke a greater wrath and indignation of the Lord against himself in the day of judgment, 
who, not being able to be a guide to the brethren in faith and virtue, stands forth as a teacher in perfidy, in 
boldness, and in temerity; and he who has not taught the brethren to stand bravely in the battle, teaches 
those who are conquered and prostrate not even to ask for pardon; although the Lord says, "To them have 
ye poured a drink-offering, and to them have ye offered a meat-offering. Shall I not be angry for these 
things? saith the Lord. "(3) And in another place, "He that sacrificeth to any god, save unto the Lord only, shall 
be destroyed. "(4) Moreover, the Lord again speaks, and says, "They have worshipped those whom their 
own fingers have made: and the mean man boweth down, and the great man humbleth himself: and I will not 
forgive them. "(5) In the Apocalypse also, we read the anger of the Lord threatening, and saying, "If any man 
worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead or in his hand, the same shall drink of 
the wine of the wrath of God mixed in the cup of His anger; and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone 
in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb: and the smoke of their torments shall 
ascend up for ever and ever; neither shall they have rest day nor night, who worship the beast and his 
image. "(6) 

2. Since, therefore, the Lord threatens these torments, these punishments in the day of judgment, to those 
who obey the devil and sacrifice to idols, how does he think that he can act as a priest of God who has 
obeyed and served the priests of the devil; or how does he think that his hand can be transferred to the 
sacrifice of God and the prayer of the Lord which has been captive to sacrilege and to crime, when in the 
sacred Scriptures God forbids the priests to approach to sacrifice even if they have been in lighter guilt; and 
says in Leviticus: "The man in whom there shall be any blemish or stain shall not approach to offer gifts to 
God?"(7) Also in Exodus: "And let the priests which come near to the Lord God sanctify themselves, lest 
perchance the Lord forsake them. "(8) And again: "And when they come near to minister at the altar of the 
Holy One, they shall not bring sin upon them, lest they die. "(9) Those, therefore, who have brought grievous 
sins upon themselves, that is, who, by sacrificing to idols, have offered sacrilegious sacrifices, cannot claim 
to themselves the priesthood of God, nor make any prayer for their brethren in His sight; since it is written in 
the Gospel, "God heareth not a sinner; but if any man be a worshipper of God, and doeth His will, him He 
heareth."(10) Nevertheless the profound gloom of the falling darkness has so blinded the hearts of some, 
that they receive no light from the wholesome precepts, but, once turned away from the direct path of the true 

way, they are hurried headlong and suddenly by the night and error of their sins. (11) 

3. Nor is it wonderful if now those reject our counsels, or the Lord's precepts, who have denied the Lord. 
They desire gifts, and offerings, and gain, for which formerly they watched insatiably. They still long also for 
suppers and banquets, whose debauch they belched forth in the indigestion lately left to the day, most 
manifestly proving now that they did not before serve religion, but rather their belly and gain, with profane 
cupidity. Whence also we perceive and believe that this rebuke has come from God's searching out, that 
they might not continue to stand at the altar; and any further, as unchaste persons, to have to do with 
modesty; as perfidious, to have to do with faith; as profane, with religion; as earthly, with things divine; as 
sacrilegious, with things sacred. That such persons may not return again to the profanation of the altar, and 
to the contagion of the brethren, we must keep watch with all our powers, and strive with all our strength, that, 
as far as in us lies, we may keep them back from this audacity of their wickedness, that they attempt not any 
longer to act in the character of priest; who, cast down to the lowest pit of death, have gone headlong with 
the weight of a greater destruction beyond the lapses of the laity. 

4. But if, among these insane persons, their incurable madness shall continue, and, with the withdrawal of the 
Holy Spirit, the blindness which has begun shall remain in its deep night, our counsel will be to separate 
individual brethren from their deceitfulness; and, lest any one should run into the toils of their error, to 
separate them from their contagion. Since neither can the oblation be consecrated where the Holy Spirit is 
not; nor can the Lord avail to any one by the prayers and supplications of one who himself has done despite 
to the Lord. But if Fortunatianus, either by the blindness induced by the devil forgetful of his crime, or become 
a minister and servant of the devil for deceiving the brotherhood, shall persevere in this his madness, do 
you, as far as in you lies, strive, and in this darkness of the rage of the devil, recall the minds of the brethren 
from error, that they may not easily consent to the madness of another; that they may not make themselves 
partakers in the crimes of abandoned men; but being sound, let them maintain the constant tenor of their 
salvation, and of the integrity preserved and guarded by them.(l) 

5. Let the lapsed, however, who acknowledge the greatness of their sin, not depart from entreating the Lord, 
nor forsake the Catholic Church, which has been appointed one and alone by the Lord; but, continuing in 
their atonements and entreating the Lord's mercy, let them knock at the door of the Church, that they may be 
received there where once they were, and may return to Christ from whom they have departed, and not 
listen to those who deceive them with a fallacious and deadly seduction; since it is written, "Let no man 
deceive you with vain words, for because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the children of 
disobedience; be not ye therefore partakers with them. "(2) Therefore let no one associate himself with the 
contumacious, and those who do not fear God, and those who entirely with draw from the Church. But if any 
one should be impatient of entreating the Lord who is offended, and should be unwilling to obey us, but 
should follow desperate and abandoned men, he must take the blame to himself when the day of judgment 
shall come. For how shall he be able in that day to entreat the Lord, who has both before this denied Christ, 
and now also the Church of Christ, and not obeying bishops sound and wholesome and living, has made 
himself an associate and a partaker with the dying? I bid you, dearest brethren and longed-for, ever heartily 
farewell. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE LXIV.-TO 
ROGATIANUS, CONCERNING THE DEACON WHO 
CONTENDED AGAINST THE BISHOP 

EPISTLE LXIV.(3) 

TO ROGATIANUS, CONCERNING THE DEACON WHO CONTENDED AGAINST THE 
BISHOP. 

ARGUMENT. --CYPRIAN WARNS THE BISHOP ROGATIANUS TO RESTRAIN THE PRIDE 
OF THE DEACON WHO HAD PROVOKED HIM WITH HIS INSULTS, AND TO COMPEL HIM 
TO REPENT OF HIS BOLDNESS; TAKING OCCASION TO REPEAT ONCE MORE 
WHATEVER HE HAS SAID IN THE PREVIOUS LETTER, ABOUT THE SACERDOTAL OR 
EPISCOPAL POWER. (4) 

1 . Cyprian to his brotiier Rogatianus, greeting. I and my colleagues who were present with me were deeply 
and grievously distressed, dearest brother, on reading your letter in which you complained of your deacon, 
that, forgetful of your priestly station, and unmindful of his own office and ministry, he had provoked you by 
his insults and injuries. And you indeed have acted worthily, and with your accustomed humility towards us, 
in rather complaining of him to us; although you have power, according to the vigour of the episcopate and 
the authority of your See, whereby you might be justified on him at once, assured that all we your colleagues 
would regard it as a matter of satisfaction, whatever you should do by your priestly power in respect of an 
insolent deacon, as you have in respect of men of this kind divine commands. Inasmuch as the Lord God 
says in Deuteronomy, "And the man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the priest or the 
judge, whoever he shall be in those days, that man shall die; and all the people, when they hear, shall fear, 
and shall no more do impiously. "(5) And that we may know that this voice of God came forth with His true 
and highest majesty to honour and avenge His priests; when three of the ministers(1)-Korah, Dathan, and 
Abiram-dared to deal proudly, and to exalt their neck against Aaron the priest, and to equal themselves 
with the priest set over them; they were swallowed up and devoured by the opening of the earth, and so 
immediately suffered the penalty of their sacrilegious audacity. Nor they alone, but also two hundred and 
fifty others, who were their companions in boldness, were consumed by a fire breaking forth from the Lord, 
that it might be proved that God's priests are avenged by Him who makes priests. In the book of Kings also, 
when Samuel the priest was despised by the Jewish people on account of his age, as you are now, the 
Lord in wrath exclaimed, and said, "They have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me. "(2) And that He 
might avenge this. He set over them Saul as a king, who afflicted them with grievous injuries, and trod on the 
people, and pressed down their pride with all insults and penalties, that the despised priest might he 
avenged by divine vengeance on a proud people. 

2. Moreover also Solomon, established in the Holy Spirit, testifies and teaches what is the priestly authority 
and power, saying, "Fear the Lord with all thy soul, and reverence His priests;"(3) and again, "Honour God 
with all thy soul, and honour His priests. "(4) Mindful of which precepts, the blessed Apostle Paul, according 
to what we read in the Acts of the Apostles, when it was said to him, "Revilest thou thus God's high priest?" 
answered and said, "I wist not, brethren, that he was the high priest; for it is written. Thou shalt not speak evil 
of the ruler of thy people. "(5) Moreover, our Lord Jesus Christ Himself, our King, and Judge, and God, even 
to the very day, of His passion observed the honour to priests and high priests, although they observed 
neither the fear of God nor the acknowledgment of Christ. For when He had cleansed the leper. He said to 
him, "Go, show thyself to the priest, and offer the gift."(6) With that humility which taught us also to he humble. 
He still called him a priest whom He knew to be sacrilegious; also under the very sting of His passion, when 
He had received a blow, and it was said to Him, "Answerest thou the high priest so?" He said nothing 
reproachfully against the person of the high priest, but rather maintained His own innocence saying, "If I 
have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil; but if well, why smitest thou me?"(7) All which things were 
therefore done by Him humbly and patiently, that we might have an example of humility and patience; for He 
taught that true priests were lawfully and fully to be honoured, in showing Himself such as He was in respect 
of false priests. 

3. But deacons ought to remember that the Lord chose apostles, that is, bishops and overseers; while 
apostles appointed for themselves deacons(8) after the ascent of the Lord into heaven, as ministers of their 
episcopacy and of the Church. But if we may dare anything against God who makes bishops, deacons may 
also dare against us by whom they are made; and therefore it behoves the deacon of whom you write to 
repent of his audacity, and to acknowledge the honour of the priest, and to satisfy the bishop set over him 
with full humility. For these things are the beginnings of heretics, and the origins and endeavours of 
evil-minded schismatics;-to please themselves, and with swelling haughtiness to despise him who is set 
over them. Thus they depart from the Church-thus a profane altar is set up outside-thus they rebel against 
the peace of Christ, and the appointment and the unity of God. But if, further, he shall harass and provoke 
you with his insults, you must exercise against him the power of your dignity, by either deposing him or 
excommunicating him. For if the Apostle Paul, writing to Timothy, said, "Let no man despise thy youth, "(9) 
how much rather must it he said by your colleagues to you, "Let no man despise thy age? And since you 
have written, that one has associated himself with that same deacon of yours, and is a partaker of his pride 
and boldness, you may either restrain or excommunicate him also, and any others that may appear of a like 
disposition, and act against God's priest. Unless, as we exhort anti advise, they should rather perceive that 
they have sinned and make satisfaction, and suffer us to keep our own purpose; for we rather ask and 
desire to overcome the reproaches and injuries of individuals by clemency and patience, than to punish 
them by our priestly power.(10) I bid you, dearest brother, ever heartily farewell. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE LXV.-TO THE 
CLERGY AND PEOPLE ABIDING AT FURNI 

A 

EPISTLE LXV.(11) 

TO THE CLERGY AND PEOPLE ABIDING AT FURNI, ABOUT VICTOR, WHO HAD MADE 
THE PRESBYTER FAUSTINUS A GUARDIAN. 

ARGUMENT. -SINCE, AGAINST THE DECISION OF A COUNCIL OF BISHOPS, GEMINIUS 
VICTOR HAD NAMED IN HIS WILL GEMINIUS FAUSTINUS THE PRESBYTER AS HIS 
GUARDIAN OR CURATOR, HE FORBIDS THAT OFFERING SHOULD BE MADE FOR HIM, 
OR THAT THE SACRIFICE SHOULD BE CELEBRATED FOR HIS REPOSE, INFERRING BY 
THE WAY, FROM THE EXAMPLE OF THE LEVITICAL TRIBE, THAT CLERICS OUGHT NOT 
TO MIX THEMSELVES UP IN SECULAR CARES. 

1 . Cyprian to the presbyters, and deacons, and people abiding at Furni, greeting. I and my colleagues who 
were present with me were greatly disturbed, dearest brethren, as were also our fellow-presbyters who sate 
with us, when we were made aware that Geminius Victor, our brother, when departing this life, had named 
Geminius Faustinusthe presbyter executor to his will, although long since it was decreed, in a council of the 
bishops, that no one should appoint any of the clergy and the ministers of God executor or guardian(1) by 
his will, since every one honoured by the divine priesthood, and ordained in the clerical service, ought to 
serve only the altar and sacrifices, and to have leisure for prayers and supplications. For it is written: "No 
man that warreth for God entangleth himself with the affairs of this life, that he may please Him to whom he 
has pledged himself."(2) As this is said of all men, how much rather ought those not to be bound by worldly 
anxieties and involvements, who, being busied with divine and spiritual things, are not able to withdraw from 
the Church, and to have leisure for earthly and secular doings! The form of which ordination and 
engagement the Levites formerly observed under the law, so that when the eleven tribes divided the land 
and shared the possessions, the Levitical tribe, which was left free for the temple and the altar, and for the 
divine ministries, received nothing from that portion of the division; but while others cultivated the soil, that 
portion only cultivated the favour of God, and received the tithes from the eleven tribes, for their food and 
maintenance, from the fruits which grew. All which was done by divine authority and arrangement, so that 
they who waited on divine services might in no respect be called away, nor be compelled to consider or to 
transact secular business. Which plan and rule is now maintained in respect of the clergy, that they who are 
promoted by clerical ordination in the Church of the Lord may be called off in no respect from the divine 
administration, nor be tied down by worldly anxieties and matters; but in the honour of the brethren who 
contribute, receiving as it were tenths of the fruits, they may not withdraw from the altars and sacrifices, but 
may serve day and might in heavenly and spiritual things. 

2. The bishops our predecessors religiously considering this, and wholesomely providing for it, decided 
that no brother departing should name a cleric for executor or guardian; and if any one should do this, no 
offering should be made for him, nor any sacrifice be celebrated for his repose. (3) For he does not deserve 
to be named at the altar of God in the prayer of the priests, who has wished to call away the priests and 
ministers from the altar. And therefore, since Victor, contrary to the rule lately made in council by the priests, 
has dared to appoint Geminius Faustinus, a presbyter, his executor, it is not allowed that any offering be 
made by you for his repose, nor any prayer be made in the church in his name, that so the decree of the 
priests, religiously and needfully made, may be kept by us; and, at the same time, an example be given to 
the rest of the brethren, that no one should call away to secular anxieties the priests and ministers of God 
who are occupied with the service of His altar and Church. For care will probably be taken in time to come 
that this happen not with respect to the person of clerics any more, if what has now been done has been 
punished. I bid you, dearest brethren, ever heartily farewell. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE LXVI.-TO 
FATHER STEPHANUS, CONCERNING MARCIANUS OF 
ARLES, WHO HAD JOINED HIMSELF TO NOVATIAN 

I 

EPISTLE LXVI.(4) 

TO FATHER STEPHANUS, CONCERNING MARCIANUS OF ARLES, WHO HAD JOINED 
HIMSELF TO NOVATIAN. 

ARGUMENT. -AS MARCIANUS, BISHOP OF ARLES, WHEN HE FOLLOWED THE SECT OF 
NOVATIAN, HAD SEDUCED MANY, AND BY HIS SCHISM HAD SEPARATED HIMSELF 
FROM THE COMMUNION OF THE REST OF THE BISHOPS, CYPRIAN WARNS 
STEPHANUS, THAT HE SHOULD BY ANNOUNCING THE EXCOMMUNICATION OF THE 
OFFENDER, ALIKE BY ROME AND CARTHAGE, ENABLE THE CHURCH AT ARLES, TO 
ELECT ANOTHER IN HIS PLACE; AND THAT SO PEACE MIGHT BE GRANTED, AS WELL 
TO THE LAPSED AS TO THOSE SEDUCED BY HIM, UPON THEIR REPENTANCE, AND A 
RETURN TO THE CHURCH CONCEDED TO THEM. 

1 . Cyprian to his brotiier Stepiien, greeting. Faustinas our colleague, abiding at Lyons, has once and again 
written to me, dearest brother, informing me of those things which also I certainly know to have been told to 
you, as well by him as by others our fellow-bishops established in the same province, that Marcianus, who 
abides at Aries, has associated himself with Novatian, and has departed from the unity of the Catholic 
Church, and from the agreement of our body and priesthood, holding that most extreme depravity of 
heretical presumption, that the comforts and aids of divine love and paternal tenderness are closed to the 
servants of God who repent, and mourn, and knock at the gate of the Church with tears, and groans, and 
grief; and that those who are wounded are not admitted for the soothing of their wounds, but that, forsaken 
without hope of peace and communion, they must be thrown to become the prey of wolves and the booty of 
the devil; which matter, dearest brother, it is our business to advise for and to aid in, since we who consider 
the divine clemency, and hold the balance in governing the Church, do thus exhibit the rebuke of vigour to 
sinners in such a way as that, nevertheless, we do not refuse the medicine of divine goodness and mercy in 
raising the lapsed and healing the wounded. 

2. Wherefore it behoves you(1) to write a very copious letter to our fellow-bishops appointed in Gaul, not to 
suffer any longer that Marcian, froward and haughty, and hostile to the divine mercy and to the salvation of 
the brotherhood, should insult our assembly, because he does not yet seem to be excommunicated by 
us;(2) in that he now for a long time boasts and announces that, adhering to Novatian, and following his 
frowardness, he has separated himself from our communion; although Novatian himself, whom he follows, 
has formerly been excommunicated, and judged an enemy to the Church; and when he sent ambassadors 
to us into Africa, asking to be received into our communion, he received back word from a council of several 
priests who were here present, that he himself had excluded himself, and could not by any of us be received 
into communion, as he had attempted to erect a profane altar, and to set up an adulterous throne, and to 
offer sacrilegious sacrifices opposed to the true priest; while the Bishop Cornelius was ordained in the 
Catholic Church by the judgment of God, and by the suffrages of the clergy and people. Therefore, if he 
were willing to return to a right mind, and to come to himself, he should repent and return to the Church as a 
suppliant. How vain it is, dearest brother, when Novatian has lately been repulsed and rejected, and 
excommunicated by God's priests throughout the whole world, for us still to suffer his flatterers now to jest 
with us, and to judge of the majesty and dignity of the Church! 

3. Let letters be directed by you into the province and to the people abiding at Aries, by which, Marcian 
being excommunicated, another may be substituted in his place, and Christ's flock, which even to this day is 
contemned as scattered and wounded by him, may be gathered together. Let it suffice that many of our 
brethren have departed in these late years in those parts without peace; and certainly let the rest who 
remain be helped, who groan both day and night, and beseeching the divine and fatherly mercy, entreat the 
comfort of our succour. For, for that reason, dearest brother, the body of priests is abundantly large, joined 
together by the bond of mutual concord, and the link of unity; so that if any one of our college should try to 

originate iieresy, and to lacerate and lay waste Christ's flock, others may help, and as it were, as useful and 
merciful shepherds, gather together the Lord's sheep into the flock. For what if any harbour in the sea shall 
begin to be mischievous and dangerous to ships, by the breach of its defences; do not the navigators direct 
their ships to other neighbouring ports where there is a safe(3) and practicable entrance, and a secure 
station? Or if, on the road, any inn should begin to be beset and occupied by robbers, so that whoever 
should enter would be caught by the attack of those who lie in wait there; do not the travellers, as soon as 
this its character is discovered, seek other houses of entertainment on the road, which shall be safer, where 
the lodging is trustworthy, and the inns safe for the travellers? And this ought now to be the case with us, 
dearest brother,(4) that we should receive to us with ready and kindly humanity our brethren, who, tossed on 
the rocks of Marcian,(5) are seeking the secure harbours of the Church; and that we afford such a place of 
entertainment for the travellers as is that in the Gospel, in which those who are wounded and maimed by 
robbers may be received and cherished, and protected by the host. 

4. For what is a greater or a more worthy care of overseers, than to provide by diligent solicitude and 
wholesome medicine for cherishing and preserving the sheep? since the Lord speaks, and says, "The 
diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up 
that which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought 
that which was lost. And my sheep were scattered because there is no shepherd; and they became meat to 
all the beasts of the field, and none did search or seek after them. Therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold, I 
am against the shepherds, and I will require my flock at their hands, and cause them to cease from feeding 
the flock; neither shall they feed them any more: for I will deliver them from their mouth, and I will feed them 
with judgment."(1) Since therefore the Lord thus threatens such shepherds by whom the Lord's sheep are 
neglected and perish, what else ought we to do, dearest brother, than to exhibit full diligence in gathering 
together and restoring the sheep of Christ, and to apply the medicine of paternal affection to cure the 
wounds of the lapsed, since the Lord also in the Gospel warns, and says, "They that be whole need not a 
physician, but they that are sick?"(2) For although we are many shepherds, yet we feed one flock, (3) and 
ought to collect and cherish all the sheep which Christ by His blood and passion sought for; nor ought we to 
suffer our suppliant and mourning brethren to be cruelly despised and trodden down by the haughty 
presumption of some, since it is written, "But the man that is proud and boastful shall bring nothing at all to 
perfection, who has enlarged his soul as hell. "(4) And the Lord, in His Gospel, blames and condemns men 
of that kind, saying, "Ye are they which justify yourselves before men, but God knoweth your hearts: for that 
which is highly esteemed among men is abomination in the sight Of God. "(5) He says that those are 
execrable and detestable who please themselves, who, swelling and inflated, arrogantly assume anything 
to themselves. Since then Marcian has begun to be of these, and, allying himself with Novatian, has stood 
forth as the opponent of mercy and love, let him not pronounce sentence, but receive it; and let him not so 
act as if he himself were to judge of the college of priests, since he himself is judged by all the priests. 

5. For the glorious honour of our predecessors, the blessed martyrs Cornelius and Lucius, must be 
maintained, whose memory as we hold in honour, much more ought you, dearest brother, to honour and 
cherish with your weight and authority, since you have become their vicar and successor.(6) For they, full of 
the Spirit of God, and established in a glorious martyrdom, judged that peace should be granted to the 
lapsed, and that when penitence was undergone, the reward of peace and communion was not to be 
denied; and this they attested by their letters, and we all everywhere and entirely have judged the same 
thing. For there could not be among us a diverse feeling in whom there was one spirit; and therefore it is 
manifest that he does not hold the truth of the Holy Spirit with the rest, whom we observe to think differently. 
Intimate plainly to us who has been substituted at Aries in the place of Marcian, that we may know to whom 
to direct our brethren, and to whom we ought to write. I bid you, dearest brother, ever heartily farewell. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE LXVII.-TO THE 
CLERGY AND PEOPLE ABIDING IN SPAIN 

A 

EPISTLE LXVII.(7) 

TO THE CLERGY AND PEOPLE ABIDING IN SPAIN, CONCERNING BASILIDES AND 
MARTIAL. 

ARGUMENT. -BASILIDES AND MARTIAL, BISHOPS, HAVING LAPSED AND BECOME 
CONTAMINATED BY THE CERTIFICATES OF IDOLATRY, CYPRIAN WITH HIS 
FELLOW-BISHOPS PRAISES THE CLERGY AND PEOPLE OF SPAIN THAT THEY HAD 
SUBSTITUTED IN THEIR PLACE BY A LEGITIMATE ELECTION SABINUS AND FELIX; 
ESPECIALLY AS, ACCORDING TO THE DECISION OF CORNELIUS AND HIS 
COLLEAGUES, LAPSED BISHOPS MIGHT INDEED BE RECEIVED TO REPENTANCE, BUT 
WERE PROHIBITED FROM THE PRIESTLY HONOUR. MOREOVER, HE ALLUDES BY THE 
WAY TO CERTAIN MATTERS ABOUT THE ANCIENT RITE OF EPISCOPAL ELECTION. 
THE CONTEXT INDICATES THAT THIS WAS WRITTEN DURING THE EPISCOPATE OF 
STEPHEN. 

1. Cyprian, Caecilius, Primus, Polycarp, Nicomedes, Lucilianus, Successus, Sedatus, Fortunatus, Januarius, 
Secundinus, Pomponius, Honora-tus, Victor, Aurelius, Sattius, Petrus, anotiier Januarius, Saturninus, anotiier 
Aurelius, Venantius, Quietus, Rogatianus, Tenax, Felix, Faustinus, Quintus, anotiier Saturninus, Lucius, 
Vincentius, Libosus, Geminius, IVIarcellus, Iambus, Adelphius, Victoricus, and Paulus, to Felix the presbyter, 
and to the peoples abiding at Legio(8) and Asturica,(9) also to Laelius the deacon, and the people abiding 
at Emerita,(10) brethren in the Lord, greeting. When we had come together, dearly beloved brethren, we 
read your letters, which according to the integrity of your faith and your fear of God you wrote to us by Felix 
and Sabinus our fellow-bishops, signifying that Basilides and Martial, being stained with the certificates of 
idolatry, and bound with the consciousness of wicked crimes, ought not to hold the episcopate and 
administer the priesthood of God; and you desired an answer to be written to you again concerning these 
things, and your solicitude, no less just than needful, to be relieved either by the comfort or by the help of our 
judgment. Nevertheless to this your desire not so much our counsels as the divine precepts reply, in which it 
is long since bidden by the voice of Heaven and prescribed by the law of God, who and what sort of 
persons ought to serve the altar and to celebrate the divine sacrifices. For in Exodus God speaks to Moses, 
and warns him, saying, "Let the priests which come near to the Lord God sanctify themselves, lest the Lord 
forsake them."(1) And again: "And when they come near to the altar of the Holy One to minister they shall not 
bring sin upon them, lest they die. "(2) Also in Leviticus the Lord commands and says, "Whosoever hath any 
spot or blemish upon him, shall not approach to offer gifts to God. "(3) 

2. Since these things are announced and are made plain to us, it is necessary that our obedience should 
wait upon the divine precepts; nor in matters of this kind can human indulgence accept any man's person, or 
yield anything to any one, when the divine prescription has interfered, and establishes a law. For we ought 
not to be forgetful what the Lord spoke to the Jews by Isaiah the prophet, rebuking, and indignant that they 
had despised the divine precepts and followed human doctrines. "This people," he says, honoureth me 
with their lips, but their heart is widely removed from me; but in vain do they worship me, teaching the 
doctrines and commandments of men. "(4) This also the Lord repeats in the Gospel, and says, "Ye reject the 
commandment of God, that ye may establish your own tradition. "(5) Having which things before our eyes, 
and solicitously and religiously considering them, we ought in the ordinations of priests to choose none but 
unstained and upright ministers, (6) who, holily and worthily offering sacrifices to God, may be heard in the 
prayers which they make for the safety of the Lord's people, since it is written, "God heareth not a sinner; but 
if any man be a worshipper of God, and doeth His will, him He heareth. "(7) On which account it is fitting, that 
with full diligence and sincere investigation those should be chosen for God's priesthood whom it is 
manifest God will hear. 

3. Nor let the people flatter themselves that they can be free from the contagion of sin, while communicating 
with a priest who is a sinner, and yielding their consent to the unjust and unlawful episcopacy of their 

overseer, when the divine reproof by Hosea the prophet threatens, and says, "Their sacrifices shall be as 
the bread of mourning; all that eat thereof shall be polluted;"(8) teaching manifestly and showing that all are 
absolutely bound to the sin who have been contaminated by the sacrifice of a profane and unrighteous 
priest. Which, moreover, we find to be manifested also in Numbers, when Korah, and Dathan, and Abiram 
Claimed for themselves the power of sacrificing in opposition to Aaron the priest. There also the Lord 
commanded by Moses that the people should be separated from them, lest, being associated with the 
wicked, themselves also should be bound closely in the same wickedness. "Separate yourselves," said 
He, "from the tents of these wicked and hardened men, and touch notthose things which belong to them, lest 
ye perish together in their sins. "(9) On which account a people obedient to the Lord's precepts, and fearing 
God, ought to separate themselves from a sinful prelate, and not to associate themselves with the sacrifices 
of a sacrilegious priest, especially since they themselves have the power either of choosing worthy priests, 
or of rejecting unworthy 
ones. 

4. Which very thing, too, we observe to come from divine authority, that the priest should be chosen in the 
presence of the people under the eyes of all, and should be approved worthy and suitable by public 
judgment and testimony; as in the book of Numbers the Lord commanded Moses, saying, "Take Aaron thy 
brother, and Eleazar his son, and place them in the mount, in the presence of all the assembly, and strip 
Aaron of his garments, and put them upon Eleazar his son; and let Aaron die there, and be added to his 
people. "(10) God commands a priest to be appointed in the presence of all the assembly; that is. He 
instructs and shows that the ordination of priests ought not to be solemnized except with the knowledge of 
the people standing near, that in the presence of the people either the crimes of the wicked may be 
disclosed, or the merits of the good may be declared, and the ordination, which shall have been examined 
by the suffrage and judgment of all, may be just and legitimate. (1 1) And this is subsequently observed, 
according to divine instruction, in the Acts of the Apostles, when Peter speaks to the people of ordaining an 
apostle in the place of Judas. "Peter," it says, "stood up in the midst of the disciples, and the multitude were 
in one place. "(12) Neither do we observe that this was regarded by the apostles only in the ordinations of 
bishops and priests, but also in those of deacons, of which matter itself also it is written in their Acts: "And 
they twelve called together," it says, "the whole congregation of the disciples, and said to them;"(1) which 
was done so diligently and carefully, with the calling together of the whole of the people, surely for this 
reason, that no unworthy person might creep into the ministry of the altar, or to the office of a priest. For that 
unworthy persons are sometimes ordained, not according to the will of God, but according to human 
presumption, and that those things which do not come of a legitimate and righteous ordination are 
displeasing to God, God Himself manifests by Hosea the prophet, saying, "They have set up for 
themselves a king, but not by me. "(2) 

5. For which reason you must diligently observe and keep the practice delivered from divine tradition and 
apostolic observance, which is also maintained among us, and almost throughout all the provinces;(3) that 
for the proper celebration of ordinations all the neighbouring bishops of the same province should 
assemble with that people for which a prelate is ordained. And the bishop should be chosen in the 
presence of the people, who have most fully known the life of each one, and have looked into the doings of 
each one as respects his habitual conduct. And this also, we see, was done by you in the ordination of our 
colleague Sabinus; so that, by the suffrage of the whole brotherhood, (4) and by the sentence of the bishops 
who had assembled in their presence, and who had written letters to you concerning him, the episcopate 
was conferred upon him, and hands were imposed on him in the place of Basilides. Neither can it rescind 
an ordination rightly perfected, that Basilides, after the detection of his crimes, and the baring of his 
conscience even by his own confession, went to Rome and deceived Stephen our colleague, placed at a 
distance, and ignorant of what had been done, and of the truth, to canvass that he might be replaced unjustly 
in the episcopate from which he had been righteously deposed. (5) The result of this is, that the sins of 
Basilides are not so much abolished as enhanced, inasmuch as to his former sins he has also added the 
crime of deceit and circumvention. For he is not so much to be blamed who has been through 
heedlessness surprised by fraud, as he is to be execrated who has fraudulently taken him by surprise. But if 
Basilides could deceive men, he cannot deceive God, since it is written, "God is not mocked. "(6) But neither 
can deceit advantage Martialis, in such a way as that he who also is involved in great crimes should hold 
his bishopric, since the apostle also warns, and says, "A bishop must be blameless, as the steward of 
God. "(7) 

6. Wherefore, since as ye have written, dearly beloved brethren, and as Felix and Sabinus our colleagues 
affirm, and as another Felix of Caesar Augusta, (8) a maintainor of the faith and a defender of the truth, 
signifies in his letter, Basilides and Martialis have been contaminated by the abominable certificate of 
idolatry; and Basilides, moreover, besides the stain of the certificate, when he was prostrate in sickness, 
blasphemed against God, and confessed that he blasphemed; and because of the wound to his own 

conscience, i voluntarily laying down his episcopate, turned I himself to repentance, entreating God, and 
considering himself sufficiently happy if it might be permitted him to communicate even as a layman: 
Martialis also, besides the long frequenting of the disgraceful and filthy banquets of the Gentiles in their 
college, and placing his sons in the same college, after the manner of foreign nations, among profane 
sepulchres, and burying them together with strangers, has also affirmed, by acts which are publicly taken 
before a ducenarian procurator,(9) that he had yielded himself to idolatry, and had denied Christ; and as 
there are many other and grave crimes in which Basilides and Martialis are held to be implicated; such 
persons attempt to claim for themselves the episcopate in vain; since it is evident that men of that kind may 
neither rule over the Church of Christ, nor ought to offer sacrifices to God, especially since Cornelius also, 
our colleague, a peaceable and righteous priest, and moreover honoured by the condescension of the 
Lord with martyrdom, has long ago decreed with us, (10) and with all the bishops appointed throughout the 
whole world, that men of, this sort might indeed be admitted to repentance, but were prohibited from the 
ordination of the clergy, and from the priestly honour. 

7. Nor let it disturb you, dearest brethren, if with some, in these last times, either an uncertain faith is 
wavering, or a fear of God without religion is vacillating, or a peaceable concord does not continue. These 
things have been foretold as about to happen in the end of the world; and it was predicted by the voice of 
the Lord, and by the testimony of the apostles, that now that the world is failing, and the Antichrist is drawing 
near, everything good shall fail, but evil and adverse things shall prosper.(1 1) 

8. Yet although, in these last times, evangelic rigour has not so failed in the Church of God, nor the strength of 
Christian virtue or faith so languished, that there is not left a portion of the priests which in no respect gives 
way under these ruins of things and wrecks of faith; but, bold and stedfast, they maintain the honour of the 
divine majesty and the priestly dignity, with full observance of fear. We remember and keep in view that, 
although others succumbed and yielded, Mattathias boldly vindicated God's law; that Ellas, when the Jews 
gave way and departed from the divine religion, stood and nobly contended; that Daniel, deterred neither 
by the loneliness of a foreign country nor by the harassment of continual persecution, frequently and 
gloriously suffered martyrdoms; also that the three youths, subdued neither by their tender years(1) nor by 
threats, stood up faithfully against the Babylonian fires, and conquered the victor king even in their very 
captivity itself. Let the number either of prevaricators or of traitors see to it, who have now begun to rise in the 
Church against the Church, and to corrupt as well the faith as the truth. Among very many there still remains a 
sincere mind and a substantial religion, and a spirit devoted to nothing but the Lord and its God. (2) Nor does 
the perfidy of others press down the Christian faith into ruin, but rather stimulates and exalts it to glory, 
according to what the blessed Apostle Paul exhorts, and says: "For what if some of these have fallen from 
their faith: hath their unbelief made the faith of God of none effect? God forbid. For God is true, but every man 
a liar."(3) But if every man is a liar, and God only true, what else ought we, the servants, and especially the 
priests, of God, to do, than forsake human errors and lies, and continue in the truth of God, keeping the 
Lord's precepts? 

9. Wherefore, although there have been found: some among our colleagues, dearest brethren, who think 
that the godly discipline may be neglected, and who rashly hold communion with Basilides and Martialis, 
such a thing as this ought not to trouble our faith, since the Holy Spirit threatens such in the Psalms, saying, 
"But thou hatest instruction, and castedst my words behind thee: when thou sawest a thief, thou consentedst 
unto him, and hast been partaker with adulterers. "(4) He shows that they become sharers and partakers of 
other men's sins who are associated with the delinquents. And besides, Paul the apostle writes, and says 
the same thing: "Whisperers, backbiters, haters of God, injurious, proud, boasters of themselves, inventors 
of evil things, who, although they knew the judgment of God, did not understand that they which commit such 
things are worthy of death, not only they which commit those things, but they also which consent unto those 
who do these things. "(5) Since they, says he, who do such things are worthy of death, he makes manifest 
and proves that not only they are worthy of death, and come into punishment who do evil things, but also 
those who consent unto those who do such things-who, while they are mingled in unlawful communion with 
the evil and sinners, and the unrepenting, are polluted by the contact of the guilty, and, being joined in the 
fault, are thus not separated in its penalty. For which reason we not only approve, but applaud, dearly 
beloved brethren, the religious solicitude of your integrity and faith, and exhort you as much as we can by 
our letters, not to mingle in sacrilegious communion with profane and polluted priests, but maintain the 
sound and sincere constancy of your faith with religious fear. I bid you, dearest brethren, ever heartily 
farewell. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE LXVIII.-TO 
FLORENTIUS PUPIANUS, ON CALUMNIATORS 

EPISTLE LXVIII.(6) 

TO FLORENTIUS PUPIANUS, ON CALUMNIATORS. 

ARGUMENT. --CYPRIAN CLEARS HIMSELF IN THE EYES OF FLORENTIUS PUPIANUS 
FROM VARIOUS CRIMES OF WHICH HE IS ACCUSED BY HIM; AND ARGUES THE 
LIGHTNESS OF HIS MIND, IN THAT HE HAS SO HASTILY TRUSTED CALUMNIATORS. 

1. Cyprian, who is also called Thascius,(7) to Florentius, who is also Pupianus, his brother, greeting. I had 
believed, brother, that you were now at length turned to repentance for having either rashly heard or 
believed in time past things so wicked, so disgraceful, so execrable even among Gentiles, concerning me. 
But even now in your letter I perceive that you are still the same as you were before-that you believe the 
same things concerning me, and that you persist in what you did believe, and, lest by chance the dignity of 
your eminence and your martyrdom should be stained by communion with me, that you are inquiring 
carefully into my character; and after God the Judge who makes priests, that you wish to judge-l will not say 
of me, for what am l?-but of the judgment of God and of Christ. This is not to believe in God-this is to stand 
forth as a rebel against Christ and His Gospel; so that although He says, "Are not two sparrows sold for a 
farthing? and neither of them falls to the ground without the will of my Father,"(1) and His majesty and truth 
prove that even things of little consequence are not done without the consciousness and permission of God, 
you think that God's priests are ordained in the Church without His knowledge. For to believe that they who 
are ordained are unworthy and unchaste, what else is it than to believe that his priests are not appointed in 
the Church by God, nor through God? 

2. Think you that my testimony of myself is better than that of God? when the Lord Himself teaches, and says 
that testimony is not true, if any one himself appears as a witness concerning himself, for the reason that 
every one would assuredly favour himself. Nor would any one put forward mischievous and adverse things 
against himself, but there may be a simple confidence of truth if, in what was announced of us, another is the 
announcer and witness. "If," He says, "I bear witness of myself, my testimony is not true; but there is another 
who beareth witness of me. "(2) but if the Lord Himself, who will by and by judge all things, was unwilling to be 
believed on His own testimony, but preferred to be approved by the judgment and testimony of God the 
Father, how much more does it be-hove His servants to observe this, who are not only approved by, but 
even glory in the judgment and testimony of God! But with you the fabrication of hostile and malignant men 
has prevailed against the divine decree, and against our conscience resting upon the strength of its faith, as 
if among lapsed and profane persons placed outside the Church, from whose breasts the Holy Spirit has 
departed, there could be anything else than a depraved mind and a deceitful tongue, and venomous 
hatred, and sacrilegious lies, which whosoever believes, must of necessity be found with them when the day 
of judgment shall come. 

3. But with respect to what you have said, that priests should be lowly, because both the Lord and His 
apostles were lowly; both all the brethren and Gentiles also well know and love my humility; and you also 
knew and loved it while you were still in the Church, and were in communion with me. But which of us is far 
from humility: I, who daily serve the brethren, and kindly receive with good-will and gladness every one that 
comes to the Church; or you, who appoint yourself bishop of a bishop, and judge of a judge, (3) given for the 
time by God? Although the Lord God says in Deuteronomy, "And the man that will do presumptuously, and 
will not hearken unto the priests or unto the judge who shall be in those days, even that man shall die; and all 
the people, when they hear, shall fear, and do no more presumptuously. "(4) And again He speaks to 
Samuel, and says, "They have not despised thee, but they have despised me. "(5) And moreover the Lord, 
in the Gospel, when it was said to Him, "Answerest thou the high priest so?" guarding the priestly dignity, and 
teaching that it ought to be maintained, would say nothing against the high priest, but only clearing His own 
innocence, answered, saying, "If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil; but if well, why smitestthou 
me?"(6) The blessed apostle also, when it was said to him, "Revilest thou God's high priest?" spoke 
nothing reproachfully against the priest, when he might have lifted up himself boldly against those who had 

crucified tiie Lord, and wiio iiad already sacrificed God and Ciirist, and tiie temple and the priesthood; but 
even although in false and degraded priests, considering still the mere empty shadow of the priestly name, 
he said, "I wist not, brethren, that he was the high priest; for it is written. Thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of 
thy people."(7) 

4. Unless perchance I was a priest to you before the persecution, when you held communion with me, and 
ceased to be a priest after the persecution! For the persecution, when it came, lifted you to the highest 
sublimity of martyrdom. But it depressed me with the burden of proscription, since it was publicly declared, 
"If any one holds or possesses any of the property of Caecilius Cyprian, bishop of the Christians;" so that 
even they who did not believe in God appointing a bishop, could still believe in the devil proscribing a 
bishop. Nor do I boast of these things, but with grief I bring them forward, since you constitute yourself a 
judge(3) of God and of Christ, who says to the apostles, and thereby to all chief rulers, who by vicarious 
ordination succeed to the apostles: "He that heareth you, heareth me; and he that heareth me, heareth Him 
that sent me; and he that despiseth you, despiseth me, and Him that sent me. "(8) 

5. For from this have arisen, and still arise, schisms and heresies, in that the bishop who is one(9) and rules 
over the Church is contemned by the haughty presumption of some persons; and the man who is honoured 
by God's condescension, is judged unworthy by men. For what swelling of pride is this, what arrogance of 
soul, what inflation of mind, to call prelates and priests to one's own recognition, and unless I may be 
declared clear in your sight and absolved by your judgment, behold now for six years the brotherhood has 
neither had a bishop, nor the people a prelate, (1) nor the flock a pastor, nor the Church a governor, nor 
Christ a representative, (2) nor God a priest! Pupianus must come to the rescue, and give judgment, and 
declare the decision of God and Christ accepted, that so great a number of the faithful who have been 
summoned away, under my rule, may not appear to have departed without hope of salvation and of peace; 
that the new crowd of believers may not be considered to have failed of attaining any grace of baptism and 
the Holy Spirit by my ministry;(3) that the peace conferred upon so many lapsed and penitent persons, and 
the communion vouchsafed by my examination, may not be abrogated by the authority of your judgment. 
Condescend for once, and deign to pronounce concerning us, and to establish our episcopate by the 
authority of your recognition, that God and His Christ may thank you, in that by your means a representative 
and ruler has been restored as well to their altar as to their people. 

6. Bees have a king, and cattle a leader, and they keep faith to him. Robbers obey their chief with an 
obedience full of humility. How much more simple and better than you are the brute cattle and dumb 
animals, and robbers, although bloody, and raging among swords and weapons! The chief among them is 
acknowledged and feared, whom no divine judgment has appointed, but on whom an abandoned faction 
and a guilty band have agreed. 

7. You say, indeed, that the scruple into which you have fallen ought to be taken from your mind. You have 
fallen into it, but it was by your irreligious credulity. You have fallen into it, but it was by your own sacrilegious 
disposition and will in easily hearkening to unchaste, to impious, to unspeakable things against your 
brother, against a priest, and in willingly believing them in defending other men's falselhoods, as if they were 
your own and your private property; and in not remembering that it is written, "Hedge thine ears with thorns, 
and hearken not to a wicked tongue;"(4) and again: "A wicked doer giveth heed to the tongue of the unjust; 
but a righteous man regards not lying lips. "(5) Wherefore have not the martyrs fallen into this scruple, full of 
the Holy Ghost, and already by their passion near to the presence of God and of His Christ; martyrs who, 
from their dungeon, directed letters to Cyprian the bishop, acknowledging the priest of God, and bearing 
witness to him? Wherefore have not so many bishops, my colleagues, fallen into this scruple, who either, 
when they departed from the midst of us, were proscribed, or being taken were cast into prison and were in 
chains; or who, sent away into exile, have gone by an illustrious road to the Lord; or who in some places, 
condemned to death, have received heavenly crowns from the glorification of the Lord? Wherefore have not 
they fallen into this scruple, from among that people of ours which is with us, and is by God's condescension 
committed to us-so many confessors who have been put to the question and tortured, and glorious by the 
memory of illustrious wounds and scars; so many chaste virgins, so many praiseworthy widows; finally, all 
the churches throughout the whole world who are associated with us in the bond of unity? Unless all these, 
who are in communion with me, as you have written, are polluted with the pollution of my lips, and have lost 
the hope of eternal life by the contagion of my communion. (6) Pupianus alone, sound, inviolate, holy, 
modest, who would not associate himself with us, shall dwell alone in paradise and in the kingdom of 
heaven. 

8. You have written also, that on my account the Church has now a portion of herself in a state of dispersion, 
although the whole people of the Church are collected, and united, and joined to itself in an undivided 
concord: they alone have remained without, who even, if they had been within, would have had to be cast 
out. Nor does the Lord, the protector of His people, and their guardian, suffer the wheat to be snatched from 
His floor; but the chaff alone can be separated from the Church, since also the apostle says, "For what if 

some of them have departed from the faith? shall their unbelief make the faith of God of none effect? God 
forbid; for God is true, but every man a liar."(7) And the Lord also in the Gospel, when disciples forsook Him 
as He spoke, turning to the twelve, said, "Will ye also go away?" then Peter answered Him, "Lord, to whom 
shall we go? Thou hast the word of eternal life; and we believe, and are sure, that Thou art the Son of the 
living God. "(8) Peter speaks there, on whom the Church was to be built,(9) teaching and showing in the name 
of the Church, that although a rebellious and arrogant multitude of those who will not hear and obey may 
depart, yet the Church does not depart from Christ; and they are the Church who are a people united to the 
priest, and the flock which adheres to its pastor.(3) Whence you ought to know that the bishop is in the 
Church, and the Church in the bishop;(1) and if any one be not with the bishop, that he is not in the Church, 
and that those flatter themselves in vain who creep in, not having peace with God's priests, and think that 
they communicate secretly with some; while the Church, which is Catholic and one, is not cut nor divided, but 
is indeed connected and bound together by the cement of priests who cohere with one another. 

9. Wherefore, brother, if you consider God's majesty who ordains priests, if you will for once have respect to 
Christ, who by His decree and word, and by His presence, both rules prelates themselves, and rules the 
Church by prelates; if you will trust, in respect of the innocence of bishops, not human hatred, but the divine 
judgment; if you will begin even a late repentance for your temerity, and pride, and insolence; if you will most 
abundantly make satisfaction to God and His Christ whom I serve, and to whom with pure and unstained lips 
I ceaselessly offer sacrifices, not only in peace, but in persecution; we may have some ground for 
communion with you, even although there still remain among us respect and fear for the divine censure; so 
that first I should consult my Lord whether He would permit peace to be granted to you, and you to be 
received to the communion of His Church by His own showing and admonition. 

10. For I remember what has already been manifested to me, nay, what has been prescribed by the 
authority of our Lord and God to an obedient and fearing servant; and among other things which He 
condescended to show and to reveal. He also added this: "Whoso therefore does not believe Christ, who 
maketh the priest, shall hereafter begin to believe Him who avengeth the priest." Although I know that to 
some men dreams seem ridiculous and visions foolish, yet assuredly it is to such as would rather believe in 
opposition to the priest, than believe the priest. But it is no wonder, since his brethren said of Joseph, 
"Behold, this dreamer cometh; come now therefore, let us slay him. "(2) And afterwards the dreamer attained 
to what he had dreamed; and his slayers and sellers were put to confusion, so that they, who at first did not 
believe the words, afterwards believed the deeds. But of those things that you have done, either in 
persecution or in peace, it is foolish for me to pretend to judge you, since you rather appoint yourself a 
judge over us. These things, of the pure conscience of my mind, and of my confidence in my Lord and my 
God, I have written at length. You have my letter, and I yours. In the day of judgment, before the tribunal of 
Christ, both will be read. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLES LXIX TO 
LXXIV.-CONCERNING THE BAPTISM OF HERETICS 

^ 

EPISTLE LXIX.(3) 

TO JANUARIUS AND OTHER NUMIDIAN BISHOPS, ON BAPTIZING HERETICS. 

ARGUMENT. --THE ARGUMENT OF THIS LETTER AND THE NEXT IS FOUND IN A 
SUBSEQUENT EPISTLE TO STEPHEN;(4) "THAT WHAT HERETICS USE IS NOT 
BAPTISM; AND THAT NONE AMONG THEM CAN RECEIVE BENEFIT BY THE GRACE OF 
CHRIST, WHO OPPOSE CHRIST; HAS BEEN LATELY CAREFULLY EXPRESSED IN A 
LETTER WHICH WAS WRITTEN ON THAT SUBJECT TO QUINTUS, OUR COLLEAGUE, 
ESTABLISHED IN MAURITANIA; AS ALSO IN A LETTER WHICH OUR COLLEAGUES 
PREVIOUSLY WROTE TO THE BISHOPS PRESIDING IN NUMIDIA; OF BOTH OF WHICH 
LETTERS I HAVE SUBJOINED COPIES. "(5) 

1. Cyprian, Liberalis, Caldonius, Junius, Primus, Caecilius, Potycarp, Nicomedes, Felix, IVIarrutius, 
Successus, Lucianus, Honoratus, Fortu-natus, Victor, Donatus, Lucius, Herculanus, Pomponius, Demetrius, 
Quintus, Saturninus Januarius, IVIarcus, anotiier Saturninus, anotiier Donatus, Rogatianus, Sedatus, 
Tertullus, Hortensianus, still another Saturninus, Sattius, to their brethren Januarius, Saturninus, Maximus, 
Victor, another Victor, Cassius, Proculus, Modianus, Cittinus, Gargilius, Eutycianus, another Gargilius, 
another Saturninus, Nemesianus, Nampulus, Antonianus, Rogatianus, Honoratus, greeting. When we were 
together in council, dearest brethren, we read your letter which you wrote to us concerning those who seem 
to be baptized by heretics and schismatics, (asking) whether, when the), come to the Catholic Church, which 
is one, (6) they ought to be baptized. On which matter, although you yourselves hold thereupon the truth and 
certainty of the Catholic rule, yet since you have thought that of our mutual love we ought to be consulted, we 
put forward our opinion, not as a new one, (7) but we join with you in equal agreement, in an opinion long 
since decreed by our predecessors, and observed by us, -judging, namely, and holding it for certain that no 
one can be baptized abroad outside the Church, since there is one baptism appointed in the holy Church. 
And it is written in the words of the Lord, "They have forsaken me, the fountain of living waters, and hewed 
them out broken cisterns, which can hold no water."(1) And again, sacred Scripture warns, and says, "Keep 
thee from the strange water, and drink not from a fountain of strange water."(2) It is required, then, that the 
water should first be cleansed and sanctified by the priest,(3) that it may wash away by its baptism the sins 
of the man who is baptized; because the Lord says by Ezekiel the prophet: "Then will I sprinkle clean water 
upon you, and ye shall be cleansed from all your filthiness; and from all your idols will I cleanse you: a new 
heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you. "(4) But how can he cleanse and sanctify the 
water who is himself unclean, and in whom the Holy Spirit is not? since the Lord says in the book of 
Numbers, "And whatsoever the unclean person toucheth shall be unclean. "(5) Or how can he who baptizes 
give to another remission of sins who himself, being outside the Church, cannot put away his own sins? 

2. But, moreover, the very interrogation which is put in baptism is a witness of the truth. For when we say, 
"Dost thou believe in eternal life and remission of sins through the holy Church?" we mean that remission of 
sins is not granted except in the Church, and that among heretics, where there is no Church, sins cannot be 
put away. Therefore they who assert that heretics can baptize, must either change the interrogation or 
maintain the truth; unless indeed they attribute a church also to those who, they contend, have baptism. It is 
also necessary that he should be anointed who is baptized; so that, having received the chrism, (6) that is, 
the anointing, he may be anointed of God, and have in him the grace of Christ. Further, it is the Eucharist 
whence the baptized are anointed with the oil sanctified on the altar.(7) But he cannot sanctify the creature of 
oil, (8) who has neither an altar nor a church; whence also there can be no spiritual anointing among heretics, 
since it is manifest that the oil cannot be sanctified nor the Eucharist celebrated at all among them. But we 
ought to know and remember that it is written, "Let not the oil of a sinner anoint my head, "(9) which the Holy 
Spirit before forewarned in the Psalms, lest any one going out of the way and wandering from the path of 
truth should be anointed by heretics and adversaries of Christ. Besides, what prayer can a priest who is 
impious and a sinner offer for a baptized person? since it is written, "God heareth not a sinner; but if any man 

be a worshipper of God, and doeth His will, him He heareth."(1 0) Who, moreover, can give what he himself 
has not? or how can he discharge spiritual functions who himself has lost the Holy Spirit? And therefore he 
must be baptized and renewed who comes untrained to the Church, that he may be sanctified within by 
those who are holy, since it is written, "Be ye holy, for I am holy, saith the Lord."(1 1) So that he who has been 
seduced into error, and baptized(12) outside of the Church, should lay aside even this very thing in the true 
and ecclesiastical baptism, viz., that he a man coming to God, while he seeks for a priest, fell by the deceit 
of error upon a profane one. 

3. But it is to approve the baptism of heretics and schismatics, to admit that they have truly baptized. For 
therein a part cannot be void, and part be valid. If one could baptize, he could also give the Holy Spirit. But if 
he cannot give the Holy Spirit, because he that is appointed without is not endowed with the Holy Spirit, he 
cannot baptize those who come; since both baptism is one and the Holy Spirit is one, and the Church 
founded by Christ the Lord upon Peter, by a source and principle of unity, (13) is one also. Hence it results, 
that since with them all things are futile and false, nothing of that which they have done ought to be approved 
by us. For what can be ratified and established by God which is done by them whom the Lord calls His 
enemies and adversaries? setting forth in His Gospel, "He that is not with me is against me; and he that 
gathereth not with me, scattereth."(14) And the blessed Apostle John also, keeping the commandments and 
precepts of the Lord, has laid it down in his epistle, and said, "Ye have heard that antichrist shall come: even 
now there are many Antichrists; whereby we know that it is the last time. They went out from us, but they were 
not of us; for if they had been of us, no doubt they would have continued with us."(1 5) Whence we also ought 
to gather and consider whether they who are the Lord's adversaries, and are called antichrists, can give the 
grace of Christ. Wherefore we who are with the Lord, and maintain the unity of the Lord, and according to His 
condescension administer His priesthood in the Church, ought to repudiate and reject and regard as 
profane whatever His adversaries and the antichrists do; and to those who, coming out of error and 
wickedness, acknowledge the true faith of the one Church, we should give the truth both of unity and faith, by 
means of all the sacraments of divine grace. (1) We bid you, dearest brethren, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE LXX.(2) 

TO QUINTUS, CONCERNING THE BAPTISM OF HERETICS. 

ARGUMENT. --AN ANSWER IS GIVEN TO QUINTUS A BISHOP IN MAURITANIA, WHO HAS 
ASKED ADVICE CONCERNING THE BAPTISM OF HERETICS. 

1. Cyprian to Quintus his brother, greeting. Lucian, our co-presbyter, has reported to me, dearest brother, that 
you have wished me to declare to you what I think concerning those who seem to have been baptized by 
heretics and schismatics; of which matter, that you may know what several of us fellow-bishops, with the 
brother presbyters who were present, lately determined in council, I have sent you a copy of the same 
epistle. For I know not by what presumption some of our colleagues(3) are led to think that they who have 
been dipped by heretics ought not to be baptized when they come to us, for the reason that they say that 
there is one baptism which indeed is therefore one, because the Church is one, and there cannot be any 
baptism out of the Church. (4) For since there cannot be two baptisms, if heretics truly baptize, they 
themselves have this baptism. And he who of his own authority grants this advantage to them yields and 
consents to them, that the enemy and adversary of Christ should seem to have the power of washing, and 
purifying, and sanctifying a man. But we say that those who come thence are not re-baptized among us, but 
are baptized. For indeed they do not receive anything there, where there is nothing; but they come to us, that 
here they may receive where there is both grace and all truth, because both grace and truth are one. But 
again some of our colleagues(3) would rather give honour to heretics than agree with us; and while by the 
assertion of one baptism they are unwilling to baptize those that come, they thus either themselves make 
two baptisms in saying that there is a baptism among heretics; or certainly, which is a matter of more 
importance, they strive to set before and prefer the sordid and profane washing of heretics to the true and 
only and legitimate baptism of the Catholic Church, not considering that it is written, "He who is baptized by 
one dead, what availeth his washing?"(5) Now it is manifest that they who are not in the Church of Christ are 
reckoned among the dead; and another cannot be made alive by him who himself is not alive, since there is 
one Church which, having attained the grace of eternal life, both lives for ever and quickens the people of 
God. 

2. And they say that in this matter they follow ancient custom;(6) although among the ancients these were as 
yet the first beginnings of heresy and schisms, so that those were involved in them who departed from the 
Church, having first been baptized therein; and these, therefore, when they returned to the Church and 
repented, it was not necessary to baptize. Which also we observe in the present day, that it is sufficient to 

lay hands for repentance upon those who are known to have been baptized in the Church, and have gone 
over from us to the heretics, if, subsequently acknowledging their sin and putting away their error, they return 
to the truth and to their parent; so that, because it had been a sheep, the Shepherd may receive into His fold 
the estranged and vagrant sheep. But if he who comes from the heretics has not previously been baptized 
in the Church, but comes as a stranger and entirely profane, he must be baptized, that he may become a 
sheep, because in the holy Church is the one water which makes sheep. And therefore, because there can 
be nothing common to falsehood and truth, to darkness and light, to death and immortality, to Antichrist and 
Christ, we ought by all means to maintain the unity of the Catholic Church, and not to give way to the enemies 
of faith and truth in any respect. 

3. Neither must we prescribe this from custom, but overcome opposite custom by reason. For neither did 
Peter, whom first the Lord chose, and upon whom He built His Church, when Paul disputed with him 
afterwards about circumcision, claim anything to himself insolently, nor arrogantly assume anything; so as to 
say that he held the primacy, (7) and that he ought rather to be obeyed by novices and those lately come. (8) 
Nor did he despise Paul because he had previously been a persecutor of the Church, but admitted the 
counsel of truth, and easily yielded to the lawful reason which Paul asserted, furnishing thus an illustration to 
us both of concord and of patience, that we should not obstinately love our own opinions, but should rather 
adopt as our own those which at any time are usefully and wholesomely suggested by our brethren and 
colleagues, if they be true and lawful. Paul, moreover, looking forward to this, and consulting faithfully for 
concord and peace, has laid down in his epistle this rule: "Moreover, let the prophets speak two or three, 
and let the rest judge. But if anything be revealed to another that sitteth by, let the first hold his peace. "(1) In 
which place he has taught and shown that many things are revealed to individuals for the better, and that 
each one ought not obstinately to contend for that which he had once imbibed and held; but if anything has 
appeared better and more useful, he should gladly embrace it. For we are not overcome when better things 
are presented to us, but we are instructed, especially in those matters which pertain to the unity of the Church 
and the truth of our hope and faith; so that we, priests of God and prelates of His Church, by His 
condescension, should know that remission of sins cannot be given save in the Church, nor can the 
adversaries of Christ claim to themselves anything belonging to His grace. 

4. Which thing, indeed, Agrippinus also, a man of worthy memory, with his other fellow-bishops, who at that 
time governed the Lord's Church in the province of Africa and Numidia, decreed, and by the well-weighed 
examination of the common council established: whose opinion, as being both religious and lawful and 
salutary, and in harmony with the Catholic faith and Church, we also have followed. (2) And that you may 
know what kind of letters we have written on this subject, I have transmitted for our mutual love a copy of 
them, as well for your own information as for that of our fellow-bishops who are in those parts. I bid you, 
dearest brother, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE LXXI.(3) 

TO STEPHEN, CONCERNING A COUNCIL. 

ARGUMENT. --CYPRIAN WITH HIS COLLEAGUES IN A CERTAIN COUNCIL TELLS 
STEPHEN, THE ROMAN BISHOP, THAT IT HAD BEEN DECREED BY THEM, BOTH THAT 
THOSE WHO RETURNED FROM HERESY INTO THE CHURCH SHOULD BE BAPTIZED, 
AND THAT BISHOPS OR PRIESTS COMING FROM THE HERETICS SHOULD BE 
RECEIVED ON NO OTHER CONDITION, THAN THAT THEY SHOULD COMMUNICATE AS 
LAY PEOPLE. A. D. 255. 

1 . Cyprian and others, to Stephen their brother, greeting. We have thought it necessary for the arranging of 
certain matters, dearest brother, and for their investigation by the examination of a common council, to 
gather together and to hold a council, at which many priests were assembled at once; at which, moreover, 
many things were brought forward and transacted. But the subject in regard to which we had chiefly to write 
to you, and to confer with your gravity and wisdom, is one that more especially pertains both to the priestly 
authority and to the unity, as well as the dignity, of the Catholic Church, arising as these do from the 
ordination of the divine appointment; to wit, that those who have been dipped abroad outside the Church, 
and have been stained among heretics and schismatics with the taint of profane water, when they come to 
us and to the Church which is one, ought to be baptized, for the reason that it is a small matter(4) to "lay 
hands on them that they may receive the Holy Ghost," unless they receive also the baptism of the Church. 
For then finally can they be fully sanctified, and be the sons of God, if they be born of each sacrament;(5) 

since it is written, "Except a man be born again of water, and of tiie Spirit, lie cannot enter into tiie l<ingdom of 
God. "(6) For we find also, in tiie Acts of tiie Apostles, that this is maintained by the apostles, and kept in the 
truth of the saving faith, so that when, in the house of Cornelius the centurion, the Holy Ghost had descended 
upon the Gentiles who were there, fervent in the warmth of their faith, and believing in the Lord with their whole 
heart; and when, filled with the Spirit, they blessed God in divers tongues, still none the less the blessed 
Apostle Peter, mindful of the divine precept and the Gospel, commanded that those same men should be 
baptized who had already been filled with the Holy Spirit, that nothing might seem to be neglected to the 
observance by the apostolic instruction in all things of the law of the divine precept and Gospel. (7) But that 
that is not baptism which the heretics use; and that none of those who oppose Christ can profit by the grace 
of Christ; has lately been set forth with care in the letter which was written on that subject to Quintus, our 
colleague, established in Mauritania; as also in a letter which our colleagues previously wrote to our 
fellow-bishops presiding in Numidia, of both which letters I have subjoined copies. 

2. We add, however, and connect with what we have said, dearest brother, with common consent and 
authority, that if, again, any presbyters or deacons, who either have been before ordained in the Catholic 
Church, and have subsequently stood forth as traitors and rebels against the Church, or who have been 
promoted among the heretics by a profane ordination by the hands of false bishops and antichrists contrary 
to the appointment of Christ, and have attempted to offer; in opposition to the one and divine altar, false and 
sacrilegious sacrifices without, that these also be received when they return, on this condition, that they 
communicate as laymen, and hold it to be enough that they should be received to peace, after having stood 
forth as enemies of peace; and that they ought not, on returning, to retain those arms of ordination and 
honour with which they rebelled against us. For it behoves priests and ministers, who wait upon the altar and 
sacrifices, to be sound and stainless; since the Lord God speaks in Leviticus, and says, "No man that hath a 
stain or a blemish shall come nigh to offer gifts to the Lord."(1) Moreover, in Exodus, He prescribes this 
same thing, and says, "And let the priests which come near to the Lord God sanctify themselves, lest the 
Lord forsake them. "(2) And again: "And when they come near to minister at the altar of the holy place, they 
shall not bear iniquity upon them, lest they die. "(3) But what can be greater iniquity, or what stain can be 
more odious, than to have stood in opposition to Christ; than to have scattered His Church, which He 
purchased and founded with His blood; than, unmindful of evangelical peace and love, to have fought with 
the madness of hostile discord against the unanimous and accordant people of God? Such as these, 
although they themselves return to the Church, still cannot restore and recall with them those who, seduced 
by them, and forestalled by death without, have perished outside the Church without communion and peace; 
whose souls in the day of judgment shall be required at the hands of those who have stood forth as the 
authors and leaders of their ruin. And therefore to such, when they return, it is sufficient that pardon should be 
granted; since perfidy ought certainly not to receive promotion in the household of faith. For what do we 
reserve for the good and innocent, and those who do not depart from the Church, if we honour those who 
have departed from us, and stood in opposition to the Church? 

3. We have brought these things, dearest brother, to your knowledge, for the sake of our mutual honour and 
sincere affection; believing that, according to the truth of your religion and faith, those things which are no 
less religious than true will be approved by you. But we know that some will not lay aside what they have 
once imbibed, and do not easily change their purpose; but, keeping fast the bond of peace and concord 
among their colleagues, retain certain things peculiar to themselves, which have once been adopted 
among them. In which behalf we neither do violence to, nor impose a law upon, any one, since each prelate 
has in the administration of the Church the exercise of his will free, as he shall give an account of his conduct 
to the Lord. (4) We bid you, dearest brother, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE LXXII.(5) 

TO JUBAIANUS, CONCERNING THE BAPTISM OF HERETICS. 

ARGUMENT. --CYPRIAN REFUTES A LETTER ENCLOSED TO HIM BY JUBAIANUS, AND 
WITH THE GREATEST CARE COLLECTS WHATEVER HE THINKS WILL AVAIL FOR THE 
DEFENCE OF HIS CAUSE. MOREOVER, HE SENDS JUBAIANUS A COPY OF THE LETTER 
TO THE NUMIDIANS AND TO QUINTUS, AND PROBABLY THE DECREES OF THE LAST 
SYNOD. (6) 

1 . Cyprian to Jubaianus his brother, greeting. You have written to me, dearest brother, wishing that the 
impression of my mind should be signified to you, as to what I think concerning the baptism of heretics; who, 
placed without, and established outside the Church, arrogate to themselves a matter neither within their right 
nor their power. This baptism we cannot consider as valid or legitimate, since it is manifestly unlawful 

among them; and since we have already expressed in our letters what we thought on this matter, I have, as 
a compendious method, sent you a copy of the same letters, what we decided in council when very many of 
us were present, and what, moreover, I subsequently wrote back to Quintus, our colleague, when he asked 
about the same thing. And now also, when we had met together, bishops as well of the province of Africa as 
of Numidia, to the number of seventy-one, we established this same matter once more(7) by our judgment, 
deciding that there is one baptism which is appointed in the Catholic Church; and that by this those are not 
re-baptized, but baptized by us, who at any time come from the adulterous and unhallowed water to be 
washed and sanctified by the truth of the saving water. 

2. Nor does what you have described in your letters disturb us, dearest brother, that the Novarians 
re-baptize those whom they entice from us, since it does not in any wise matter to us what the enemies of the 
Church do, so long as we ourselves hold a regard for our power, and the stedfastness of reason and truth. 
For Novatian, after the manner of apes-which, although they are not men, yet imitate human doings-wishes 
to claim to himself the authority and truth of the Catholic Church, while he himself is not in the Church; nay, 
moreover, has stood forth hitherto as a rebel and enemy against the Church. For, knowing that there is one 
baptism, he arrogates to himself this one, so that he may say that the Church is with him, and make us 
heretics. But we who hold the head and root(1) of the one Church know, and trust for certain, that nothing is 
lawful there outside the Church, and that the baptism which is one(2) is among us, where he himself also was 
formerly baptized, when he maintained both the wisdom and truth of the divine unity. But if Novatian thinks 
that those who have been baptized in the Church are to be re-baptized outside-without the Church-he ought 
to begin by himself, that he might first be re-baptized with an extraneous and heretical baptism, since he 
thinks that after the Church, yea, and contrary to the Church, people are to be baptized without. But what sort 
of a thing is this, that, because Novatian dares to do this thing, we are to think that we must not do it! What 
then? Because Novatian also usurps the honour of the priestly throne, ought we therefore to renounce our 
throne? Or because Novatian endeavours wrongfully to set up an altar and to offer sacrifices, does it 
behove us to cease from our altar and sacrifices, lest we should appear to be celebrating the same or like 
things with him? Utterly vain and foolish is it, that because Novatian arrogates to himself outside the Church 
the image of the truth, we should forsake the truth of the Church. 

3. But among us it is no new or sudden thing for us to judge that those are to be baptized who come to the 
Church from among the heretics, since it is now many years and a long time ago, that, under Agrippinus-a 
man of worthy memory-very many bishops assembling together have decided this;(3) and thenceforward 
until the present day, so many thousands of heretics in our provinces have been converted to the Church, 
and have neither despised nor delayed, nay, they have both reasonably and gladly embraced, the 
opportunity to attain the grace of the life-giving layer and of saving baptism. For it is not difficult for a teacher 
to insinuate true and lawful things into his mind, who, having condemned heretical pravity, and discovered 
the truth of the Church, comes for this purpose, that he may learn, and learns for the purpose that he may live. 
We ought not to increase the stolidity of heretics by the patronage of our consent, when they gladly and 
readily obey the truth. 

4. Certainly, since I found in the letter the copy of which you transmitted to me, that it was written, "That it 
should not be asked who baptized, since he who is baptized might receive remission of sins according to 
what he believed," I thought that this topic was not to be passed by, especially since I observed in the same 
epistle that mention was also made of Marcion, saying that "even those that came from him did not need to 
be baptized, because they seemed to have been already baptized in the name of Jesus Christ." Therefore 
we ought to consider their faith who believe without, whether in respect of the same faith they can obtain any 
grace. For if we and heretics have one faith, we may also have one grace. If the Patripassians, Anthropians, 
Valentinians, Apelletians, Ophites, Marcionites, and other pests, and swords, and poisons of heretics for 
subverting the truth, (4) confess the same Father, the same Son, the same Holy Ghost, the same Church with 
us, they may also have one baptism if they have also one faith. 

5. And lest it should be wearisome to go through all the heresies, and to enumerate either the follies or the 
madness of each of them, because it is no pleasure to speak of that which one either dreads or is ashamed 
to know, let us examine in the meantime about Marcion alone, the mention of whom has been made in the 
letter transmitted by you to us, whether the ground of his baptism can be made good. For the Lord after His 
resurrection, sending His disciples, instructed and taught them in what manner they ought to baptize, saying, 
"All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. Go ye, therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in 
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. "(5) He suggests the Trinity, in whose 
sacrament the nations were to be baptized. Does Marcion then maintain the Trinity? Does he then assert the 
same Father, the Creator, as we do? Does he know the same Son, Christ born of the Virgin Mary, who as the 
Word was made flesh, who bare our sins, who conquered death by dying, who by Himself first of all 
originated the resurrection of the flesh, and showed to His disciples that He had risen in the same flesh? 
Widely different is the faith with Marcion, and, moreover, with the other heretics nay, with them there is nothing 

but perfidy, and blasphemy, and contention, wiiicii is iiostile to iioliness and trutii. How tiien can one wiio is 
baptized among tiiem seem to iiave obtained 

mission of sins, and tiie grace oftiie divine mercy, by iiisfaitii, wiien lie lias not tiie trutli oftiie faitii itself? For 
if, as some suppose, one could receive anything abroad out of the Church according to his faith, certainly he 
has received what he believed; but if he believes what is false, he could not receive what is true; but rather 
he has received things adulterous and profane, according to what he believed. 

6. This matter of profane and adulterous baptism Jeremiah the prophet plainly rebukes, saying, "Why do 
they who afflict me prevail? My wound is hard; whence shall I be healed? while it has indeed become unto 
me as deceitful water which has no faithfulness. "(1) The Holy Spirit makes mention by the prophet of 
deceitful water which has no faithfulness. What is this deceitful and faithless water? Certainly that which 
falsely assumes the resemblance of baptism, and frustrates the grace of faith by a shadowy pretence. But if, 
according to a perverted faith, one could be baptized without, and obtain remission of sins, according to the 
same faith he could also attain the Holy Spirit; and there is no need that hands should be laid on him when 
he comes, that he might obtain the Holy Ghost, and be sealed. Either he could obtain both privileges without 
by his faith, or he who has been without has received neither. 

7. But it is manifest where and by whom remission of sins can be given; to wit, that which is given in baptism. 
For first of all the Lord gave that power to Peter, upon whom He built the Church, and whence He appointed 
and showed the source of unity-the power, namely, that whatsoever he loosed on earth should be loosed in 
heaven. And after the resurrection, also. He speaks to the apostles, saying, "As the Father hath sent me, 
even so I send you. And when He had said this. He breathed on them, and saith, unto them. Receive ye the 
Holy Ghost: whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whosesoever sins ye retain, they 
are retained. "(2) Whence we perceive that only they who are set over the Church and established in the 
Gospel law, and in the ordinance of the Lord, are allowed to baptize and to give remission of sins; but that 
without, nothing can either be bound or loosed, where there is none who can either bind or loose anything. 

8. Nor do we propose this, dearest brother, without the authority of divine Scripture, when we say that all 
things are arranged by divine direction by a certain law and by special ordinance, and that none can usurp 
to himself, in opposition to the bishops and priests, anything which is not of his own right and power. For 
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram endeavoured to usurp, in opposition to Moses and Aaron the priest, the power 
of sacrificing; and they did not do without punishment what they unlawfully dared. The sons of Aaron also, 
who placed strange fire upon the altar, were at once consumed in the sight of an angry Lord; which 
punishment remains to those who introduce strange water by a false baptism, that the divine vengeance 
may avenge and chastise when heretics do that in opposition to the Church, which the Church alone is 
allowed to do. 

9. But in respect of the assertion of some concerning those who had been baptized in Samaria, that when 
the Apostles Peter and John came, only hands were imposed on them, that they might receive the Holy 
Ghost, yet that they were not re-baptized; we see that that place does not, dearest brother, touch the present 
case. For they who had believed in Samaria had believed with a true faith; and within, in the Church which is 
one, and to which alone it is granted to bestow the grace of baptism and to remit sins, had been baptized by 
Philip the deacon, whom the same apostles had sent. And therefore, because they had obtained a 
legitimate and ecclesiastical baptism, there was no need that they should be baptized any more, but only 
that which was needed was performed by Peter and John; viz., that prayer being made for them, and hands 
being imposed, the Holy Spirit should be invoked and poured out upon them, which now too is done among 
us, so that they who are baptized in the Church are brought to the prelates of the Church, and by our prayers 
and by the imposition of hands obtain the Holy Spirit, and are perfected with the Lord's seal. 

10. There is no ground, therefore, dearest brother, for thinking that we should give way to heretics so far as 
to contemplate the betrayal to them of that baptism, which is only granted to the one and only Church. It is a 
good soldier's duty to defend the camp of his general against rebels and enemies. It is the duty of an 
illustrious leader to keep the standards entrusted to him. (3) It is written, "The Lord thy God is a jealous 
God. "(4) We who have received the Spirit of God ought to have a jealousy for the divine faith; with such a 
jealousy as that wherewith Phineas both pleased God and justly allayed His wrath when He was angry, and 
the people were perishing. Why do we receive as allowed an adulterous and alien church, a foe to the 
divine unity, when we know only one Christ and His one Church? The Church, setting forth the likeness of 
paradise, includes within her walls fruit-bearing trees, whereof that which does not bring forth good fruit is cut 
off and is cast into the fire. These trees she waters with four rivers, that is, with the four Gospels, wherewith, by 
a celestial inundation, she bestows the grace of saving baptism. Can any one water from the Church's 
fountains who is not within the Church? Can one impart those wholesome and saving draughts of paradise to 
any one if he is perverted, and of himself condemned, and banished outside the fountains of paradise, and 
has dried up and failed with the dryness of an eternal thirst? 

1 1 . The Lord cries aloud, that "whosoever thirsts should come and drink of the rivers of i living water that 

flowed out of His bosom. "(1) Whither is he to come who thirsts? Shall he come to the heretics, where there is 
no fountain and river of living water at all; or to the Church which is one, and is founded upon one who has 
received the keys of it by the Lord's voice? It is she who holds and possesses alone all the power of her 
spouse and Lord. In her we preside; for her honour and unity we fight; her grace, as well as her glory, we 
defend with faithful devotedness.(2) We by the divine permission water the thirsting people of God; we 
guard the boundaries of the living fountains. If, therefore, we hold the right of our possession, if we 
acknowledge the sacrament of unity, wherefore are we esteemed prevaricators against truth? Wherefore 
are we judged betrayers of unity? The faithful, and saving, and holy water of the Church cannot be corrupted 
and adulterated, as the Church herself also is uncorrupted, and chaste, and modest. If heretics are devoted 
to the Church and established in the Church, they may use both her baptism and her other saving benefits. 
But if they are not in the Church, nay more, if they act against the Church, how can they baptize with the 
Church's baptism? 

12. For it is no small and insignificant matter, which is conceded to heretics, when their baptism is 
recognised by us; since thence springs the whole origin of faith and the saving access to the hope of life 
eternal, and the divine condescension for purifying and quickening the servants of God. For if any one could 
be baptized among heretics, certainly he could also obtain remission of sins. If he attained remission of 
sins, he was also sanctified. If he was sanctified, he also was made the temple of God. I ask, of what God? If 
of the Creator; he could not be, because he has not believed in Him. If of Christ; he could not become His 
temple, since he denies that Christ is God. If of the Holy Spirit; since the three are one, how can the Holy 
Spirit be at peace with him who is the enemy either of the Son or of the Father? 

13. Hence it is in vain that some who are overcome by reason oppose to us custom, as if custom were 
greater than truth;(3) or as if that were not to be sought after in spiritual matters which has been revealed as 
the better by the Holy Spirit. For one who errs by simplicity may be pardoned, as the blessed Apostle Paul 
says of himself, "I who at first was a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious; yet obtained mercy, 
because I did it ignorantly."(4) But after inspiration and revelation made to him, he who intelligently and 
knowingly perseveres in that course in which he had erred, sins without pardon for his ignorance. For he 
resists with a certain presumption and obstinacy, when he is overcome by reason. Nor let any one say, "We 
follow that which we have received from the apostles," when the apostles only delivered one Church, and 
one baptism, which is not ordained except in the same Church. And we cannot find that any one, when he 
had been baptized by heretics, was received by the apostles in the same baptism, and communicated in 
such a way as that the apostles should appear to have approved the baptism of heretics. 

14. For as to what some say, as if it tended to favour heretics, that the Apostle Paul declared, "Only every 
way, whether in pretence or in truth, let Christ be preached, "(5) we find that this also can avail nothing to their 
benefit who support and applaud heretics. For Paul, in his epistle, was not speaking of heretics, nor of their 
baptism, so that anything can be shown to have been alleged which pertained to this matter. He was 
speaking of brethren, whether as walking disorderly anti against the discipline of the Church, or as keeping 
the truth of the Gospel with the fear of God. And he said that certain ofthemspoke the word of God with 
constancy and courage, but some acted in envy and dissension; that some maintained towards him a 
benevolent love, but that some indulged a malevolent spirit of dissension; but yet that he bore all patiently, 
so long only as, whether in truth or in pretence, the name of Christ which Paul preached might come to the 
knowledge of many; and the sowing of the word, which as yet had been new and irregular, might increase 
through the preaching of the speakers. Besides, it is one thing for those who are within the Church to speak 
concerning the name of Christ; it is another for those who are without, and act in opposition to the Church, to 
baptize in the name of Christ. Wherefore, let not those who favour heretics put forward what Paul spoke 
concerning brethren, but let them show if he thought anything was to be conceded to the heretic, or if he 
approved of their faith or baptism, or if he appointed that perfidious and blasphemous men could receive 
remission of their sins outside the Church. 

1 5. But if we consider what the apostles thought about heretics, we shall find that they, in all their epistles, 
execrated and detested the sacrilegious wickedness of heretics. For when they say that "their word creeps 
as a canker,"(1) how is such a word as that able to give remission of sins, which creeps like a canker to the 
ears of the hearers? And when they say that there can be no fellowship between righteousness and 
un-righteousness, no communion between light and darkness, (2) how can either darkness illuminate, or 
unrighteousness justify? And when they say that "they are not of God, but are of the spirit of Antichrist,"(3) 
how can they transact spiritual and divine matters, who are the enemies of God, and whose hearts the spirit 
of Antichrist has possessed? Wherefore, if, laying aside the errors of human dispute, we return with a 
sincere and religious faith to the evangelical authority and to the apostolical tradition, we shall perceive that 
they may do nothing towards conferring the ecclesiastical and saving grace, who, scattering and attacking 
the Church of Christ, are called adversaries by Christ Himself, but by His apostles. Antichrists. 

16. Again, there is no ground for any one, for the circumvention of Christian truth, opposing to us the name of 

Christ, and saying, "All who are baptized everywhere, and in any manner, in the name of Jesus Christ, have 
obtained the grace of baptism, "-when Christ Himself speaks, and says, "Not every one that saith unto me. 
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. "(4), And again. He forewarns and instructs, that no one 
should be easily deceived by false prophets and false Christs in His name. "Many," He says, "shall come 
in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many." And afterwards He added: "But take ye heed; 
behold, I have foretold you all things. "(5) Whence it appears that all things are not at once to be received 
and assumed which are boasted of in the name of Christ, but only those things which are done in the truth of 
Christ. 

17. For whereas in the Gospels, and in the epistles of the apostles, the name of Christ is alleged for the 
remission of sins; it is not in such a way as that the Son alone, without the Father, or against the Father, can 
be of advantage to anybody; but that it might be shown to the Jews, who boasted as to their having the 
Father, that the Father would profit them nothing, unless they believed on the Son whom He had sent. For 
they who know God the Father the Creator, ought also to know Christ the Son, lest they should flatter and 
applaud themselves about the Father alone, without the acknowledgment of His Son, who also said, "No 
man cometh to the Father but by me. "(6) But He, the same, sets forth, that it is the knowledge of the two which 
saves, when He says, "And this is life eternal, that they might know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus 
Christ, whom thou hast sent."(7) Since, therefore, from the preaching and testimony of Christ Himself, the 
Father who sent must be first known, then afterwards Christ, who was sent, and there cannot be a hope of 
salvation except by knowing the two together; how, when God the Father is not known, nay, is even 
blasphemed, can they who among the heretics are said to be baptized in the name of Christ, be judged to 
have obtained the remission of sins? For the case of the Jews under the apostles was one, but the condition 
of the Gentiles is another. The former, because they had already gained the most ancient baptism of the law 
and Moses, were to be baptized also in the name of Jesus Christ, in conformity with what Peter tells them in 
the Acts of the Apostles, saying, "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of the Lord Jesus 
Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. For this promise is unto you, 
and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. "(8) Peter 
makes mention of Jesus Christ, not as though the Father should be omitted, but that the Son also might be 
joined to the Father. 

18. Finally, when, after the resurrection, the apostles are sent by the Lord to the heathens, they are bidden to 
baptize the Gentiles "in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." How, then, do some 
say, that a Gentile baptized without, outside the Church, yea, and in opposition to the Church, so that it be 
only in the name of Jesus Christ, everywhere, and in whatever manner, can obtain remission of sin, when 
Christ Himself commands the heathen to be baptized in the full and united Trinity? Unless while one who 
denies Christ is denied by Christ, he who denies His Father whom Christ Himself confessed is not denied; 
and he who blasphemes against Him whom Christ called His Lord and His God, is rewarded by Christ, and 
obtains remission of sins, and the sanctification of baptism! But by what power can he who denies God the 
Creator, the Father of Christ, obtain, in baptism, the remission of sins, since Christ received that very power 
by which we are baptized and sanctified, from the same Father, whom He called "greater" than Himself, by 
whom He desired to be glorified, whose will He fulfilled even unto the obedience of drinking the cup, and of 
undergoing death? What else is it then, than to become a partaker with blaspheming heretics, to wish to 
maintain and assert, that one who blasphemes and gravely sins against the Father and the Lord and God of 
Christ, can receive remission of sins in the name of Christ? What, moreover, is that, and of what kind is it, that 
he who denies the Son of God has not the Father, and he who denies the Father should be thought to have 
the Son, although the Son Himself testifies, and says, "No man can come unto me except it were given unto 
him of my Father?"(1) So that it is evident, that no remission of sins can be received in baptism from the Son, 
which it is not plain that the Father has granted. Especially, since He further repeats, and says, "Every plant 
which my heavenly Father hath not planted shall be rooted up. "(2) 

1 9. But if Christ's disciples are unwilling to learn from Christ what veneration and honour is due to the name of 
the Father, still let them learn from earthly and secular examples, and know that Christ has declared, not 
without the strongest rebuke, "The children of this world are wiser in their generation than the children of 
light."(3) In this world of ours, if any one have offered an insult to the father of any; if in injury and frowardness 
he have wounded his reputation and his honour by a malevolent tongue, the son is indignant, and wrathful, 
and with what means he can, strives to avenge his injured father's wrong. Think you that Christ grants 
impunity to the impious and profane, and the blasphemers of His Father, and that He puts away their sins in 
baptism, who it is evident, when baptized, still heap up evil words on the person of the Father, and sin with 
the unceasing wickedness of a blaspheming tongue? Can a Christian, can a servant of God, either 
conceive this in his mind, or believe it in faith, or put it forward in discourse? And what will become of the 
precepts of the divine law, which say, "Honour thy father and thy mother?"(4) If the name of father, which in 
man is commanded to be honoured, is violated with impunity in God, what will become of what Christ 

Himself lays down in the Gospel, and says, "He that curseth father or mother, let him die the death;"(5) if He 
who bids that those who curse their parents after the flesh should be punished and slain. Himself quickens 
those who revile their heavenly and spiritual Father, and are hostile to the Church, their Mother? An 
execrable and detestable thing is actually asserted by some, that He who threatens the man who 
blasphemes against the Holy Spirit, that he shall be guilty of eternal sin. Himself condescends to sanctify 
those who blaspheme against God the Father with saving baptism. And now, those who think that they must 
communicate with such as come to the Church without baptism, do not consider that they are becoming 
partakers with other men's, yea, with eternal sins, when they admit without baptism those who cannot, except 
in baptism, put off the sins of their blasphemies. 

20. Besides, how vain and perverse a thing it is, that when the heretics themselves, having repudiated and 
forsaken either the error or the wickedness in which they had previously been, acknowledge the truth of the 
Church, we should mutilate the rights and sacrament of that same truth, and say to those who come to us and 
repent, that they had obtained remission of sins when they confess that they have sinned, and are for that 
reason come to seek the pardon of the Church! Wherefore, dearest brother, we ought both firmly to maintain 
the faith and truth of the Catholic Church, and to teach, and by all the evangelical and apostolical precepts to 
set forth, the plan of the divine dispensation and unity. 

21 . Can the power of baptism be greater or of more avail than confession, than suffering, when one 
confesses Christ before men and is baptized in his own blood? And yet even this baptism does not benefit 
a heretic, although he has confessed Christ, and been put to death outside the Church, unless the patrons 
and advocates of heretics declare that the heretics who are slain in a false confession of Christ are martyrs, 
and assign to them the glory and the crown of martyrdom contrary to the testimony of the apostle, who says 
that it will profit them nothing although they were burnt and slain. (6) But if not even the baptism of a public 
confession and blood can profit a heretic to salvation, because there is no salvation out of the Church, (7) 
how much less shall it be of advantage to him, if in a hiding-place and a cave of robbers, stained with the 
contagion of adulterous water, he has not only not put off his old sins, but rather heaped up still newer and 
greater ones! Wherefore baptism cannot be common to us and to heretics, to whom neither God the Father, 
nor Christ the Son, nor the Holy Ghost, nor the faith, nor the Church itself, is common. And therefore it 
behoves those to be baptized who come from heresy to the Church, that so they who are prepared, in the 
lawful, and true, and only baptism of the holy Church, by divine regeneration, for the kingdom of God, may 
be born of both sacraments, because it is written, "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot 
enter into the kingdom of God."(1) 

22. On which place some, as if by human reasoning they were able to make void the truth of the Gospel 
declaration, object to us the case of catechumens; asking if any one of these, before he is baptized in the 
Church, should be apprehended and slain on confession of the name, whether he would lose the hope of 
salvation and the reward of confession, because he had not previously been born again of water? Let men 
of this kind, who are aiders and favourers of heretics, know therefore, first, that those catechumens hold the 
sound faith and truth of the Church, and advance from the divine camp to do battle with the devil, with a full 
and sincere acknowledgment of God the Father, and of Christ, and of the Holy Ghost; then, that they certainly 
are not deprived of the sacrament of baptism who are baptized with the most glorious and greatest baptism 
of blood, concerning which the Lord also said, that He had "another baptism to be baptized with. "(2) But the 
same Lord declares in the Gospel, that those who are baptized in their own blood, and sanctified by 
suffering, are perfected, and obtain the grace of the divine promise, when He speaks to the thief believing 
and confessing in His very passion, and promises that he should be with Himself in paradise. Wherefore we 
who are set over the faith and truth ought not to deceive and mislead those who come to the faith and truth, 
and repent, and beg that their sins should be remitted to them; but to instruct them when corrected by us, and 
reformed for the kingdom of heaven by celestial discipline. 

23. But some one says, "What, then, shall become of those who in past times, coming from heresy to the 
Church, were received without baptism?" The Lord is able by His mercy to give indulgence, (3) and not to 
separate from the gifts of His Church those who by simplicity were admitted into the Church, and in the 
Church have fallen asleep. Nevertheless it does not follow that, because there was error at one time, there 
must always be error; since it is more fitting for wise and God-fearing men, gladly and without delay to obey 
the truth when laid open and perceived, than pertinaciously and obstinately to struggle against brethren and 
fellow-priests on behalf of heretics. 

24. Nor let any one think that, because baptism is proposed to them, heretics will be kept back from coming 
to the Church, as if offended at the name of a second baptism; nay, but on this very account they are rather 
driven to the necessity of coming by the testimony of truth shown and proved to them. For if they shall see 
that it is determined and decreed by our judgment and sentence, that the baptism wherewith they are there 
baptized is considered just and legitimate, they will think that they are justly and legitimately in possession 
of the Church also, and the other gifts of the Church; nor will there be any reason for their coming to us, when. 

as they have baptism, they seem also to have the rest. But further, when they know that there is no baptism 
without, and that no remission of sins can be given outside the Church, they more eagerly and readily 
hasten to us, and implore the gifts and benefits of the Church our Mother, assured that they can in no wise 
attain to the true promise of divine grace unless they first come to the truth of the Church. Nor will heretics 
refuse to be baptized among us with the lawful and true baptism of the Church, when they shall have learnt 
from us that they also were baptized by Paul, who already had been baptized with the baptism of John, (4) 
as we read in the Acts of the Apostles. 

25. And now by certain of us the baptism of heretics is asserted to occupy the (like) ground, and, as if by a 
certain dislike of re-baptizing, it is counted unlawful to baptize after God's enemies. And this, although we 
find that they were baptized whom John had baptized: John, esteemed the greatest among the prophets; 
John, filled with divine grace even in his mother's womb; who was sustained with the spirit and power of 
Ellas; who was not an adversary of the Lord, but His precursor and announcer; who not only foretold our 
Lord in words, but even showed Him to the eyes; who baptized Christ Himself by whom others are baptized. 
But if on that account a heretic could obtain the right of baptism, because he first baptized, then baptism will 
not belong to the person that has it, but to the person that seizes it. And since baptism and the Church can by 
no means be separated from one another, and divided, he who has first been able to lay hold on baptism 
has equally also laid hold on the Church; and you begin to appear to him as a heretic, when you being 
anticipated, have begun to be last, and by yielding and giving way have relinquished the right which you 
had received. But how dangerous it is in divine matters, that any one should depart from his right and power. 
Holy Scripture declares when, in Genesis, Esau thence lost his birthright, nor was able afterwards to regain 
that which he had once given up. 

26. These things, dearest brother, I have briefly written to you, according to my abilities, prescribing to none, 
and prejudging none, so as to prevent any one of the bishops doing what he thinks well, and having the free 
exercise of his judgment.(l) We, as far as in us lies, do not contend on behalf of heretics with our colleagues 
and fellow-bishops, with whom we maintain a divine concord and the peace of the Lord;(1) especially since 
the apostle says, "If any man, however, is thought to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the 
Church of God. "(2) Charity of spirit, the honour of our college, the bond of faith, and priestly concord, are 
maintained by us with patience and gentleness. For this reason, moreover, we have with the best of our 
poor abilities, with the permission and inspiration of the Lord, written a treatise(3) on the "Benefit of 
Patience," which for the sake of our mutual love we have transmitted to you. I bid you, dearest brother, ever 
heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE LXXIII.(4) 

TO POMPEY, AGAINST THE EPISTLE OF STEPHEN ABOUT THE BAPTISM OF 
HERETICS. 

ARGUMENT. --THE PURPORT OF THIS EPISTLE IS GIVEN IN ST. AUGUSTINE'S 
"CONTRA DONATISTAS," LIB. V. CAP. 23. HE SAYS THERE: "CYPRIAN, MOREOVER, 
WRITES TO POMPEY ON THE SAME SUBJECT, WHEN HE PLAINLY SIGNIFIES THAT 
STEPHEN, WHO, AS WE LEARN, WAS THEN A BISHOP OF THE ROMAN CHURCH, NOT 
ONLY DID NOT AGREE WITH HIM ON THOSE POINTS, BUT EVEN HAD WRITTEN AND 
CHARGED IN OPPOSITION TO HIM. "(5) 

1 . Cyprian to his brother Pompeius, greeting. Although I have fully comprised what is to be said concerning 
the baptism of heretics in the letters of which I sent you copies, dearest brother, yet, since you have desired 
that what Stephen our brother replied to my letters should be brought to your knowledge, I have sent you a 
copy of his reply; on the reading of which, you will more and more observe his error in endeavouring to 
maintain the cause of heretics against Christians, and against the Church of God. (6) For among other 
matters, which were either haughtily assumed, or were not pertaining to the matter, or contradictory to his 
own view, which he unskilfully and without foresight wrote, he moreover added this saying: "If any one, 
therefore, come to you from any heresy whatever, let nothing be innovated (or done) which has not been 
handed down, to wit, that hands be imposed on him for repentance;(7) since the heretics themselves, in their 
own proper character, do not baptize such as come to them from one another, but only admit them to 
communion." 

2. He forbade one coming from any heresy to be baptized in the Church; that is, he judged the baptism of all 
heretics to be just and lawful. And although special heresies have special baptisms and different sins, he, 
holding communion with the baptism of all, gathered up the sins of all, heaped together into his own bosom. 
And he charged that nothing should be innovated except what had been handed down; as if he were an 

innovator, who, holding the unity, claims for the one Church one baptism; and not manifestly he who, forgetful 
of unity, adopts the lies and the contagions of a profane washing. Let nothing be innovated, says he, nothing 
maintained, except what has been handed down. Whence is that tradition? Whether does it descend from 
the authority of the Lord and of the Gospel, or does it come from the commands and the epistles of the 
apostles? For that those things which are written must be done, God witnesses and admonishes, saying to 
Joshua the son of Nun: "The book of this law shall not depart out of thy mouth; but thou shalt meditate in it 
day and night, that thou mayest observe to do according to all that is written therein. "(8) Also the Lord, 
sending His apostles, commands that the nations should be baptized, and taught to observe all things 
which He commanded. If, therefore, it is either prescribed in the Gospel, or contained in the epistles or Acts 
of the Apostles, that those who come from any heresy should not be baptized, but only hands laid upon 
them to repentance, let this divine and holy tradition be observed. But if everywhere heretics are called 
nothing else than adversaries and antichrists, if they are pronounced to be people to be avoided, and to be 
perverted and condemned of their own selves, wherefore is it that they should not be thought worthy of being 
condemned by us, since it is evident from the apostolic testimony(l) that they are of their own selves 
condemned? So that no one ought to defame the apostles as if they had approved of the baptisms of 
heretics, or had communicated with them without the Church's baptism, when they, the apostles, wrote such 
things of the heretics. And this, too, while as yet the more terrible plagues of heresy had not broken forth; 
while Marcion of Pontus had not yet emerged from Pontus, whose master Cordon came to Rome, -while 
Hyginus was still bishop, who was the ninth bishop in that city,-whom Marcion followed, and with greater 
impudence adding other enhancements to his crime, and more daringly set himself to blaspheme against 
God the Father, the Creator, and armed with sacrilegious arms the heretical madness that rebelled against 
the Church with greater wickedness and determination. 

3. But if it is evident that subsequently heresies became more numerous and worse; and if, in time past, it 
was never at all prescribed nor written that only hands should be laid upon a heretic for repentance, and that 
so he might be communicated with; and if there is only one baptism, which is with us, and is within, and is 
granted of the divine condescension to the Church alone, what obstinacy is that, or what presumption, to 
prefer human tradition to divine ordinance, and not to observe that God is indignant and angry as often as 
human tradition relaxes and passes by the divine precepts, as He cries out, and says by Isaiah the prophet, 
"This people honoureth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. But in vain do they worship me, 
teaching the doctrines and commandments of men. "(2) Also the Lord in the Gospel, similarly rebuking and 
reproving, utters and says, "Ye reject the commandment of God, that ye may keep your own tradition. "(3) 
Mindful of which precept, the blessed Apostle Paul himself also warns and instructs, saying, "If any man 
teach otherwise, and consent not to the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to His doctrine, he is 
proud, knowing nothing: from such withdraw thyself. "(4) 

4. Certainly an excellent and lawful tradition is set before us by the teaching of our brother Stephen, which 
may afford us a suitable authority! For in the same place of his epistle he has added and continued: "Since 
those who are specially heretics do not baptize those who come to them from one another, but only receive 
them to communion." To this point of evil has the Church of God and spouse of Christ been developed, that 
she follows the examples of heretics; that for the purpose of celebrating the celestial sacraments, light 
should borrow her discipline from darkness, and Christians should do that which antichrists do. But what is 
that blindness of soul, what is that degradation of faith, to refuse to recognise the unity(5) which comes from 
God the Father, and from the tradition of Jesus Christ the Lord and our God! For if the Church is not with 
heretics, therefore, because it is one, and cannot be divided; and if thus the Holy Spirit is not there, because 
He is one, and cannot be among profane persons, and those who are without; certainly also baptism, which 
consists in the same unity, cannot be among heretics, because it can neither be separated from the Church 
nor from the Holy Spirit. 

5. Or if they attribute the effect of baptism to the majesty of the name, so that they who are baptized anywhere 
and anyhow, in the name of Jesus Christ, are judged to be renewed and sanctified; wherefore, in the name 
of the same Christ, are not hands laid upon the baptized persons among them, for the reception of the Holy 
Spirit? Why does not the same majesty of the same name avail in the imposition of hands, which, they 
contend, availed in the sanctification of baptism? For if any one born out of the Church can become God's 
temple, why cannot the Holy Spirit also be poured out upon the temple? For he who has been sanctified, his 
sins being put away in baptism, and has been spiritually reformed into a new man, has become fitted for 
receiving the Holy Spirit; since the apostle says, "As many of you as have been baptized into Christ have 
put on Christ."(6) He who, having been baptized among the heretics, is able to put on Christ, may much more 
receive the Holy Spirit whom Christ sent. Otherwise He who is sent will be greater than Him who sends; so 
that one baptized without may begin indeed to put on Christ, but not to be able to receive the Holy Spirit, as if 
Christ could either be put on without the Spirit, or the Spirit be separated from Christ. Moreover, it is silly to 
say, that although the second birth is spiritual, by which we are born in Christ through the layer of 

regeneration, one may be born spiritually among the heretics, where they say that the Spirit is not. For water 
alone is not able to cleanse away sins, and to sanctify a man, unless he have also the Holy Spirit.(1) 
Wherefore it is necessary that they should grant the Holy Spirit to be there, where they say that baptism is; or 
else there is no baptism where the Holy Spirit is not, because there cannot be baptism without the Spirit. 

6. But what a thing it is, to assert and contend that they who are not born in the Church can be the sons of 
God! For the blessed apostle sets forth and proves that baptism is that wherein the old man dies and the 
new man is born, saying, "He saved us by the washing of regeneration. "(2) But if regeneration is in the 
washing, that is, in baptism, how can heresy, which is not the spouse of Christ, generate sons to God by 
Christ? For it is the Church alone which, conjoined and united with Christ, spiritually bears sons; as the same 
apostle again says, "Christ loved the Church, and gave Himself for it, that He might sanctify it, cleansing it 
with the washing of water."(3) If, then, she is the beloved and spouse who alone is sanctified by Christ, and 
alone is cleansed by His washing, it is manifest that heresy, which is not the spouse of Christ, nor can be 
cleansed nor sanctified by His washing, cannot bear sons to God. (4) 

7. But further, one is not born by the imposition of hands when he receives the Holy Ghost, but in baptism, 
that so, being already born, he may receive the Holy Spirit, even as it happened in the first man Adam. For 
first God formed him, and then breathed into his nostrils the breath of life. For the Spirit cannot be received, 
unless he who receives first have an existence. But as the birth of Christians is in baptism, while the 
generation and sanctification of baptism are with the spouse of Christ alone, who is able spiritually to 
conceive and to bear sons to God, where and of whom and to whom is he born, who is not a son of the 
Church, so as that he should have God as his Father, before he has had the Church for his Mother? But as 
no heresy at all, and equally no schism, being without, can have the sanctification of saving baptism, why 
has the bitter obstinacy of our brother Stephen broken forth to such an extent, as to contend that sons are 
born to God from the baptism of Marcion; moreover, of Valentinus and Apelles, and of others who 
blaspheme against God the Father; and to say that remission of sins is granted in the name of Jesus Christ 
where blasphemy is uttered against the Father and against Christ the Lord God? 

8. In which place, dearest brother, we must consider, for the sake of the faith and the religion of the 
sacerdotal office which we discharge, whether the account can be satisfactory in the day of judgment for a 
priest of God, who maintains, and approves, and acquiesces in the baptism of blasphemers, when the Lord 
threatens, and says, "And now, O ye priests, this commandment is for you: if ye will not hear, and if ye will not 
lay it to heart to give glory unto my name, saith the Lord Almighty, I will even send a curse upon you, and I 
will curse your blessings. "(5) Does he give glory to God, who communicates with the baptism of Marcion? 
Does he give glory to God, who judges that remission of sins is granted among those who blaspheme 
against God? Does he give glory to God, who affirms that sons are born to God without, of an adulterer and 
a harlot? Does he give glory to God, who does not hold the unity and truth that arise from the divine law, but 
maintains heresies against the Church? Does he give glory to God, who, a friend of heretics and an enemy 
to Christians, thinks that the priests of God, who support the truth of Christ and the unity of the Church, are to 
be excommunicated?(6) If glory is thus given to God, if the fear and the discipline of God is thus preserved 
by His worshippers and His priests, let us cast away our arms; let us give ourselves up to captivity; let us 
deliver to the devil the ordination of the Gospel, the appointment of Christ, the majesty of God; let the 
sacraments of the divine warfare be loosed; let the standards of the heavenly camp be betrayed; and let 
the Church succumb and yield to heretics, light to darkness, faith to perfidy, hope to despair, reason to error, 
immortality to death, love to hatred, truth to falsehood, Christ to Antichrist! Deservedly thus do heresies and 
schisms arise day by day, more frequently and more fruitfully grow up, and with serpents' locks shoot forth 
and cast out against the Church of God with greater force the poison of their venom; whilst, by the advocacy 
of some, both authority and support are afforded them; whilst their baptism is defended, whilst faith, whilst 
truth, is betrayed;(7) whilst that which is done without against the Church is defended within in the very Church 
itself. 

9. But if there be among us, most beloved brother, the fear of God, if the maintenance of the faith prevail, if 
we keep the precepts of Christ, if we guard the incorrupt and inviolate sanctity of His spouse, if the words of 
the Lord abide in our thoughts and hearts, when he says, "Thinkest thou, when the Son of man cometh, shall 
He find faith on the earth"(1) then, because we are God's faithful soldiers, who war for the faith and sincere 
religion of God, let us keep the camp entrusted to us by God with faithful valour. Nor ought custom, which 
had crept in among some, to prevent the truth from prevailing and conquering; for custom without truth is the 
antiquity of error.(2) On which account, let us forsake the error and follow the truth, knowing that in Esdras 
also the truth conquers, as it is written: "Truth endureth and grows strong to eternity, and lives and prevails 
for ever and ever. With her there is no accepting of persons or distinctions; but what is just she does: nor in 
her judgments is there unrighteousness, but the strength, and the kingdom, and the majesty, and the power 
of all ages. Blessed be the Lord God oftruth!"(3) This truth Christ showed to us in His Gospel, and said, "I am 
the truth. "(4) Wherefore, if we are in Christ, and have Christ in us, if we abide in the truth, and the truth abides 

in us, let us keep fast those things which are true. 

10. But it happens, by a love of presumption and of obstinacy, that one would rather maintain his own evil 
and false position, than agree in the right and true which belongs to another. Looking forward to which, the 
blessed Apostle Paul writes to Timothy, and warns him that a bishop must not be "litigious, nor contentious, 
but gentle and teachable. "(5) Now he is teachable who is meek and gentle to the patience of learning. For it 
behoves a bishop not only to teach, but also to learn; because he also teaches better who daily increases 
and advances by learning better; which very thing, moreover, the same Apostle Paul teaches, when he 
admonishes, "that if anything better be revealed to one sitting by, the first should hold his peace. "(6) But 
there is a brief way for religious and simple minds, both to put away error, and to find and to elicit truth. For if 
we return to the head and source of divine tradition, human error ceases; and having seen the reason of the 
heavenly sacraments, whatever lay hid in obscurity under the gloom and cloud of darkness, is opened into 
the light of the truth. If a channel supplying water, which formerly flowed plentifully and freely, suddenly fail, do 
we not go to the fountain, that there the reason of the failure may be ascertained, whether from the drying up 
of the springs the water has failed atthefountainhead, or whether, flowing thence free and full, it has failed in 
the midst of its course; that so, if it has been caused by the fault of an interrupted or leaky channel, that the 
constant stream does not flow uninterruptedly and continuously, then the channel being repaired and 
strengthened, the water collected may be supplied for the use and drink of the city, with the same fertility and 
plenty with which it issues from the spring? And this it behoves the priests of God to do now, if they would 
keep the divine precepts, that if in any respect the truth have wavered and vacillated, we should return to our 
original and Lord, and to the evangelical and apostolical tradition; and thence may arise the ground of our 
action, whence has taken rise both our order and our origin. (7) 

1 1 . For it has been delivered to us, that there is one God, and one Christ, and one hope, and one faith, and 
one Church, and one baptism ordained only in the one Church, from which unity whosoever will depart must 
needs be found with heretics; and while he upholds them against the Church, he impugns the sacrament of 
the divine tradition. The sacrament of which unity we see expressed also in the Canticles, in the person of 
Christ, who says, "A garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse, a fountain sealed, a well of living water, a 
garden with the fruit of apples. "(8) But if His Church is a garden enclosed, and a fountain sealed, how can he 
who is not in the Church enter into the same garden, or drink from its fountain? Moreover, Peter himself, 
showing and vindicating the unity, has commanded and warned us that we cannot be saved, except by the 
one only baptism of one Church. "In the ark," says he, "of Noah, few, that is, eight souls, were saved by 
water, as also baptism shall in like manner save you. "(9) In how short and spiritual a summary has he set 
forth the sacrament of unity! For as, in that baptism of the world in which its ancient iniquity was purged away, 
he who was not in the ark of Noah could not be saved by water, so neither can he appear to be saved by 
baptism who has not been baptized in the Church which is established in the unity(10) of the Lord according 
to the sacrament of the one ark. 

12. Therefore, dearest brother, having explored and seen the truth; it is observed and held by us, that all 
who are converted from any heresy whatever to the Church must be baptized by the only and lawful baptism 
of the Church, with the exception of those who had previously been baptized in the Church, and so had 
passed over to the heretics. (1) For it behoves these, when they return, having repented, to be received by 
the imposition of hands only, and to be restored by the shepherd to the sheep-fold whence they had 
strayed. I bid you, dearest brother, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE LXXIV.(2) 

FIRMILIAN, BISHOP OF CAESAREA IN CAPPADOCIA, TO CYPRIAN, AGAINST THE 
LETTER OF STEPHEN. A. D. 256. 

ARGUMENT. --THE ARGUMENT OF THIS LETTER IS EXACTLY THE SAME AS THAT OF 
THE PREVIOUS ONE, BUT WRITTEN WITH A LITTLE MORE VEHEMENCE AND 
ACERBITY THAN BECOMES A BISHOP, (3) CHIEFLY FOR THE REASON, AS MAY BE 
SUSPECTED, THAT STEPHEN HAD ALSO WRITTEN ANOTHER LETTER TO 
FIRMILIANUS, HELENUS, AND OTHER BISHOPS OF THOSE PARTS. (4) 

1 . Firmilianus to Cyprian, his brother in the Lord, greeting. We have received by Rogatian, our beloved 
deacon, the letter sent by you which you wrote to us, well-beloved brother; and we gave the greatest thanks 
to the Lord, because it has happened that we who are separated from one another in body are thus united in 
spirit, as if we were not only occupying one country, but inhabiting together one and the self-same house. 
Which also it is becoming for us to say, because, indeed, the spiritual house of God is one. "For it shall 
come to pass in the last days," saith the prophet, "that the mountain of the Lord shall be manifest, and the 

house of God above the tops of the mountains. "(5) Those that come together into this house are united with 
gladness, according to what is asl<ed from the Lord in the psalm, to dwell in the house of the Lord all the 
days of one's life. Whence in another place also it is made manifest, that among the saints there is great 
and desirous love for assembling together. "Behold," he says, "how good and how pleasant a thing it is for 
brethren to dwell together in unity! "(6) 

2. For unity and peace and concord afford the greatest pleasure not only to men who believe and know the 
truth, but also to heavenly angels themselves, to whom the divine word says it is a joy when one sinner 
repents and returns to the bond of unity. But assuredly this would not be said of the angels, who have their 
conversation in heaven, unless they themselves also were united to us, who rejoice at our unity; even as, on 
the other hand, they are assuredly saddened when they see the diverse minds and the divided wills of 
some, as if not only they do not together invoke one and the same God, but as if, separated and divided 
from one another, they can neither have a common conversation nor discourse. (7) Except that we may in 
this matter give thanks to Stephen, that it has now happened through his unkindness that we receive the 
proof of your faith and wisdom. But although we have received the favour of this benefit on account of 
Stephen, certainly Stephen has not done anything deserving of kindness and thanks. For neither can Judas 
be thought worthy by his perfidy and treachery wherewith he wickedly dealt concerning the Saviour, as 
though he had been the cause of such great advantages, that through him the world and the people of the 
Gentiles were delivered by the Lord's passion. 

3. But let these things which were done by Stephen be passed by for the present, lest, while we remember 
his audacity and pride, we bring a more lasting sadness on ourselves from the things that he has wickedly 
done. (8) And knowing, concerning you, that you have settled this matter, concerning which there is now a 
question, according to the rule of truth and the wisdom of Christ; we have exulted with great joy, and have 
given God thanks that we have found in brethren placed at such a distance such a unanimity of faith and 
truth with us. For the grace of God is mighty to associate and join together in the bond of charity and unity 
even those things which seem to be divided by a considerable space of earth, according to the way in 
which of old also the divine power associated in the bond of unanimity Ezekiel and Daniel, though later in 
their age, and separated from them by a long space of time, to Job and Noah, who were among the first; so 
that although they were separated by long periods, yet by divine inspiration they felt the same truths. And 
this also we now observe in you, that you who are separated from us by the most extensive regions, 
approve yourselves to be, nevertheless, joined with us in mind and spirit. All which arises from the divine 
unity. For even as the Lord who dwells in us is one and the same. He everywhere joins and couples His own 
people in the bond of unity, whence their sound has gone out into the whole earth, who are sent by the Lord 
swiftly running in the spirit of unity; as, on the other hand, it is of no advantage that some are very near and 
joined together bodily, if in spirit and mind they differ, since souls cannot at all be united which divide 
themselves from God's unity. "For, lo," it says, "they that are far from Thee shall perish. "(1) But such shall 
undergo the judgment of God according to their desert, as depart from His words who prays to the Father for 
unity, and says, "Father, grant that, as Thou and I are one, so they also may be one in us. "(2) 

4. But we receive those things which you have written as if they were our own; nor do we read them cursorily, 
but by frequent repetition have committed them to memory. Nor does it hinder saving usefulness, either to 
repeat the same things for the confirmation of the truth, or, moreover, to add some things for the sake of 
accumulating proof. But if anything has been added by us, it is not added as if there had been too little said 
by you; but since the divine discourse surpasses human nature, and the soul cannot conceive or grasp the 
whole and perfect word, therefore also the number of prophets is so great, that the divine wisdom in its 
multiplicity may be distributed through many. Whence also he who first speaks in prophecy is bidden to be 
silent if a revelation be made to a second. For which reason it happens of necessity among us, that year by 
year we, the elders and prelates, assemble together to arrange those matters which are committed to our 
care, so that if any things are more serious they may be directed by the common counsel. Moreover, we do 
this that some remedy may be sought for by repentance for lapsed brethren, and for those wounded by the 
devil after the saving layer, not as though they obtained remission of sins from us, but that by our means 
they may be converted to the understanding of their sins, and may be compelled to give fuller satisfaction to 
the Lord. 

5. But since that messenger sent by you was in haste to return to you, and the winter season was pressing, 
we replied what we could to your letter. And indeed, as respects what Stephen has said, as though the 
apostles forbade those who come from heresy to be baptized, and delivered this also to be observed by 
their successors, you have replied most abundantly, that no one is so foolish as to believe that the apostles 
delivered this, when it is even well known that these heresies themselves, execrable and detestable as they 
are, arose subsequently; when even Marcion the disciple of Cerdo is found to have introduced his 
sacrilegious tradition against God long after the apostles, and after long lapse of time from them. Apelles, 
also consenting to his blasphemy, added many other new and more important matters hostile to faith and 

truth. But also the time of Valentinus and Basilides is manifest, that they too, after the apostles, and after a 
long period, rebelled against the Church of God with their wicked lies. It is plain that the other heretics, also, 
afterwards introduced their evil sects and perverse inventions, even as every one was led by error; all of 
whom, it is evident, were self-condemned, and have declared against themselves an inevitable sentence 
before the day of judgment; and he who confirms the baptism of these, what else does he do but adjudge 
himself with them, and condemn himself, making himself a partaker with such? 

6. But that they who are at Rome do not observe those things in all cases which are handed down from the 
beginning, and vainly pretend the authority of the apostles;(3) any one may know also from the fact, that 
concerning the celebration of Easter, and concerning many other sacraments of divine matters, he may see 
that there are some diversities among them, and that all things are not observed among them alike, which 
are observed at Jerusalem, just as in very many other provinces also many things are varied because of 
the difference of the places and names. (4) And yet on this account there is no departure at all from the 
peace and unity of the Catholic Church, such as Stephen has now dared to make;(5) breaking the peace 
against you, which his predecessors have always kept with you in mutual love and honour, even herein 
defaming Peter and Paul the blessed apostles, (5) as if the very men delivered this who in their epistles 
execrated heretics, and warned us to avoid them. Whence it appears that this tradition is of men which 
maintains heretics, and asserts that they have baptism, which belongs to the Church alone. 

7. But, moreover, you have well answered that part where Stephen said in his letter that heretics themselves 
also are of one mind in respect of baptism; and that they do not baptize such as come to them from one 
another, but only communicate with them; as if we also ought to do this. In which place, although you have 
already proved that it is sufficiently ridiculous for any one to follow those that are in error, yet we add this 
moreover, over and above, that it is not wonderful for heretics to act thus, who, although in some lesser 
matters they differ, yet in that which is greatest they hold one and the same agreement to blaspheme the 
Creator, figuring for themselves certain dreams and phantasms of an unknown God. Assuredly it is but 
natural that these should agree in having a baptism which is unreal, (1) in the same way as they agree in 
repudiating the truth of the divinity. Of whom, since it is tedious to reply to their several statements, either 
wicked or foolish, it is sufficient shortly to say in sum, that they who do not hold the true Lord the Father 
cannot hold the truth either of the Son or of the Holy Spirit; according to which also they who are called 
Cataphrygians, and endeavour to claim to themselves new prophecies, can have neither the Father, nor the 
Son, nor the Holy Spirit,(2) of whom, if we ask what Christ they announce, they will reply that they preach Him 
who sent the Spirit that speaks by Montanus and Prisca. And in these, when we observe that there has been 
not the spirit of truth, but of error, we know that they who maintain their false prophesying against the faith of 
Christ cannot have Christ. Moreover, all other heretics, if they have separated themselves from the Church of 
God, can have nothing of power or of grace, since all power and grace are established in the Church where 
the elders(3) preside, who possess the power both of baptizing, and of imposition of hands, and of 
ordaining. For as a heretic may not lawfully ordain nor lay on hands, so neither may he baptize, nor do any 
thing holily or spiritually, since he is an alien from spiritual and deifying sanctity. All which we some time 
back confirmed in Iconium, which is a place in Phrygia, when we were assembled together with those who 
had gathered from Galatia and Cilicia, and other neighbouring countries, as to be held and firmly vindicated 
against heretics, when there was some doubt in certain minds concerning that matter.(4) 

8. And as Stephen and those who agree with him contend that putting away of sins and second birth may 
result from the baptism of heretics, among whom they themselves confess that the Holy Spirit is not; let them 
consider and understand that spiritual birth cannot be without the Spirit; in conformity with which also the 
blessed Apostle Paul baptized anew with a spiritual baptism those who had already been baptized by John 
before the Holy Spirit had been sent by the Lord, and so laid hands on them that they might receive the Holy 
Ghost. But what kind of a thing is it, that when we see that Paul, after John's baptism, baptized his disciples 
again, we are hesitating to baptize those who come to the Church from heresy after their unhallowed and 
profane dipping. Unless, perchance, Paul was inferior to the bishops of these times, so that these indeed 
can by imposition of hands alone give the Holy Spirit to those heretics who come (to the Church), while Paul 
was not fitted to give the Holy Spirit by imposition of hands to those who had been baptized by John, unless 
he had first baptized them also with the baptism of the Church. 

9. That, moreover, is absurd, that they do not think it is to be inquired who was the person that baptized, for 
the reason that he who has been baptized may have obtained grace by the invocation of the Trinity, of the 
names of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Then this will be the wisdom which Paul writes is 
in those who are perfected. But who in the Church is perfect and wise who can either defend or believe this, 
that this bare invocation of names is sufficient to the remission of sins and the sanctification of baptism; since 
these things are only then of advantage, when both he who baptizes has the Holy Spirit, and the baptism 
itself also is not ordained without the Spirit? But, say they, he who in any manner whatever is baptized 
without, may obtain the grace of baptism by his disposition and faith, which doubtless is ridiculous in itself. 

as if either a wicl<ed disposition could attract to itself from heaven the sanctification of the righteous, or a 
false faith the truth of believers. But that not all who call on the name of Christ are heard, and that their 
invocation cannot obtain any grace, the Lord Himself manifests, saying, "Many shall come in my name, 
saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many. "(5) Because there is no difference between a false prophet 
and a heretic. For as the former deceives in the name of God or Christ, so the latter deceives in the 
sacrament of baptism. Both strive by falsehood to deceive men's wills. 

10. But I wish to relate to you some facts concerning a circumstance which occurred among us, pertaining to 
this very matter. About two-and-twenty years ago, in the tithes after the Emperor Alexander, there happened 
in these parts many struggles and difficulties, either in general to all men, or privately to Christians. 
Moreover, there were many and frequent earthquakes, so that many places were overthrown throughout 
Cappadocia and Pontus; even certain cities, dragged into the abyss, were swallowed up by the opening of 
the gaping earth. So that from this also a severe persecution arose against us of the Christian name; and 
this after the long peace of the previous age arose suddenly, and with its unusual evils was made more 
terrible for the disturbance of our people. Se-renianus was then governor in our province, a bitter and terrible 
persecutor. But the faithful being set in this state of disturbance, and fleeing hither and thither for fear of the 
persecution, and leaving their country and passing over into other regions-for there was an opportunity of 
passing over, for the reason that that persecution was not over the whole world, but was local-there arose 
among us on a sudden a certain woman, who in a state of ecstasy announced herself as a prophetess, and 
acted as if filled with the Holy Ghost. And she was so moved by the impetus of the principal demons, that for 
a long time she made anxious and deceived the brotherhood, accomplishing certain wonderful and 
portentous things, and promised that she would cause the earth to be shaken. Not that the power of the 
demon was so great that he could prevail to shake the earth, or to disturb the elements; but that sometimes 
a wicked spirit, prescient, and perceiving that there will be an earthquake, pretends that he will do what he 
sees will happen. By these lies and boastings he had so subdued the minds of individuals, that they 
obeyed him and followed whithersoever he commanded and led. He would also make that woman walk in 
the keen winter with bare feet over frozen snow, and not to be troubled or hurt in any degree by that walking. 
Moreover, she would say that she was hurrying to Judea and to Jerusalem, feigning as if she had come 
thence. Here also she deceived one of the presbyters, a countryman, and another, a deacon, so that they 
had intercourse with that same woman, which was shortly afterwards detected. For on a sudden there 
appeared unto her one of the exorcists, a man approved and always of good conversation in respect of 
religious discipline; who, stimulated by the exhortation also of very many brethren who were themselves 
strong and praiseworthy in the faith, raised himself up against that wicked spirit to overcome it; which 
moreover, by its subtile fallacy, had predicted this a little while before, that a certain adverse and 
unbelieving tempter would come. Yet that exorcist, inspired by God's grace, bravely resisted, and showed 
that that which was before thought holy, was indeed a most wicked spirit. But that woman, who previously by 
wiles and deceitfulness of the demon was attempting many things for the deceiving of the faithful, among 
other things by which she had deceived many, also had frequently dared this; to pretend that with an 
invocation not to be contemned she sanctified bread and celebrated, the Eucharist, and to offer sacrifice to 
the Lord, not without the sacrament of the accustomed utterance; and also to baptize many, making use of 
the usual and lawful words of interrogation, that nothing might seem to be different from the ecclesiastical 
rule. 

1 1 . What, then, shall we say about the baptism of this woman, by which a most wicked demon baptized 
through means of a woman? Do Stephen and they who agree with him approve of this also especially when 
neither the symbol of the Trinity nor the legitimate and ecclesiastical interrogatory were wanting to her? Can 
it be believed that either remission of sins was given, or the regeneration of the saving layer duly 
completed, when all things, although after the image of truth, yet were done by a demon? Unless, 
perchance, they who defend the baptism of heretics contend that the demon also conferred the grace of 
baptism in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Among them, no doubt, there is the 
same error-it is the very deceitfulness of devils, since among them the Holy Spirit is not at all. 

12. Moreover, what is the meaning of that which Stephen would assert, that the presence and holiness of 
Christ is with those who are baptized among heretics? For if the apostle does not speak falsely when he 
says, "As many of you as are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, "(2) certainly he who has been 
baptized among them into Christ, has put on Christ. But if he has put on Christ, he might also receive the Holy 
Ghost, who was sent by Christ, and hands are vainly laid upon him who comes to us for the reception of the 
Spirit; unless, perhaps, he has not put on the Spirit from Christ, so that Christ indeed may be with heretics, but 
the Holy Spirit not be with them. 

13. But let us briefly run through the other matters also, which were spoken of by you abundantly and most 
fully, especially as Rogaflanus, our well-beloved deacon, is hurrying to you. For it follows that they must be 
asked by us, when they defend hereflcs, whether their bapflsm is carnal or spiritual. For if it is carnal, they 

differ in no respect from tiie baptism of tiie Jews, wiiicii tiiey use in sucii a manner tiiat in it, as if in a common 
and vulgar laver, only external filth is washed away. But if it is spiritual, how can baptism be spiritual among 
those among whom there is no Holy Spirit? And thus the water wherewith they are washed is to them only a 
carnal washing, not a sacrament of baptism. 

14. But if the baptism of heretics can have the regeneration of the second birth, those who are baptized 
among them must be counted not heretics, but children of God. For the second birth, which occurs in 
baptism, begets sons of God. But if the spouse of Christ is one, which is the Catholic Church, it is she herself 
who alone bears sons of God. For there are not many spouses of Christ, since the apostle says, "I have 
espoused you, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ;"(1) and, "Hearken, O daughter, and 
consider, and incline thine ear; forget also thine own people, for the King hath greatly desired thy beauty;"(2) 
and, "Come with me, my spouse, from Lebanon; thou shalt come, and shalt pass over from the source of thy 
faith; "(3) and, "I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse. "(4) We see that one person is everywhere 
set forward, because also the spouse is one. But the synagogue of heretics is not one with us, because the 
spouse is not an adulteress and a harlot. Whence also she cannot bear children of God; unless, as 
appears to Stephen, heresy indeed brings them forth and exposes them, while the Church takes them up 
when exposed, and nourishes those for her own whom she has not born, although she cannot be the mother 
of strange children. And therefore Christ our Lord, setting forth that His spouse is one, and declaring the 
sacrament of His unity, says, "He that is not with me is against me, and he that gathereth not with me 
scattereth."(5) For if Christ is with us, but the heretics are not with us, certainly the heretics are in opposition to 
Christ; and if we gather with Christ, but the heretics do not gather with us, doubtless they scatter. 

15. But neither must we pass over what has been necessarily remarked by you, that the Church, according 
to the Song of Songs, is a garden enclosed, and a fountain sealed, a paradise with the fruit of apples. (6) 
They who have never entered into this garden, and have not seen the paradise planted by God the Creator, 
how shall they be able to afford to another the bring water of the saving lava from the fountain which is 
enclosed within, and sealed with a divine seal? And as the ark of Noah was nothing else than the sacrament 
of the Church of Christ, which then, when all without were perishing, kept those only safe who were within the 
ark, we are manifestly instructed to look to the unity of the Church. Even as also the Apostle Peter laid down, 
saying, "Thus also shall baptism in like manner make you safe;"(7) showing that as they who were not in the 
ark with Noah not only were not purged and saved by water, but at once perished in that deluge; so now 
also, whoever are not in the Church with Christ will perish outside, unless they are converted by penitence to 
the only and saving lava of the Church. 

16. But what is the greatness of his error, and what the depth of his blindness, who says that remission of sins 
can be granted in the synagogues of heretics, and does not abide on the foundation of the one Church 
which was once based by Christ upon the rock, may be perceived from this, that Christ said to Peter alone, 
"Whatsoever thou shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth 
shall be loosed in heaven. "(8) And again, in the Gospel, when Christ breathed on the apostles alone, 
saying, "Receive ye the Holy Ghost: whose soever sins ye remit they are remitted unto them, and whose 
soever sins ye retain they are retained. "(9) Therefore the power of remitting sins was given to the apostles, 
and to the churches which they, sent by Christ, established, and to the bishops who succeeded to them by 
vicarious ordination. (10) But the enemies of the one Catholic Church in which we are, and the adversaries of 
us who have succeeded the apostles, asserting for themselves, in opposition to us, unlawful priesthoods, 
and setting up profane altars, what else are they than Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, profane with a like 
wickedness, and about to suffer the same punishments which they did, as well as those who agree with 
them, just as their partners and abettors perished with a like death to theirs? 

17. And in this respect I am justly indignant at this so open and manifest folly of Stephen, that he who so 
boasts of the place of his episcopate, and contends that he holds the succession from Peter," on whom the 
foundations of the Church were laid, should introduce many other rocks and establish new buildings of many 
churches; maintaining that there is baptism in them by his authority. For they who are baptized, doubtless, fill 
up the number of the Church. But he who approves their baptism maintains, of those baptized, that the 
Church is also with them. Nor does he understand that the truth of the Christian Rock is overshadowed, and 
in some measure abolished, by him when he thus betrays and deserts unity. (12) The apostle 
acknowledges that the Jews, although blinded by ignorance, and bound by the grossest wickedness, have 
yet a zeal for God. Stephen, who announces that he holds by succession the throne of Peter, is stirred with 
no zeal against heretics, when he concedes to them, not a moderate, but the very greatest power of grace: 
so far as to say and assert that, by the sacrament of baptism, the filth of the old man is washed away by 
them, that they pardon the former mortal sins, that they make sons of God by heavenly regeneration, and 
renew to eternal life by the sanctification of the divine layer. He who concedes and gives up to heretics in 
this way the great and heavenly gifts of the Church, what else does he do but communicate with them for 
whom he maintains and claims so much grace? And now he hesitates in vain to consent to them, and to be 

a partaker with them in other matters also, to meet together with them, and equally with them to mingle their 
prayers, and appoint a common altar and sacrifice. 

18. But, says he, "the name of Christ is of great advantage to faith and the sanctification of baptism; so that 
whosoever is anywhere so-ever baptized in the name of Christ, immediately obtains the grace of Christ: 
"although this position may be briefly met and answered, that if baptism without in the name of Christ availed 
for the cleansing of man; in the name of the same Christ, the imposition of hands might avail also for the 
reception of the Holy Spirit; and the other things also which are done among heretics will begin to seem just 
and lawful when they are done in the name of Christ; as you have maintained in your letter that the name of 
Christ could be of no avail except in the Church alone, to which alone Christ has conceded the power of 
heavenly grace. 

19. But with respect to the refutation of custom which they seem to oppose to the truth, who is so foolish as to 
prefer custom to truth, or when he sees the light, not to forsake the darkness?-unless most ancient custom in 
any respect avail the Jews, upon the advent of Christ, that is, the Truth, in remaining in their old usage, and 
forsaking the new way of truth. And this indeed you Africans are able to say against Stephen, that when you 
knew the truth you forsook the error of custom. But we join custom to truth, and to the Romans' custom we 
oppose custom, but the custom of truth; holding from the beginning that which was delivered by Christ and 
the apostles. (1) Nor do we remember that this at any time began among us, since it has always been 
observed here, that we knew none but one Church of God, and accounted no baptism holy except that of the 
holy Church. Certainly, since some doubted about the baptism of those who, although they receive the new 
prophets, (2) yet appear to recognise the same Father and Son with us; very many of us meeting together in 
Iconium very carefully examined the matter, and we decided that every baptism was altogether to be 
rejected which is arranged for without the Church. (3) 

20. But to what they allege and say on behalf of the heretics, that the apostle said, "Whether in pretence or in 
truth, Christ is preached, "(4) it is idle for us to reply; when it is manifest that the apostle, in his epistle wherein 
he said this, made mention neither of heretics nor of baptism of heretics, but spoke of brethren only, whether 
as perfidiously speaking in agreement with himself, or as persevering in sincere faith; nor is it needful to 
discuss this in a long argument, but it is sufficient to read the epistle itself, and to gather from the apostle 
himself what the apostle said. 

21 . What then, say they, will become of those who, coming from the heretics, have been received without the 
baptism of the Church? If they have departed this life, they are reckoned in the number of those who have 
been catechumens indeed among us, but have died before they were baptized,-no trifling(5) advantage of 
truth and faith, to which they had attained by forsaking error, although, being prevented by death, they had 
not gained the consummation of grace. (6) But they who still abide in life should be baptized with the baptism 
of the Church, that they may obtain remission of sins, lest by the presumption of others they remain in their 
old error, and die without the completion of grace. But what a crime is theirs on the one hand who receive, or 
on the other, theirs who are received, that their foulness not being washed away by the layer of the Church, 
nor their sins put away, communion being rashly seized, they touch the body and blood of the Lord, although 
it is written, "Whosoever shall eat the bread or drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body 
and blood of the Lord !"(7) 

22. We have judged, that those also whom they, who had formerly been bishops in the Catholic Church, and 
afterwards had assumed to themselves the power of clerical ordination, had baptized, are to be regarded 
as not baptized. And this is observed among us, that whosoever dipped by them come to us are baptized 
among us as strangers and having obtained nothing, with the only and true baptism of the Catholic Church, 
and obtain the regeneration of the layer of life. And yet there is a great difference between him who 
unwillingly and constrained by the necessity of persecution has given way, and him who with a profane will 
boldly rebels against the Church, or with impious voice blasphemes against the Father and God of Christ 
and the Creator of the whole world. And Stephen is not ashamed to assert and to say that remission of sins 
can be granted by those who are themselves set fast in all kinds of sins, as if in the house of death there 
could be the layer of salvation. 

23. What, then, is to be made of what is written, "Abstain from strange water, and drink not from a strange 
fountain, "(1) if, leaving the sealed fountain of the Church, you take up strange water for your own, and pollute 
the Church with unhallowed fountains? For when you communicate with the baptism of heretics, what else do 
you do than drink from their slough and mud; and while you yourself are purged with the Church's 
sanctification, you become befouled with the contact of the filth of others? And do you not fear the judgment 
of God when you are giving testimony to heretics in opposition to the Church, although it is written, "A false 
witness shall not be unpunished?"(2) But indeed you are worse than all heretics. For when many, as soon as 
their error is known, come over to you from them that they may receive the true light of the Church, you assist 
the errors of those who come, and, obscuring the light of ecclesiastical truth, you heap up the darkness of 
the heretical night; and although they confess that they are in sins, and have no grace, and therefore come 

to the Church, you take away from them remission of sins, which is given in baptism, by saying that they are 
already baptized and have obtained the grace of the Church outside the Church, and you do not perceive 
that their souls will be required at your hands when the day of judgment shall come, for having denied to the 
thirsting the drink of the Church, and having been the occasion of death to those that were desirious of living. 
And, after all this, you are indignant! 

24. Consider with what want of judgment you dare to blame those who strive for the truth against falsehood. 
For who ought more justly to be indignant against the other?-whether he who supports God's enemies, or 
he who, in opposition to him who supports God's enemies, unites with us on behalf of the truth of the 
Church?-except that it is plain that the ignorant are also excited and angry, because by the want of counsel 
and discourse they are easily turned to wrath; so that of none more than of you does divine Scripture say, "A 
wrathful man stirreth up strifes, and a furious man heapeth up sins. "(3) For what strifes and dissensions have 
you stirred up throughout the churches of the whole world! Moreover, how great sin have you heaped up for 
yourself, when you cut yourself off from so many flocks! For it is yourself that you have cut off. Do not deceive 
yourself, since he is really the schismatic who has made himself an apostate from the communion of 
ecclesiastical unity. (4) For while you think that all may be excommunicated by you, you have 
excommunicated yourself alone from all; and not even the precepts of an apostle have been able to mould 
you to the rule of truth and peace, although he warned, and said, "I therefore, the prisoner of the Lord, 
beseech you that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called, with all lowliness and meekness, 
with long-suffering, forbearing one another in love; endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of 
peace. There is one body and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one 
faith, one baptism; one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in us all. "(5) 

25. How carefully has Stephen fulfilled these salutary commands and warnings of the apostle, keeping in 
the first place lowliness of mind and meekness! For what is more lowly or meek than to have disagreed with 
so many bishops throughout the whole world, breaking peace with each one of them in various kinds of 
discord:(6) at one time with the eastern churches, as we are sure you know; at another time with yon who are 
in the south, from whom he received bishops as messengers sufficiently patiently and meekly not to receive 
them even to the speech of an ordinary conference; and even more, so mindful of love and charity as to 
command the entire fraternity, that no one should receive them into his house, so that not only peace and 
communion, but also a shelter and entertainment, were denied to them when they came! This is to have kept 
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, to cut himself off from the unity of love, (7) and to make himself a 
stranger in all respects from his brethren, and to rebel against the sacrament and the faith with the madness 
of contumacious discord! With such a man can there be one Spirit and one body, in whom perchance there 
is not even one mind, so slippery, and shifting, and uncertain is it? 

26. But as far as he is concerned, let us leave him;(7) let us rather deal with that concerning which there is the 
greatest question. They who contend that persons baptized among the heretics ought to be received as if 
they had obtained the grace of lawful baptism, say that baptism is one and the same to them and to us, and 
differs in no respect. But what says the Apostle Paul? "One Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God. "(8) If the 
baptism of heretics be one and the same with ours, without doubt their faith also is one; but if our faith is one, 
assuredly also we have one Lord: if there is one Lord, it follows that we say that He is one.(1) But if this unity 
which cannot be separated and divided at all, is itself also among heretics, why do we contend any more? 
Why do we call them heretics and not Christians? Moreover, since we and heretics have not one God, nor 
one Lord, nor one Church, nor one faith, nor even one Spirit, nor one body, it is manifest that neither can 
baptism be common to us with heretics, since between us there is nothing at all in common. And yet 
Stephen is not ashamed to afford patronage to such in opposition to the Church, and for the sake of 
maintaining heretics to divide the brotherhood and in addition, to call Cyprian "a false Christ and a false 
apostle, and a deceitful worker."(2) And he, conscious that all these characters are in himself, has been in 
advance of you, by falsely objecting to another those things which he himself ought deservedly to hear. We 
all bid you, for all our sakes, with all the bishops who are in Africa, and all the clergy, and all the brotherhood, 
farewell; that, constantly of one mind, and thinking the same thing, we may find you united with us even 
though afaroff.(3) 

EPISTLE LXXV.-CYPRIAN TO MAGNUS, ON BAPTIZING 
THE NOVATIANS, AND THOSE WHO OBTAIN GRACE 
ON A SICK-BED 

A 

EPISTLE LXXV.(4) 

TO MAGNUS, ON BAPTIZING THE NOVATIANS, AND THOSE WHO OBTAIN GRACE ON A 
SICK-BED. 

ARGUMENT. --THE FORMER PART OF THIS LETTER IS OF THE SAME TENOR WITH 
THOSE THAT PRECEDE, EXCEPT THAT HE INCULCATES CONCERNING THE 
NOVATIANS WHAT HE HAD IN SUBSTANCE SAID CONCERNING ALL HERETICS; 
MOREOVER, INSINUATING BY THE WAY THAT THE LEGITIMATE SUCCESSION OF 
CORNELIUS AT ROME IS KNOWN, AS THE CHURCH MAY BE KNOWN. IN THE SECOND 
PART (WHICH HITHERTO, AS THE TITLE SUFFICIENTLY INDICATES, HAS BEEN 
WRONGLY PUBLISHED AS A SEPARATE LETTER) HE TEACHES THAT THAT IS A TRUE 
BAPTISM WHEREIN ONE IS BAPTIZED BY SPRINKLING ON A SICK-BED, AS WELL AS BY 
IMMERSION IN THE CHURCH. 

1 . Cyprian to Magnus his son, greeting. Witii your usual religious diligence, you have consulted my poor 
intelligence, dearest son, as to whether, among other heretics, they also who come from Novatian ought, 
after his profane washing, to be baptized, and sanctified in the Catholic Church, with the lawful, and true, and 
only baptism of the Church. Respecting which matter, as much as the capacity of my faith and the sanctity 
and truth of the divine Scriptures suggest, I answer, that no heretics and schismatics at all have any power or 
right. For which reason Novatian neither ought to be nor can be expected, inasmuch as he also is without the 
Church and acting in opposition to the peace and love of Christ, from being counted among adversaries 
and antichrists. For our Lord Jesus Christ, when He testified in His Gospel that those who were not with Him 
were His adversaries, did not point out any species of heresy, but showed that all whatsoever who were not 
with Him, and who, not gathering with Him, were scattering His flock, were His adversaries; saying, "He that 
is not with me is against me, and he that gathereth not with me scattereth."(5) Moreover, the blessed Apostle 
John himself distinguished no heresy or schism, neither did he set down any as specially separated; but he 
called all who had gone out from the Church, and who acted in opposition to the Church, antichrists, saying, 
"Ye have heard that Antichrist cometh, and even now are come many antichrists; wherefore we know that 
this is the last time. They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would have 
continued with us. "(6) Whence it appears, that all are adversaries of the Lord and antichrists, who are known 
to have departed from charity and from the unity of the Catholic Church. In addition, moreover, the Lord 
establishes it in His Gospel, and says, "But if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as a 
heathen man and a publican. "(7) Now if they who despise the Church are counted heathens and publicans, 
much more certainly is it necessary that rebels and enemies, who forge false altars, and lawless 
priesthoods, and sacrilegious sacrifices, and corrupter names, should be counted among heathens and 
publicans; since they who sin less, and are only despisers of the Church, are by the Lord's sentence judged 
to be heathens and publicans. 

2. But that the Church is one, the Holy Spirit declares in the Song of Songs, saying, in the person of Christ, 
"My dove, my undefiled, is one; she is the only one of her mother, she is the choice one of her that bare 
her."(8) Concerning which also He says again, "A garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse; a spring 
sealed up, a well of living water."(9) But if the spouse of Christ, which is the Church, is a garden enclosed; a 
thing that is closed up cannot lie open to strangers and profane persons. And if it is a fountain sealed, he 
who, being placed without has no access to the spring, can neither drink thence nor be sealed. And the well 
also of living water, if it is one and the same within, he who is placed without cannot be quickened and 
sanctified from that water of which it is only granted to those who are within to make any use, or to drink. 
Peter also, showing this, set forth that the Church is one, and that only they who are in the Church can be 
baptized; and said, "In the ark of Noah, few, that is, eight souls, were saved by water; the like figure 
where-unto even baptism shall save you;"(1) proving and attesting that the one ark of Noah was a type of 
the one Church. If, then, in that baptism of the world thus expiated and purified, he who was not in the ark of 

Noah could be saved by water, he who is not in the Church to which alone baptism is granted, can also now 
be quickened by baptism. Moreover, too, the Apostle Paul, more openly and clearly still manifesting this 
same thing, writes to the Ephesians, and says, "Christ loved the Church, and gave Himself for it, that He 
might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water."(2) But if the Church is one which is loved by Christ, 
and is alone cleansed by His washing, how can he who is not in the Church be either loved by Christ, or 
washed and cleansed by His washing? 

3. Wherefore, since the Church alone has the living water, and the power of baptizing and cleansing man, he 
who says that any one can be baptized and sanctified by Novatian must first show and teach that Novatian 
is in the Church or presides over the Church. For the Church is one, and as she is one, cannot be both within 
and without. For if she is with Novatian, she was not with Cornelius. (3) But if she was with Cornelius, who 
succeeded the bishop Fabian by lawful ordination, and whom, beside the honour of the priesthood, the Lord 
glorified also with martyrdom, Novatian is not in the Church; nor can he be reckoned as a bishop, who, 
succeeding to no one, and despising the evangelical and apostolic tradition, sprang from himself. For he 
who has not been ordained in the Church can neither have nor hold to the Church in any way. 

4. For the faith of the sacred Scripture sets forth that the Church is not without, nor can be separated nor 
divided against itself, but maintains the unity of an inseparable and undivided house; since it is written of the 
sacrament of the passover, and of the lamb, which Lamb designated Christ: "In one house shall it be eaten: 
ye shall not carry forth the flesh abroad out of the house. "(4) Which also we see expressed concerning 
Rahab, who herself also bore a type of the Church, who received the command which said, "Thou shalt 
bring thy father, and thy mother, and thy brethren, and all thy father's household unto thee into thine house; 
and whosoever shall go out of the doors of thine house into the street, his blood shall be upon him. "(5) In 
which mystery is declared, that they who will live, and escape from the destruction of the world, must be 
gathered together into one house alone, that is, into the Church; but whosoever of those thus collected 
together shall go out abroad, that is, if any one, although he may have obtained grace in the Church, shall 
depart and go out of the Church, that his blood shall be upon him; that is, that he himself must charge it upon 
himself that he perishes; which the Apostle Paul explains, teaching and enjoining that a heretic must be 
avoided, as perverse, and a sinner, and as condemned of himself. For that man will be guilty of his own ruin, 
who, not being cast out by the bishop, but of his own accord deserting from the Church is by heretical 
presumption condemned of himself. 

5. And therefore the Lord, suggesting to us a unity that comes from divine authority, lays it down, saying, "I 
and my Father are one. "(6) To which unity reducing His Church, He says again, "And there shall be one 
flock, (7) and one shepherd. "(8) But if the flock is one, how can he be numbered among the flock who is not in 
the number of the flock? Or how can he be esteemed a pastor, who,-while the true shepherd remains and 
presides over the Church of God by successive ordination,-succeeding to no one, and beginning from 
himself, becomes a stranger and a profane person, an enemy of the Lord's peace and of the divine unity, 
not dwelling in the house of God, that is, in the Church of God, in which none dwell except they are of one 
heart and one mind, since the Holy Spirit speaks in the Psalms, and says, "It is God who maketh men to 
dwell of one mind in a house. "(9) 

6. Besides even the Lord's sacrifices themselves declare that Christian unanimity is linked together with 
itself by a firm and inseparable charity. For when the Lord calls bread, which is combined by the union of 
many grains. His body. He indicates our people whom He bore as being united; and when He calls the 
wine, which is pressed from many grapes and clusters and collected together. His blood. He also signifies 
our flock linked together by the mingling of a united multitude. (10) If Novatian is united to this bread of the 
Lord, if he also is mingled with this cup of Christ, he may also seem to be able to have the grace of the one 
baptism of the Church, if it be manifest that he holds the unity of the Church. In fine, how inseparable is the 
sacrament of unity, and how hopeless are they, and what excessive ruin they earn for themselves from the 
indignation of God, who make a schism, and, forsaking their bishop, (1) appoint another false bishop for 
themselves without,-Holy Scripture declares in the books of Kings; where ten tribes were divided from the 
tribe of Judah and Benjamin, and, forsaking their king, appointed for themselves another one without. It 
says, "And the Lord was very angry with all the seed of Israel, and removed them away, and delivered them 
into the hand of spoilers, until He had cast them out of His sight; for Israel was scattered from the house of 
David, and they made themselves a king, Jeroboam the son of Nebat."(2) It says that the Lord was very 
angry, and gave them up to perdition, because they were scattered from unity, and had made another king 
for themselves. And so great was the indignation of the Lord against those who had made the schism, that 
even when the man of God was sent to Jeroboam, to charge upon him his sins, and predict the future 
vengeance, he was forbidden to eat bread or to drink water with them. And when he did not observe this, 
and took meat against the command of God, he was immediately smitten by the majesty of the divine 
judgment, so that returning thence he was slain on the way by the jaws of a lion which attacked him. And 
dares any one to say that the saving water of baptism and heavenly grace can be in common with 
schismatics, with whom neither earthly food nor worldly drink ought to be in common? Moreover, the Lord 

satisfies us in His Gospel, and siiows fortii a still greater light of intelligence, that the same persons who had 
then divided themselves from the tribe of Judah and Benjamin, and forsaking Jerusalem had seceded to 
Samaria, should be reckon among profane persons and Gentiles. For when first He sent His disciples on 
the ministry of salvation. He bade them, saying, "Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the 
Samaritans enter ye not."(3) Sending first to the Jews, He commands the Gentiles as yet to be passed over; 
but by adding that even the city of the Samaritans was to be omitted, where there were schismatics. He 
shows that schismatics were to be put on the same level as Gentiles. 

7. But if any one objects, by way of saying that Novatian holds the same law which the Catholic Church 
holds, baptizes with the same symbol with which we baptize, knows the same God and Father, the same 
Christ the Son, the same Holy Spirit, and that for this reason he may claim the power of baptizing, namely, 
that he seems not to differ from us in the baptismal interrogatory; let any one that thinks that this may be 
objected, know first of all, that them is not one law of the Creed, nor the same interrogatory common to us 
and to schismatics. For when they say, "Dost thou believe the remission of sins and life eternal through the 
holy Church?" they lie in their interrogatory, since they have not the Church. Then, besides, with their own 
voice they themselves confess that remission of sins cannot be given except by the holy Church; and not 
having this, they show that sins cannot be remitted among them. 

8. But that they are said to have the same God the Father as we, to know the same Christ the Son, the same 
Holy Spirit, can be of no avail to such as these. For even Korah, Dathan, and Abiram knew the same God as 
did the priest Aaron and Moses. Living under the same law and religion, they invoke the one and true God, 
who was to be invoked and worshipped; yet, because they transgressed the ministry of their office in 
opposition to Aaron the priest, who bad received the legitimate priesthood by the condescension of God 
and the ordination of the Lord, and claimed to themselves the power of sacrificing, divinely stricken, they 
immediately suffered punishment for their unlawful endeavours; and sacrifices offered irreligiously and 
lawlessly, contrary to the right of divine appointment, could not be accepted, nor profit them. Even those 
very censers in which incense had been lawlessly offered, lest they should any more be used by the 
priests, but that they might rather exhibit a memorial of the divine vengeance and indignation for the 
correction of their successors, being by the command of the Lord melted and purged by fire, were beaten 
out into flexible plates, and fastened to the altars, according to what the Holy Scripture says, "to be," it says, 
"a memorial to the children of Israel, that no stranger which is not of the seed of Aaron come near to offer 
incense before the Lord, that he be not as Korah. "(4) And yet those men had not made a schism, nor had 
gone out abroad, and in opposition to God's priests rebelled shamelessly and with hostility; but this these 
men are now doing who divide the Church, and, as rebels against the peace and unity of Christ, attempt to 
establish a throne for themselves, and to assume the primacy, (5) and to claim the right of baptizing and of 
offering. How can they complete what they do, or obtain anything by lawless endeavours from God, seeing 
that they are endeavouring against God what is not lawful to them? Wherefore they who patronize Novatian 
or other schismatics of that kind, contend in vain that any one can be baptized and sanctified with a saving 
baptism among them, when it is plain that he who baptizes has not the power of baptizing. 

9. And, moreover, that it may be better understood what is the divine judgment against audacity of the like 
kind, we find that in such wickedness, not only the leaders and originators, but also the partakers, are 
destined to punishment, unless they have separated themselves from the communion of the wicked; as the 
Lord by Moses commands, and says, "Separate yourselves from the tents of these most hardened men, 
and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be consumed in their sins. "(1) And what the Lord had threatened by 
Moses He fulfilled, that whosoever had not separated himself from Korah, and Dathan, and Abiram, 
immediately suffered punishment for his impious communion. By which example is shown and proved, that 
all will be liable to guilt as well as its punishment, who with irreligious boldness mingle themselves with 
schismatics in opposition to prelates and priests; even as also by the prophet Osea the Holy Spirit 
witnesses, and says, "Their sacrifices shall be unto them as the bread of mourning; all that thereof shall be 
polluted; "(2) teaching, doubtless, and showing that all are absolutely joined with the leaders in punishment, 
who have been contaminated by their crime. 

10. What, then, can be their deservings in the sight of God, on whom punishment are divinely denounced? or 
how can such persons justify and sanctify the baptized, who, being enemies of the priests, strive to usurp 
things foreign and lawless, and by no right conceded to them? And yet we do not wonder that, in 
accordance with their wickedness, they do contend for them. For it is necessary that each one of them 
should maintain what they do; nor when vanquished will they easily yield, although they know that what they 
do is not lawful. That is to be wondered at, yea, rather to be indignant and aggrieved at, that Christians 
should support antichrists; and that prevaricators of the faith, and betrayers of the Church, should stand 
within in the Church itself.(3) And these, although otherwise obstinate and unteachable, yet still at least 
confess this that all, whether heretics or schismatics, are without the Holy Ghost, and therefore can indeed 
baptize, but cannot confer the Holy Spirit; and at this very point they are held fast by us, inasmuch as we 
show that those who have not the Holy Ghost are not able to baptize at all. 

1 1 . For since in baptism every one lias iiis own sins remitted, tiie Lord proves and declares in His Gospel 
that sins can only be put away by those who have the Holy Spirit. For after His resurrection, sending forth His 
disciples. He speaks to them, and says, "As the Father hath sent me, even so send I you. And when He had 
said this. He breathed on them, and said to them. Receive ye the Holy Ghost. Whose soever sins ye remit, 
they shall be remitted unto them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they shall be retained. "(4) In which place 
He shows, that he alone can baptize and give remission of sins who has the Holy Spirit. Moreover, John, 
who was to baptize Christ our Lord Himself, previously received the Holy Ghost while he was yet in his 
mother's womb, that it might be certain and manifest that none can baptize save those who have the Holy 
Spirit. Therefore those who patronize heretics or schismatics must answer us whether they have or have not 
the Holy Ghost. If they have, why are hands imposed on those who are baptized among them when they 
come to us, that they may receive the Holy Ghost, since He must surely have been received there, where if 
He was He could be given? But if heretics and schismatics baptized without have not the Holy Spirit, and 
therefore hands are imposed on them among us, that here may be received what there neither is nor can be 
given; it is plain, also, that remission of sins cannot be given by those who, it is certain, have not the Holy 
Spirit. And therefore, in order that, according to the divine arrangement and the evangelical truth, they may 
be able to obtain remission of sins, and to be sanctified, and to become temples of God, they must all 
absolutely be baptized with the baptism of the Church who come from adversaries and antichrists to the 
Church of Christ. 

12. You have asked also, dearest son, what I thought of those who obtain God's grace in sickness and 
weakness, whether they are to be accounted legitimate Christians, for that they are not to be washed, but 
sprinkled, with the saving water. In this point, my diffidence and modesty prejudges none, so as to prevent 
any from feeling what he thinks right, and from doing what he feels to be right.(5) As far as my poor 
understanding conceives it, I think that the divine benefits can in no respect be mutilated and weakened; nor 
can anything less occur in that case, where, with full and entire faith both of the giver and receiver, is 
accepted what is drawn from the divine gifts. For in the sacrament of salvation the contagion of sins is not in 
such wise washed away, as the filth of the skin and of the body is washed away in the carnal and ordinary 
washing, as that there should be need of saltpetre and other appliances also, and a bath and a basin 
wherewith this vile body must be washed and purified. Otherwise is the breast of the believer washed; 
otherwise is the mind of man purified by the merit of faith. In the sacraments of salvation, when necessity 
compels, and God bestows His mercy, the divine methods confer the whole benefit on believers; nor ought 
it to trouble any one that sick people seem to be sprinkled or affused, when they obtain the Lord's grace, 
when Holy Scripture speaks by the mouth of the prophet Ezekiel, and says, "Then will I sprinkle clean water 
upon you, and ye shall be clean: from all your filthiness and from all your idols will I cleanse you. And I will 
give you a new heart, and a new spirit will I put within you."(1) Also in Numbers: "And the man that shall be 
unclean until the evening shall be purified on the third day, and on the seventh day shall be clean: but if he 
shall not be purified on the third day, on the seventh day he shall not be clean. And that soul shall be cut off 
from Israel: because the water of sprinkling hath not been sprinkled upon him. "(2) And again: "And the Lord 
spake unto Moses saying. Take the Levites from among the children of Israel, and cleanse them. And thus 
Shalt thou do unto them, to cleanse them: thou shall sprinkle them with the water of purification. "(3) And again: 
"The water of sprinkling is a purification. "(4) Whence it appears that the sprinkling also of water prevails 
equally with the washing of salvation; and that when this is done in the Church, where the faith both of 
receiver and giver is sound, all things hold and may be con- summated and perfected by the majesty of the 
Lord and by the truth of faith. 

1 3. But, moreover, in respect of some calling those who have obtained the peace of Christ by the saving 
water and by legitimate faith, not Christians, but Clinics, I do not find whence they take up this name, unless 
perhaps, having read more, and of a more recondite kind, they have taken these Clinics from Hippocrates 
or Soranus.(5) Fori, who know of a Clinic in the Gospel, know that to that paralytic and infirm man, who lay on 
his bed during the long course of his life, his infirmity presented no obstacle to his attainment in the fullest 
degree of heavenly strength. Nor was he only raised from his bed by the divine indulgence, but he also took 
up his bed itself with his restored and increased strength. And therefore, as far as it is allowed me by faith to 
conceive and to think, this is my opinion, that any one should be esteemed a legitimate Christian, who by the 
law and right of faith shall have obtained the grace of God in the Church. Or if any one think that those have 
gained nothing by having only been sprinkled with the saving water, but that they are still empty and void, let 
them not be deceived, so as if they escape the evil of their sickness, and get well, they should seek to be 
baptized. (6) But if they cannot be baptized who have already been sanctified by ecclesiastical baptism, 
why are they offended in respect of their faith and the mercy of the Lord? Or have they obtained indeed the 
divine favour, but in a shorter and more limited measure of the divine gift and of the Holy Spirit, so as indeed 
to be esteemed Christians, but yet not to be counted equal with others? 

14. Nay, verily, the Holy Spirit is not given by measure, but is poured out altogether on the believer. For if the 
day rises alike to all, and if the sun is diffused with like and equal light over all, how much more does Christ, 

who is the true sun and the true day, bestow in His Church the light of eternal life with the like equality! Of 
which equality we see the sacrament celebrated in Exodus, when the manna flowed down from heaven, 
and, prefiguring the things to come, showed forth the nourishment of the heavenly bread and the food of the 
coming Christ. For there, without distinction either of sex or of age, an omer was collected equally by each 
one? Whence it appeared that the mercy of Christ, and the heavenly grace that would subsequently follow, 
was equally divided among all; without difference of sex, without distinction of years, without accepting of 
persons, upon all the people of God the gift of spiritual grace was shed. Assuredly the same spiritual grace 
which is equally received in baptism by believers, is subsequently either increased or diminished in our 
conversation and conduct; as in the Gospel the Lord's seed is equally sown, but, according to the variety of 
the soil, some is wasted, and some is increased into a large variety of plenty, with an exuberant fruit of either 
thirty or sixty or a hundred fold. But, once more, when each was called to receive a penny, wherefore should 
what is distributed equally by God be diminished by human interpretation? 

15. But if any one is moved by this, that some of those who are baptized in sickness are still tempted by 
unclean spirits, let him know that the obstinate wickedness of the devil prevails even up to the saving water, 
but that in baptism it loses all the poison of his wickedness. An instance of this we see in the king Pharaoh, 
who, having struggled long, and delayed in his perfidy, could resist and prevail until he came to the water; 
but when he had come thither, he was both conquered and destroyed. And that that sea was a sacrament of 
baptism, the blessed Apostle Paul declares, saying, "Brethren, I would not have you ignorant how that all 
our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea, and were all baptized unto Moses in the 
cloud and in the sea;" and he added, saying, "Now all these things were our examples. "(1) And this also is 
done in the present day, in that the devil is scourged, and burned, and tortured by exorcists, by the human 
voice, and by divine power;(2) and although he often says, that he is going out, and will leave the men of 
God, yet in that which he says he deceives, and puts in practice what was before done by Pharaoh with the 
same obstinate and fraudulent deceit. When, however, they come to the water of salvation and to the 
sanctification of baptism, we ought to know and to trust that there the devil is beaten down, and the man, 
dedicated to God, is set free by the divine mercy. For as scorpions and serpents, which prevail on the dry 
ground, when cast into water, cannot prevail nor retain their venom; so also the wicked spirits, which are 
called scorpions and serpents, and yet are trodden under foot by us, by the power given by the Lord, 
cannot remain any longer in the body of a man in whom, baptized and sanctified, the Holy Spirit is beginning 
to dwell. 

16. This, finally, in very fact also we experience, that those who are baptized by urgent necessity in 
sickness, and obtain grace, are free from the unclean spirit wherewith they were previously moved, and live 
in the Church in praise and honour, and day by day make more and more advance in the increase of 
heavenly grace by the growth of their faith. And, on the other hand, some of those who are baptized in health, 
if subsequently they begin to sin, are shaken by the return of the unclean spirit, so that it is manifest that the 
devil is driven out in baptism by the faith of the believer, and returns if the faith afterwards shall fail. Unless, 
indeed, it seems just to some, that they who, outside the Church among adversaries and antichrists, are 
polluted with profane water, should be judged to be baptized; while they who are baptized in the Church are 
thought to have attained less of divine mercy and grace; and so great consideration be had for heretics, that 
they who come from heresy are not interrogated whether they are washed or sprinkled, whether they be 
clinics or peripatetics; but among us the sound truth of faith is disparaged, and in ecclesiastical baptism its 
majesty and sanctity suffer derogation. (3) 

17. 1 have replied, dearest son, to your letter, so far as my poor ability prevailed; and I have shown, as far as 
I could, what I think; prescribing to no one, so as to prevent any prelate from determining what he thinks right, 
as he shall give an account of his own doings to the Lord, according to what the blessed Apostle Paul in his 
Epistle to the Romans writes and says: "Every one of us shall give account for himself: let us not therefore 
judge one another."(4) I bid you, dearest son, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLES LXXVI TO LXXIX.-CYPRIAN TO 
NEMESIANUS AND OTHER MARTYRS IN THE MINES 8l 
THEIR REPLIES 

EPISTLE LXXVI. (5) 

CYPRIAN TO NEMESIANUS AND OTHER MARTYRS IN THE MINES. (6) 

ARGUMENT. --HE EXTOLS WITH WONDERFUL COMMENDATIONS THE MARTYRS IN THE 
MINES, OPPOSING, IN A BEAUTIFUL ANTITHESIS, TO THE TORTURES OF EACH, THE 
CONSOLATIONS OF EACH. 

1. Cyprian to Nemesianus, Felix, Lucius, anotiier Felix, Litteus, Polianus, Victor, Jader, and Dativus, his 
fellow-bishops, also to his fellow-presbyters and deacons, and the rest of the brethren in the mines, martyrs 
of God the Father Almighty, and of Jesus Christ our Lord, and of God our preserver, everlasting greeting. 
Your glory, indeed, would demand, most blessed and beloved brethren, that I myself should come to see 
and to embrace you, if the limits of the place appointed me did not restrain me, banished as I am for the 
sake of the confession of the Name. But in what way I can, I bring myself into your presence; and even 
though it is not permitted me to come to you in body and in movement, yet in love and in spirit I come 
expressing my mind in my letter, in which mind I joyfully exult in those virtues and praises of yours, counting 
myself a partaker with you, although not in bodily suffering, yet in community of love. Could I be silent and 
restrain my voice in stillness, when I am made aware of so many and such glorious things concerning my 
dearest friends, things with which the divine condescension has honoured you, so that part of you have 
already gone before by the consummation of their martyrdom to receive from their Lord the crown of their 
deserts? Part still abide in the dungeons of the prison, or in the mines and in chains, exhibiting by the very 
delays of their punishments, greater examples for the strengthening and arming of the brethren, advancing 
by the tediousness of their tortures to more ample titles of merit, to receive as many payments in heavenly 
rewards, as days are now counted in their punishments. I do not marvel, most brave and blessed brethren, 
that these things have happened to you in consideration of the desert of your religion and your faith; that the 
Lord should thus have lifted you to the lofty height of glory by the honour of His glorification, seeing that you 
have always flourished in His Church, guarding the tenor of the faith, keeping firmly the Lord's commands; in 
simplicity, innocence; in charity, concord; modesty in humility, diligence in administration, watchfulness in 
helping those that suffer, mercy in cherishing the poor, constancy in defending the truth, judgment in severity 
of discipline. And that nothing should be wanting to the example of good deeds in you, even now, in the 
confession of your voice and the suffering of your body, you provoke the minds of your brethren to divine 
martyrdom, by exhibiting yourselves as leaders of virtue, that while the flock follows its pastors, and imitates 
what it sees to be done by those set over it, it may be crowned with the like merits of obedience by the Lord. 

2. But that, being first severely beaten with clubs, and ill-used, you have begun by sufferings of that kind, the 
glorious firstlings of your confession, is not a matter to be execrated by us. For a Christian body is not very 
greatly terrified at clubs, seeing all its hope is in the Wood.(1) The servant of Christ acknowledges the 
sacrament of his salvation: redeemed by wood to life eternal, he is advanced by wood to the crown. But 
what wonder if, as golden and silver vessels, you have been committed to the mine that is the home of gold 
and silver, except that now the nature of the mines is changed, and the places which previously had been 
accustomed to yield gold and silver have begun to receive them? Moreover, they have put fetters on your 
feet, and have bound your blessed limbs, and the temples of God with disgraceful chains, as if the spirit 
also could be bound with the body, or your gold could be stained by the contact of iron. To men who are 
dedicated to God, and attesting their faith with religious courage, such things are ornaments, not chains; nor 
do they bind the feet of the Christians for infamy, but glorify them for a crown. Oh feet blessedly bound, which 
are loosed, not by the smith but by the Lord! Oh feet blessedly bound, which are guided to paradise in the 
way of salvation! Oh feet bound for the present time in the world, that they may be always free with the Lord! 
Oh feet, lingering for a while among the fetters and cross-bars, (2) but to run quickly to Christ on a glorious 
road! Let cruelty, either envious or malignant, hold you here in its bonds and chains as long as it will, from 
this earth and from these sufferings you shall speedily come to the kingdom of heaven. The body is not 
cherished in the mines with couch and cushions, but it is cherished with the refreshment and solace of Christ. 

The frame wearied with labours lies prostrate on the ground, but it is no penalty to lie down with Christ. Your 
limbs unbathed, are foul and disfigured with filth and dirt; but within they are spiritually cleansed, although 
without the flesh is defiled. There the bread is scarce; but man liveth not by bread alone, but by the word of 
God. Shivering, you want clothing; but he who puts on Christ is both abundantly clothed and adorned. The 
hair of your half-shorn bead(3) seems repulsive; but since Christ is the head of the man, anything whatever 
must needs become that head which is illustrious on account of Christ's name. All that deformity, detestable 
and foul to Gentiles, with what splendour shall it be recompensed! This temporal and brief suffering, how 
shall it be exchanged for the re ward of a bright and eternal honour, when, according to the word of the 
blessed apostle, "the Lord shall change the body of our humiliation, that it may be fashioned like to the body 
ofHisbrightness!"(4) 

3. But there cannot be felt any loss of either religion or faith, most beloved brethren, in the fact that now there 
is given no opportunity there to God's priests for offering and celebrating the divine sacrifices; yea, you 
celebrate and offer a sacrifice to God equally(5) precious and glorious, and that will greatly profit you for the 
retribution of heavenly rewards, since the sacred Scripture speaks, saying, "The sacrifice of God is a 
broken spirit; a contrite and humbled heart God doth not despise. "(6) You offer this sacrifice to God; you 
celebrate this sacrifice without intermission day and night, being made victims to God, and exhibiting 
yourselves as holy and unspotted offerings, as the apostle exhorts and says, "I beseech you therefore, 
brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God. 
And be not conformed to this world; but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove 
what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God."(1) 

4. For this it is which especially pleases God; it is this wherein our works with greater deserts are successful 
in earning God's good-will; this it is which alone the obedience of our faith and devotion can render to the 
Lord for His great and saving benefits, as the Holy Spirit declares and witnesses in the Psalms: "What shall 
I render," says He, "to the Lord for all His benefits towards me? I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call 
upon the name of the Lord. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints. "(2) Who would not 
gladly and readily receive the cup of salvation? Who would not with joy and gladness desire that in which 
he himself also may render somewhat unto His Lord? Who would not bravely and unfalteringly receive a 
death precious in the sight of the Lord, to please His eyes, who, looking down from above upon us who are 
placed in the conflict for His name, approves the willing, assists the struggling, crowns the conquering with 
the recompense of patience, goodness, and affection, rewarding in us whatever He Himself has bestowed, 
and honouring what He has accomplished? 

5. For that it is His doing that we conquer, and that we attain by the subduing of the adversary to the palm of 
the greatest contest, the Lord declares and teaches in His Gospel, saying, "But when they deliver you up, 
take no thought how or what ye shall speak; for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak. 
For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you. "(3) And again: "Settle it 
therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what ye shall answer; for I will give you a month and wisdom, 
which your adversaries shall not be able to resist. "(4) In which, indeed, is both the great confidence of 
believers, and the gravest fault of the faithless, that they do not trust Him who promises to give His help to 
those who confess Him, and do not on the other hand fear Him who threatens eternal punishment to those 
who deny Him. 

6. All which things, most brave and faithful soldiers of Christ, you have suggested to your brethren, fulfilling in 
deeds what ye have previously taught in words, hereafter to be greatest in the kingdom of heaven, as the 
Lord promises and says, "Whosoever shall do and teach so, 

shall be called the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. "(5) Moreover, a manifold portion of the people, 
following your example, have confessed alike with you, and alike have been crowned, associated with you 
in the bond of the strongest charity, and separated from their prelates neither by the prison nor by the mines; 
in the number of whom neither are there wanting virgins in whom the hundred-fold are added to the fruit of 
sixty-fold, and whom a double glory has advanced to the heavenly crown. In boys also a I courage greater 
than their age has surpassed their years in the praise of their confession, so that every sex and every age 
should adorn the blessed flock of your martyrdom. (6) 

7. What now must be the vigour, beloved brethren, of your victorious consciousness, what the loftiness of 
your mind, what exultation in feeling, what triumph in your breast, that every one of you stands near to the 
promised reward of God, are secure from the judgment of God, walk in the mines with a body captive 
indeed, but with a heart reigning, that you know Christ is present with you, rejoicing in the endurance of His 
servants, who are ascending by His footsteps and in His paths to the eternal kingdoms! You daily expect 
with joy the saving day of your departure; and already about to withdraw from the world, you are hastening to 
the rewards of martyrdom, and to the divine homes, to behold after this darkness of the world the purest light, 
and to receive a glory greater than all sufferings and conflicts, as the apostle witnesses, and says, "The 
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us. "(7) 
And because now your word is more effectual in prayers, and supplication is more quick to obtain what is 

sought for in afflictions, seel< more eagerly, and ask that the divine condescension would consummate the 
confession of all of us; that from this darkness and these snares of the world God would set us also free with 
you, sound and glorious; that we who here are united in the bond of charity and peace, and have stood 
together against the wrongs of heretics and the oppressions of the heathens, may rejoice together in the 
heavenly kingdom. I bid you, most blessed and most beloved brethren, ever farewell in the Lord, and 
always and everywhere remember me. (8) 

EPISTLE LXXVII.(9) 

THE REPLY OF NEMESIANUS, DATIVUS, FELIX, AND VICTOR, TO CYPRIAN. 

ARGUMENT. --THIS EPISTLE AND THE TWO FOLLOWING CONTAIN NOTHING ELSE 
THAN REPLIES TO THE FOREGOING, INASMUCH AS THEY CONTAIN THE 
THANKSGIVING AS WELL FOR THE COMFORT CONVEYED BY THE LETTER AS FOR THE 
ASSISTANCE SENT THEREWITH. BUT FROM THE FACT THAT THREE DISTINCT 
LETTERS ARE SENT IN REPLY TO THE SINGLE ONE OF CYPRIAN'S, WE ARE TO 
GATHER THAT THE BISHOPS WHO WROTE THEM WERE PLACED IN DIFFERENT 
DEPARTMENTS OF THE MINES. (1) 

1. Nemesianus, Dativus, Felix, and Victor, to their brother Cyprian, in the Lord eternal salvation. You speak, 
dearly beloved Cyprian, in your letters always with deep meaning, as suits the condition of the time, by the 
assiduous reading of which letters both the wicked are corrected and men of good faith are confirmed. For 
while you do not cease in your writings to lay bare the hidden mysteries, you thus make us to grow in faith, 
and men from the world to draw near to belief. For by whatever good things you have introduced in your 
many books, unconsciously you have described yourself to us. For you are greater than all men in 
discourse, in speech more eloquent, in counsel wiser, in patience more simple, in works more abundant, in 
abstinence more holy, in obedience more humble, and in good deeds more innocent. And you yourself 
know, beloved, that our eager wish was, that we might see you, our teacher and our lover, attain to the crown 
of a great confession. 

2. For, in the proceedings before the proconsul; as a good and true teacher you first have pronounced that 
which we your disciples, following you, ought to say before the president. And, as a sounding trumpet, you 
have stirred up God's soldiers, furnished with heavenly arms, to the close encounter; and fighting in the first 
rank, you have slain the devil with a spiritual sword: you have also ordered the troops of the brethren, on the 
one hand and on the other, with your words, so that snares were on all sides laid for the enemy, and the 
severed sinews of the very carcase of the public foe were trodden under foot.(2) Believe us, dearest, that 
your innocent spirit is not far from the hundred-fold reward, seeing that it has feared neither the first onsets of 
the world, nor shrunk from going into exile, nor hesitated to leave the city, nor dreaded to dwell in a desert 
place; and since it furnished many with an example of confession, itself first spoke the martyr-witness. For it 
provoked others to acts of martyrdom by its own example; and not only began to be a companion of the 
martyrs already departing from the world, but also linked a heavenly friendship with those who should be 
so. 

3. Therefore they who were condemned with us give you before God the greatest thanks, beloved Cyprian, 
that in your letter you have refreshed their suffering breasts; have healed their limbs wounded with clubs; 
have loosened their feet bound with fetters; have smoothed the hair of their half-shorn head; have 
illuminated the darkness of the dungeon; have brought down the mountains of the mine to a smooth surface; 
have even placed fragrant flowers to their nostrils, and have shut out the foul odour of the smoke. (3) 
Moreover, your continued gifts, and those of our beloved Quirinus, which you sent to be distributed by 
Herennianus the sub-deacon, and Lucian, and Maximus, and Amantius the acolytes, provided a supply of 
whatever had been wanting for the necessities of their bodies. Let us, then, be in our prayers helpers of one 
another: and let us ask, as you have bidden us, that we may have God and Christ and the angels as 
supporters in all our actions. We bid you, lord and brother, ever heartily farewell, and have us in mind. Greet 
all who are with you. All ours who are with us love you, and greet you, and desire to see you. 

EPISTLE LXXVIII.(4) 

THE REPLY TO THE SAME OF LUCIUS AND THE REST OF THE MARTYRS. 

ARGUMENT. -THE ARGUMENT OF THE PRESENT LETTER IS, IN SUBSTANCE, THE 
SAME AS THAT OF THE PRECEDING; AND THEREFORE IT IS NOT A LETTER OF LUCIUS 
THE ROMAN BISHOP, BUT OF LUCIUS THE AFRICAN BISHOP AND MARTYR. 

1 . To Cyprian our brother and colleague, Lucius, and all the brethren who are with me in the Lord, greeting. 
Your letter came to us, dearest brother, while we were exulting and rejoicing in God that He had armed us for 
the struggle, and had made us by His condescension conquerors in the battle; the letter, namely, which you 
sent to us by Herennianus the sub-deacon, and Lucian, and Maximus, and Amantius the acolytes, (5) which 
when we read we received a relaxation in our bonds, a solace in our affliction, and a support in our 
necessity; and we were aroused and more strenuously animated to bear whatever more of punishment 
might be awaiting us. For before our suffering we were called forth by you to glory, who first afforded us 
guidance to confession of the name of Christ. We indeed, who follow the footsteps of your confession, hope 
for an equal grace with you. For he who is first in the race is first also for the reward; and you who first 
occupied the course thence have communicated this to us from what you began, showing doubtless the 
undivided love wherewith you have always loved us, so that we who had one Spirit in the bond of peace 
might have the grace of your(1) prayers, and one crown of confession. 

2. But in your case, dearest brother, to the crown of confession is added the reward of your labours-an 
abundant measure which you shall receive from the Lord in the day of retribution, who have by your letter 
presented yourself to us, as you manifested to us that candid and blessed breast of yours which we have 
ever known, and in accordance with its largeness have uttered praises to God with us, not as much as we 
deserve to hear, but as much as you are able to utter. For with your words you have both adorned those 
things which had been less in-strutted in us, and have strengthened us to the sustaining of those sufferings 
which we bear,(2) as being certain of the heavenly rewards, and of the crown of martyrdom, and of the 
kingdom of God, from the prophecy which, being filled with the Holy Spirit, you have pledged to us in your 
letter. All this will happen, beloved, if you will have us in mind in your prayers, which I trust you do even as we 
certainly do. 

3. And thus, O brother most longed-for, we have received what you sent to us from Quirinus and from 
yourself, a sacrifice from every clean thing. Even as Noah offered to God, and God was pleased with the 
sweet savour, and had respect unto his offering, so also may He have respect unto yours, and may He be 
pleased to return to you the reward of this so good work. But I beg that you will command the letter which we 
have written to Quirinus to be sent forward. I bid you, dearest brother and earnestly desired, ever heartily 
farewell, and remember us. (3) Greet all who are with you. Farewell. 

EPISTLE LXXIX.(4) 

THE ANSWER OF FELIX, JADER, POLIANUS, AND THE REST OF THE MARTYRS, TO 
CYPRIAN. 

ARGUMENT. --THE MARTYRS ABOVE SPOKEN OF ACKNOWLEDGE WITH GRATITUDE 
THE ASSISTANCE SENT TO THEM BY CYPRIAN. 

To our dearest and best beloved Cyprian, Felix, Jader, Polianus, together with the presbyters and all who 
are abiding with us at the mine of Sigua, eternal health in the Lord. We reply to your salutation, dearest 
brother, by Herennianus the sub-deacon, Lucian and Maximus our brethren, strong and safe by the aid of 
your prayers, from whom we have received a sum under the name of an offering, together with your letter 
which you wrote, and in which you have condescended to comfort us as if we were sons, out of the heavenly 
words. And we have given and do give thanks to God the Father Almighty through His Christ, that we have 
been thus comforted and strengthened by your address, asking from the candour of your mind that you 
would deign to have us in mind in your constant prayers, that the Lord would supply what is wanting in your 
confession and ours, which He has condescended to confer on us. Greet all who abide with you. We bid 
you, dearest brother, ever heartily farewell in God. I Felix wrote this; I Jader subscribed it; I Polianus read it. I 
greet my lord Eutychianus. 

EPISTLE LXXX.-CYPRIAN TO SERGIUS, ROGATIANUS, 
AND THE OTHER CONFESSORS IN PRISON JJ 

EPISTLE LXXX.(5) 

CYPRIAN TO SERGIUS, ROGATIANUS, AND THE OTHER CONFESSORS IN PRISON. 

ARGUMENT. --HE CONSOLES ROGATIANUS AND HIS COLLEAGUES, THE CONFESSORS 
IN PRISON, AND GIVES THEM COURAGE BY THE EXAMPLE OF THE MARTYRS 
ROGATIANUS THE ELDER AND FELICISSIMUS. THE LETTER ITSELF INDICATES THAT 
IT WAS WRITTEN IN EXILE. 

1. Cyprian to Sergius and Rogatianus, and the rest of the confessors in the Lord, everlasting health. I salute 
you, dearest and most blessed brethren, myself also desiring to enjoy the sight of you, if the state in which I 
am placed would permit me to come to you. For what could happen to me more desirable and more joyful 
than to be now close to you, that you might embrace me with those hands, which, pure and innocent, and 
maintaining the faith of the Lord, have rejected the profane obedience? What more pleasant and sublime 
than now to kiss your lips, which with a glorious voice have confessed the Lord, to be looked upon even in 
presence by your eyes, which, despising the world, have become worthy(6) of looking upon God? But since 
opportunity is not afforded me to share in this joy, I send this letter in my stead to your ears and to your eyes, 
by which I congratulate and exhort you that you persevere strongly and steadily in the confession of the 
heavenly glory; and having entered on the way of the Lord's condescension, that you go on in the strength 
of the Spirit, to receive the crown, having the Lord as your protector and guide, who said, "Lo, I am with you 
alway, even unto the end of the world. "(7) O blessed prison, which your presence has enlightened! O 
blessed prison, which sends the men of God to heaven! O darkness, more bright than the sun itself, and 
clearer than the light of this world, where now are placed temples of God, and your members are to be 
sanctified by divine confessions! 

2. Nor let anything now be revolved in your hearts and minds besides the divine precepts and heavenly 
commands, with which the Holy Spirit has ever animated you to the endurance of suffering. Let no one think 
of death, but of immortality; nor of temporary punishment, but of eternal glory; since it is written, "Precious in 
the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints;"(1) and again, "A broken spirit is a sacrifice to God: a contrite 
and humble heart God doth not despise. "(2) And again, where the sacred Scripture speaks of the tortures 
which consecrate God's martyrs, and sanctify them in the very trial of suffering: "And if they have suffered 
torments in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of immortality; and having been a little chastised, they shall 
be greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy of Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He 
tried them, and received them as a sacrifice of a burnt-offering, and in due time regard shall be had unto 
them. The righteous shall shine, and shall run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the 
nations, and have dominion over the people; and their Lord shall reign for ever."(3) When, therefore, you 
reflect that you shall judge and reign with Christ the Lord, you must needs exult and tread under foot present 
sufferings, in the joy of what is to come; knowing that from the beginning of the world it has been so 
appointed that righteousness should suffer there in the conflict of the world, since in the beginning, even at 
the first, the righteous Abel was slain, and thereafter all righteous men, and prophets, and apostles who 
were sent. To all of whom the Lord also in Himself has appointed an example, teaching that none shall 
attain to His kingdom but those who have followed Him in His own way, saying, "He that loveth his life in this 
world shall lose it; and he that hateth his life in this world shall keep it unto life eternal. "(4) And again: "Fear 
not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear Him who is able to destroy both 
soul and body in hell. "(5) Paul also exhorts us that we who desire to attain to the Lord's promises ought to 
imitate the Lord in all things. "We are," says he, "the sons of God: but if sons, then heirs; heirs of God, and 
joint-heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with Him, that we may also be glorified together."(6) Moreover, he 
added the comparison of the present time and of the future glory, saying, "The sufferings of this present time 
are not worthy to be compared with the coming glory which shall be revealed in us. "(7) Of which brightness, 
when we consider the glory, it behoves us to bear all afflictions and persecutions; because, although many 
are the afflictions of the righteous, yet those are delivered from them all who trust in God. 

3. Blessed women also, who are established with you in the same glory of confession, who, maintaining the 

Lord's faith, and braver than their sex, not only themselves are near to the crown of glory, but have afforded 
an example to other women by their constancy! And lest anything should be wanting to the glory of your 
number, that each sex and every age also might be with you in honour, the divine condescension has also 
associated with you boys(8) in a glorious confession; representing to us something of the same kind as 
once did Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, the illustrious youths to whom, when shut up in the furnace, the fires 
gave way, and the flames gave refreshment, the Lord being present with them, and proving that against His 
confessors and martyrs the heat of hell could have no power, but that they who trusted in God should always 
continue unhurt and safe in all dangers. And I beg you to consider more carefully, in accordance with your 
religion, what must have been the faith in these youths which could deserve such full acknowledgment from 
the Lord. For, prepared for every fate, as we ought all to be, they say to the king, "O king Nebuchadnezzar, 
we are not careful to answer thee in this matter; for our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the 
burning fiery furnace; and He will deliver us out of thine hand, O king! But if not, be it known unto thee, O king, 
that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up. "(9) Although they 
believed, and, in accordance with their faith, knew that they might even be delivered from their present 
punishment, they still would not boast of this, nor claim it for themselves, saying, "But if not." Lest the virtue of 
their confession should be less without the testimony of their suffering, they added that God could do all 
things; but yet they would not trust in this, so as to wish to be delivered at the moment; but they thought on that 
glory, of eternal liberty and security. 

4. And you also, retaining this faith, and meditating day and night, with your whole heart prepared for God, 
think of the future only, with contempt for the present, that you may be able to come to the fruit of the eternal 
kingdom, and to the embrace and kiss, and the sight of the Lord, that you may follow in all things Rogatianus 
the presbyter, the glorious old man who, to the glory of our time, makes a way for you by his religious 
courage and divine condescension, who, with Felicissimus our brother, ever quiet and temperate, receiving 
the attack of a ferocious people, first prepared for you a dwelling in the prison, and, marking out the way(1) 
for you in some measure, now also goes before you. That this may be consummated in you, we beseech 
the Lord in constant prayers, that from beginnings going on to the highest results. He may cause those 
whom He has made to confess, also to be crowned. I bid you, dearest and most beloved brethren, ever 
heartily farewell in the Lord; and may you attain to the crown of heavenly glory. Victor the deacon, and those 
who are with me, greet you. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE LXXXI.-TO 
SUCCESSUS ON THE TIDINGS BROUGHT FROM 
ROME, TELLING OF THE PERSECUTION 

EPISTLE LXXXI.(2) 

TO SUCCESSUS ON THE TIDINGS BROUGHT FROM ROME, TELLING OF THE 
PERSECUTION. 

ARGUMENT. --CYPRIAN TELLS THE BISHOP SUCCESSUS, THAT IN A SEVERE 
PERSECUTION THAT HAD BEEN DECREED BY THE EMPEROR VALERIAN(3) XISTUS 
THE BISHOP HAD SUFFERED AT ROME ON THE EIGHTH OF THE IDES OF AUGUST; 
AND HE BEGS HIM TO INTIMATE THE SAME TO THE REST OF HIS COLLEAGUES, THAT 
EACH ONE MIGHT ANIMATE HIS OWN FLOCK TO MARTYRDOM. 

1 . Cyprian to his brotiier Successus, greeting. Tiie reason wiiy I could not write to you immediately, dearest 
brother, was that all the clergy, being placed in the very heat of the contest, were unable in any way to 
depart hence, all of them being prepared in accordance with the devotion of their mind for divine and 
heavenly glory. But know that those have come whom I had sent to the City(4) for this purpose, that they 
might find out and bring back to us the truth, in whatever manner it had been decreed respecting us. For 
many various and uncertain things are current in men's opinions. But the truth concerning them is as follows, 
that Valerian had sent a rescript to the Senate, to the effect that bishops and presbyters and deacons 
should immediately be punished; but that senators, and men of importance, and Roman knights, (5) should 
lose their dignity, and moreover be deprived of their property; and if, when their means were taken away, 
they should persist in being Christians, then they should also lose their heads; but that matrons should be 
deprived of their property, and sent into banishment. Moreover, people of Caesar's household, whoever of 
them had either confessed before, or should now confess, should have their property confiscated, and 
should be sent in chains by assignment to Caesar's estates. The Emperor Valerian also added to this 
address a copy of the letters which he sent to the presidents of the provinces concerning us; which letters 
we are daily hoping will come, waiting according to the strength of our faith for the endurance of suffering, 
and expecting from the help and mercy of the Lord the crown of eternal life. But know that Xistus was 
martyred in the cemetery on the eighth day of the Ides of August, and with him four deacons. (6) Moreover, 
the prefects in the City(7) are daily urging on this persecution; so that, if any are presented to them, they are 
martyred, and their property claimed by the treasury. 

2. I beg that these things may be made known by your means to the rest of our colleagues, that everywhere, 
by their exhortation, the brotherhood may be strengthened and prepared for the spiritual conflict, that every 
one of us may think less of death than of immortality; and, dedicated to the Lord, with full faith and entire 
courage, may rejoice rather than fear in this confession, wherein they know that the soldiers of God and 
Christ are not slain, but crowned. I bid you, dearest brother, ever heartily farewell in the Lord. (8) 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN: EPISTLE LXXXII.-TO 
THE CLERGY AND PEOPLE CONCERNING HIS 
RETIREMENT / ELUCIDATIONS 

EPISTLE LXXXII.(9) 

TO THE CLERGY AND PEOPLE CONCERNING HIS RETIREMENT, A LITTLE BEFORE HIS 
MARTYRDOM. 

ARGUMENT. --WHEN, NEAR THE END OF HIS LIFE, CYPRIAN, ON RETURNING TO HIS 
GARDENS, WAS TOLD THAT MESSENGERS WERE SENT TO TAKE HIM FOR 
PUNISHMENT TO UTICA, HE WITHDREW. AND LEST IT SHOULD BE THOUGHT THAT HE 
HAD DONE SO FROM FEAR OF DEATH, HE GIVES THE REASON IN THIS LETTER, VIZ., 
THAT HE MIGHT UNDERGO HIS MARTYRDOM NOWHERE ELSE THAN AT CARTHAGE, 
IN THE SIGHT OF HIS OWN PEOPLE. A.D. 258. 

1 . Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, and all the people, greeting. When it had been told to us, dearest 
brethren, that the gaolers(IO) had been sent to bring me to Utica, and I had been persuaded by the counsel 
of those dearest to me to withdraw for a time from my gardens, as a just reason was afforded I consented. 
For the reason that it is fit for a bishop, in that city in which he presides over the Church of the Lord, there to 
confess the Lord, and that the whole people should be glorified by the confession of their prelate in their 
presence. For whatever, in that moment of confession, the confessor-bishop speaks, he speaks in the 
mouth of all, by inspiration of God. (1) But the honour of our Church, glorious as it is, will be mutilated if I, a 
bishop placed over another church, receiving my sentence or my confession at Utica, should go thence as 
a martyr to the Lord, when indeed, both for my own sake and yours, I pray with continual supplications, and 
with all my desires entreat, that I may confess among you, and there suffer, and thence depart to the Lord 
even as I ought. Therefore here in a hidden retreat I await the arrival of the proconsul returning to Carthage, 
that I may hear from him what the emperors have commanded upon the subject of Christian laymen and 
bishops, and may say what the Lord will wish to be said at that hour. 

2. But do you, dearest brethren, according to the discipline which you have ever received from me out of the 
Lord's commands, and according to what you have so very often learnt from my discourse, keep peace 
and tranquillity; nor let any of you stir up any tumult for the brethren, or voluntarily offer himself to the Gentiles. 
For when apprehended and delivered up, he ought to speak, inasmuch as the Lord abiding in us speaks in 
that hour, who willed that we should rather confess than profess. But for the rest, what it is fitting that we should 
observe before the proconsul passes sentence on me for the confession of the name of God, we will with 
the instruction of the Lord arrange in common. (2) May our Lord make you, dearest brethren, to remain safe in 
His Church, and condescend to keep you. So be it through His mercy.
