The Didache
Translation: Roberts-Donaldson 1885 (Ante-Nicene Fathers), Public Domain
Source: https://archive.org/details/EarlyChurchFathers38Volumes

THE LORD'S TEACHING THROUGH THE TWELVE APOSTLES TO THE NATIONS. (1) 

CHAP. I. --THE TWO WAYS;THE FIRST COMMANDMENT. 

THERE are two ways, (2) one of life and one of death;(3) but a great difference between tiie two ways. Tiie 
way of life, then, is this: First, thou shalt love God(4) who made thee; second, thy neighbour as thyself; (5) and 
all things whatsoever thou wouldst should not occur to thee, thou also to another do not do. (6) And of these 
sayings(7) the teaching is this: Bless them that curse you, and pray for your enemies, and fast for them that 
persecute you. (8) For what thank is there, if ye love them that love you? Do not also the Gentiles do the 
same?(9) But do ye love them that hate you; and ye shall not have an enemy. (10) Abstain thou from fleshly 
and worldly lusts. (11) If one give thee a blow upon thy right cheek, turn to him the otheralso;(12) and thou 
shalt be perfect. If one impress thee for one mile, go with him two.(1 3) If one take away thy cloak, give him 
also thy coat.(14) If one take from thee thine own, ask it not back? for indeed thou art not able. Give to every 
one that asketh thee, and ask it not back;(1 6) for the Father willeth that to all should be given of our own 
blessings (free gifts). (17) Happy is he that giveth according to the commandment; for he is guiltless. Woe to 
him that receiveth; for if one having need receiveth, he is guiltless; but he that receiveth not having need, 
shall pay the penalty, why he received and for what, and, coming into straits (confinement), (18) he shall be 
examined concerning the things which he hath done, and he shall not escape thence until he pay back the 
last farthing. (19) But also now concerning this, it hath been said. Let thine alms sweat(20) in thy hands, until 
thou know to whom thou Shouldst give. 

CHAP. II.(21)~THE SECOND COMMANDMENT: GROSS SIN FORBIDDEN. 

And the second commandment of the Teaching; Thou shalt not commit murder, thou shalt not commit 
adultery, (22) thou shalt not commit paederasty, (23) thou shalt not commit fornication, thou shalt not steal, (24) 
thou shalt not practise magic, thou shalt not practise witchcraft, thou shalt not murder a child by abortion nor 
kill that which is begotten. (25) Thou shalt not covet the things of thy neighbour,(26) thou shalt not forswear 
thyself,(27) thou shalt not bear false witness, (28) thou shalt not speak, evil, thou shalt bear no grudge. (29) 
Thou shalt not be double-minded nor double-tongued; for to be double-tongued is a 5 snare of death. (1) 
Thy speech shall not be false, 6 nor empty, but fulfilled by deed. (2) Thou shalt not be covetous, nor 
rapacious, nor a hypocrite, nor evil disposed, nor haughty. Thou shalt not 7 take evil counsel against thy 
neighbour.(3) Thou shalt not hate any man; but some thou shalt reprove, (4) and concerning some thou shalt 
pray, and some thou shalt love more than thy own life. (5) 

CHAP. III.(6)~0THER SINS FORBIDDEN. 

1 My child, (7) flee from every evil thing, and from 2 every likeness of it. Be not prone to anger, for anger 
leadeth the way to murder; neither jealous, nor quarrelsome, nor of hot temper; for 3 out of all these murders 
are engendered. My child, be not a lustful one; for lust leadeth the way to fornication; neither a filthy talker, 
nor of lofty eye; for out of all these adulteries are 4 engendered. My child, be not an observer of omens, 
since it leadeth the way to idolatry; neither an enchanter, nor an astrologer, nor a purifier, nor be willing to 
took at these things; 5 for out of all these idolatry is engendered. My child, be not a liar, since a lie leadeth 
the way to theft; neither money-loving, nor vainglorious, 6 for out of all these thefts are engendered. My child, 
be not a murmurer, since it leadeth the way to blasphemy; neither self-willed nor evil-minded, for out of all 
these blasphemies are 7 engendered. But be thou meek, since the meek 8 shall inherit the earth. (8) Be 
long-suffering and pitiful and guileless and gentle and good and always trembling at the words which thou 
hast 9 heard. (9) Thou shalt not exalt thyself,(10) nor give over-confidence to thy soul. Thy soul shall not be 
joined with lofty ones, but with just and lowly 1 ones shall it have its intercourse. The workings that befall 
thee receive as good, knowing that apart from God nothing cometh to pass. (1 1) 

CHAP. IV.(12)~VARI0US PRECEPTS. 

My child, him that speaketh to thee the word of God remember night and day; and thou shalt honour him as 
the Lord;(13) for in the place whence lordly rule is uttered, (14) there is the Lord. And thou shalt seek out day 

by day the faces of 2 the saints, in order that thou mayest rest upon(1 5) their words. Thou shalt not long 
for(16) division, 3 but shalt bring those who contend to peace. Thou shalt judge righteously, thou shalt not 
respect persons in reproving for transgressions. Thou shalt not be undecided whether it shall be 4 or no.(1 7) 
Be not a stretcher forth of the hands 5 to receive and a drawer of them back to give. (18) If thou hast aught, 
through thy hands thou shalt 6 give ransom for thy sins.(1 9) Thou shalt not hesitate 7 to give, nor murmur 
when thou givest; for thou shalt know who is the good repayer of the hire. Thou shalt not turn away from him 
that 8 is in want, but thou shalt share all things with thy brother, and shalt not say that they are thine own; for if 
ye are partakers in that which is immortal, how much more in things which are mortal?(20) Thou shalt not 
remove thy hand from thy son or from thy daughter, but from their 9 youth shalt teach them the fear of 
God. (21) Thou 10 shalt not enjoin aught in thy bitterness upon thy bondman or maidservant, who hope in the 
same God, lest ever they shall fear not God who is over both;(22) for he cometh not to call according to the 
outward appearance, but unto them whom the Spirit hath prepared. And ye bondmen shall 1 1 be subject to 
your(23) masters as to a type of God, in modesty and fear.(24) Thou shalt hate all 12 hypocrisy and 
everything which is not pleasing to the Lord. Do thou in no wise forsake the 13 commandments of the Lord; 
but thou shalt keep what thou hast received, neither adding thereto nor taking away therefrom. (25) In the 
church(26) 14 thou shalt acknowledge thy transgressions, and thou shalt not come near for thy prayer(27) 
with an evil conscience. (28) This is the way of life. (29) 

CHAP. V.(1)-THE WAY OF DEATH. 

1 And the way of death(2) is this: First of all it is evil and full of curse:(3) murders, (4) adulteries, lusts, 
fornications, thefts, idolatries, magic arts, witchcrafts, rapines, false witnessings, hypocrisies, 
double-heartedness, deceit, haughtiness, depravity, self-will, greediness, filthy talking, jealousy, 2 
over-confidence, loftiness, boastfulness; persecutors of the good, (5) hating truth, loving a lie, not knowing a 
reward for righteousness, not cleaving(6) to good nor to righteous judgment, watching not for that which is 
good, but for that which is evil; from whom meekness and endurance are far, loving vanities, pursuing 
requital, not pitying a poor man, not labouring for the afflicted, not knowing Him that made them, murderers of 
children, destroyers of the handiwork of God, turning away from him that is in want afflicting him that is 
distressed, advocates of the rich, lawless judges of the poor, utter sinners. (7) Be delivered, children, from all 
these. (8) 

CHAP. VI.(9)--AGAINST FALSE TEACHERS, AND FOOD OFFERED TO IDOLS. 

1 See that no one cause thee to err(1 0) from this way of the Teaching, since apart from God it 2 teacheth 
thee. For if thou art able to bear all the yoke(ll) of the Lord, thou wilt be perfect; but if thou art notable, what 
thou art able that do. 3 And concerning food, (12) bear what thou art able; but against that which is sacrificed 
to idols(13) be exceedingly on thy guard; for it is the service of dead gods. (14) 

CHAP. VII. -CONCERNING BAPTISM. 

And concerning baptism, (15) thus baptize ye:(16) 1 Having first said all these things, baptize into the name of 
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit,(17) in living water.(18) But if thou 2 have not living water, 
baptize into other water; and if thou 3 canst not in cold, in warm. But if thou have not either, pour cutwater 
thrice(1 9) upon the head into the name of Father and Son and Holy Spirit. But before the baptism let the 4 
baptizer fast, and the baptized, and whatever others can; but thou shalt order the baptized to fast one or two 
days before. (20) 

CHAP. VIII.(21)--C0NCERNING FASTING AND PRAYER (THE LORD'S PRAYER). 

But let not your fasts be with the hypocrites;(22) 1 for they fast on the second and fifth day of the week; but do 
ye fast on the fourth day and the Preparation(Friday).(23) Neither pray as the 2 hypocrites; but as the Lord 
commanded in His Gospel, (24) thus pray: Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy name. Thy 
kingdom come. Thy will be done, as in heaven, so on earth. Give us to-day our daily (needful) bread, (25) 
and forgive us our debt as we also forgive our debtors. And bring us not into temptation, but deliver us from 
the evil one (or, evil); for Thine is the power and the glory for ever.(26) Thrice in the day thus pray. (27) 3 

CHAP. IX.(28)-THE THANKSGIVING (EUCHARIST). 

Now concerning the Thanksgiving (Eucharist), 1 thus give thanks. First, concerning the 2 cup:(1) We thank 
thee, our Father, for the holy vine of David Thy servant,(2) which Thou madest known to us through Jesus 

Thy Servant; to Thee 3 be the glory for ever. And concerning the broken bread:(3) We thank Thee, our 
Father, for the life and knowledge which Thou modest known to us through Jesus Thy Servant; to Thee be 
the glory 4 for ever. Even as this broken bread was scattered over the hills, (4) and was gathered together 
and became one, so let Thy Church be gathered together from the ends of the earth into Thy kingdom;(5) for 
Thine is the glory and the power 5 through Jesus Christ for ever. But let no one eat or drink of your 
Thanksgiving (Eucharist), but they who have been baptized into the name of the Lord; for concerning this 
also the Lord hath said. Give not that which is holy to the dogs. (6) 

CHAP. X.(7)-PRAYER AFTER COMMUNION. 

I But after ye are filled, (8) thus give thanks: 2 We thank Thee, holy Father, for Thy holy name which Thou 
didst cause to tabernacle in our hearts, and for the knowledge and faith and immortality, which Thou modest 
known to us through Jesus Thy Servant; to Thee be the glory 3 for ever. Thou, Master almighty, didst create 
all things for Thy name's sake; Thou gavest food and drink to men for enjoyment, that they might give 
thanks to Thee; but to us Thou didst freely give spiritual food and drink 4 and life eternal through Thy 
Servant.(9) Before all things we thank Thee that Thou art mighty; to 5 Thee be the glory for ever. Remember, 
Lord, Thy Church, to deliver it from all evil and to make it perfect in Thy love, and gather it from the four 
winds, sanctified for Thy kingdom which Thou hast prepared for it;(10) for Thine is the 6 power and the glory 
forever. Let grace come, and let this world pass away. (11) Hosannatothe God(Son) (12) of David! If any 
one is holy, let him come; if any one is not so, let him repent.(13) Maranatha.(14) Amen. But permit the 
prophets 7 to make Thanksgiving as much as they desire. (15) 

CHAP. XI. 16--C0NCERNING TEACHERS, APOSTLES, AND PROPHETS. 

Whosoever, therefore, cometh and teacheth 1 you all these things that have been said before, receive 
him.(1 7) But if the teacher himself turn(1 8) 2 and teach another doctrine to the destruction of this, hear him not; 
but if he teach so as to increase righteousness and the knowledge of the Lord, receive him as the Lord. But 
concerning 3 the apostles and prophets, according to the decree of the Gospel, thus do. Let every apostle 4 
that cometh to you be received as the Lord. (19) But he shall not remain except one day; but if 5 there be 
need, also the next; but if he remain three days, he is a false prophet. And when the 6 apostle goeth away, 
let him take nothing but bread until he lodgeth;(20) but if he ask money, he is a false prophet. And every 
prophet that 7 speaketh in the Spirit(21) ye shall neither try nor judge; for every sin shall be forgiven, but this 
sin shall not be forgiven. (22) But not every one 8 that speaketh in the Spirit is a prophet; but only if he hold 
the ways of the Lord. Therefore from their ways shall the false prophet and the prophet be known. And every 
prophet who ordereth a 9 meal(23) in the Spirit eateth not from it, except indeed he be a false prophet; and 
every prophet 1 who teacheth the truth, if he do not what he teacheth, is a false prophet. And every prophet, 

I I proved true, (24) working unto the mystery of the Church in the world, (25) yet not teaching others to do what 
he himself doeth, shall not be judged among you, for with God he hath his judgment; for so did also the 
ancient prophets. But whoever saith in the Spirit, Give me money, or something else, ye shall not listen to 
him; but if he saith to you to give for others' sake who are in need, let no one judge him. 

CHAP. XII.(1)--RECEPTI0N OF CHRISTIANS. 

1 But let every one that cometh in the name of the Lord be received, (2) and afterward ye shall prove and 
know him; for ye shall have understanding 2 right and left. If he who cometh is a wayfarer, assist him as far as 
ye are able; but he shall not remain with you, except for two or 3 three days, if need be. But if he willeth to 
abide with you, being an artisan, let him work and eat;(3) 4 but if he hath no trade, according to your 
understanding see to it that, as a Christian, (4) he shall 5 not live with you idle. But if he willeth not to do, he is a 
Christ-monger.(5) Watch that ye keep aloof from such. 

CHAP. XIII.(6)-SUPP0RT OF PROPHETS. 

1 But every true prophet that willeth to abide 2 among you(7) is worthy of his support. (8) So also a true 
teacher is himself worthy, as the workman, 3 of his support.(9) Every first-fruit, therefore, of the products of 
wine-press and threshing-floor, of oxen and of sheep, thou shalt take and give to the prophets, for they are 
your high priests. (10) 4 But if ye have not a prophet, give it to the poor. 5 If thou makest a batch of dough, 
take the first-fruit and give according to the commandment. So also when thou openest a jar of wine or of 6 
oil, take the first-fruit and give it to the prophets; and of money (silver) and clothing and every 7 possession, 
take the first-fruit, as it may seem good to thee, and give according to the commandment. 

CHAP. XIV.(11)--CHRISTIAN ASSEMBLY ON THE LORD'S DAY. 

But every Lord's day(12) do ye gather yourselves 1 together, and break bread, and give thanksgiving after 
having confessed your transgressions, (13) that your sacrifice may be pure. (14) But let no one that 2 is at 
variance(1 5) with his fellow come together with you, until they be reconciled, that your sacrifice may not be 
profaned. For this is that 3 which was spoken by the Lord: In every place and time offer to me a pure 
sacrifice;(16) for I am a great King, saith the Lord, and my name is wonderful among the nations. (17) 

CHAP. XV.(18)--BISH0PS AND DEACONS; CHRISTIAN REPROOF. 

Appoint, therefore, for yourselves, bishops and 1 deacons worthy of the Lord, men meek, and not lovers of 
money, (1 9) and truthful and proved; for they also render to you the service(20) of prophets and teachers. 
Despise them not therefore, for 2 they are your honoured ones, together with the prophets and teachers. 
And reprove one another, 3 not in anger, but in peace, as ye have it in the Gospel;(21) but to every one that 
acts amiss(22) against another, let no one speak, nor let him hear aught from you until he repent. But your 
prayers and 4 alms and all your deeds so do, as ye have it in the Gospel of our Lord. (23) 

CHAP. XVI.(1)-WATCHFULNESS; THE COMING OF THE LORD. 

1 Watch for your life's sake. (2) Let not your lamps be quenched, nor your loins unloosed;(3) but be ye ready, 
for ye know not the hour in 2 which our Lord cometh.(4) But often shall ye come together, seeking the things 
which are befitting to your souls: for the whole time of your faith will not profit you, (5) if ye be not made 3 
perfect in the last time. For in the last days(6) false prophets and corrupters shall be multiplied, and the 
sheep shall be turned into wolves, and love 4 shall be turned into hate;(7) for when lawlessness increaseth, 
they shall hate and persecute and betray one another,(8) and then shall appear the world-deceiver(9) as 
Son of God, (10) and shall do signs and wonders, (11) and the earth shall be delivered into his hands, and he 
shall do iniquitous things which have never yet come to pass since 5 the beginning. Then shall the creation 
of men come into the fire of trial, (12) and many shall be made to stumble and shall perish; but they that 
endure in their faith shall be saved(13) from under the curse itself. (14) And then shall appear the 6 signs of 
thetruth;(15) first, the sign of an out-spreading(16) in heaven; then the sign of the sound of the trumpet; and 
the third, the resurrection of the dead; yet not of all, but as it is 7 said: The Lord shall come and all His saints 
with Him. (17) Then shall the world see the 8 Lord coming upon the clouds of heaven. (18)
