Gregory the Great, Register of the Epistles, Books I-VIII
Translation: Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Schaff et al. (1886-1900), Public Domain
Source: https://archive.org/details/EarlyChurchFathers38Volumes

BOOK I. 

THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER, INDICTION IX., BEING THE FIRST YEAR OF HIS 
ORDINATION. 

EPISTLE I. 

TO ALL THE BISHOPS OF SICILY. 

Gregory, servant of the servants of God (1), to all the bishops constituted throughout Sicily. 
We have plainly perceived it to be very necessary that, even as our predecessors thought fit to do, we 
should commit all things to one and the same person; and that, where we cannot be present ourselves, our 
authority should be represented through him to whom we send our instructions. Wherefore, with the help of 
God, we have appointed Peter, subdeacon of our See, our delegate in the province of Sicily. Nor can we 
doubt as to the conduct of him to whom, with the help of God, we are known to have committed the charge of 
the whole patrimony of our church. 

This also we have plainly perceived to be a thing that ought to be done; that once in the year your whole 
fraternity should assemble, at Syracuse or Catana, receiving, as we have charged him, the honour due to 
you; to the end that, together with the aforesaid Peter, subdeacon of our See, you may settle with due 
discretion whatever things pertain to the advantage of the churches of the province, or to the relief of the 
necessities of the poor and oppressed, or to the admonition of all, and the correction of those whose 
transgressions may peradventure be proved. From which council far be animosities, which are the nutriment 
of crimes, and may inward grudges die away, and that discord of souls which is beyond measure 
execrable. Let concord well-pleasing to God, and charity, approve you as His priests. Conduct all things, 
therefore, with such deliberation and calmness that yours may most worthily be called an Episcopal 
Council. 

EPISTLE II. 

TO JUSTINUS, PRAETOR OF SICILY. 

Gregory to Justinus, Praetor of Sicily. 

What my tongue speaks my conscience approves; since even before you had become engaged in the 
employments of any office of dignity, I have greatly loved and greatly respected you. For the very modesty 
of your deportment made certain incipient claims on affection even from one who had been loth. And, when I 
heard that you had come to administer the praetorship of Sicily, I greatly rejoiced. But, since I have 
discovered that a certain ill-feeling is creeping in between you and the ecclesiastics, I have been 
exceedingly distressed. But now that you are occupied with the charge of civil administration, and I with the 
care of this ecclesiastical government, we can properly love one another in particular so far as we do no 
harm to the general community. Wherefore I beseech you by Almighty God, before Whose tremendous 
judgment we must give account of our deeds, that your Glory have always the fear of Him before your eyes, 
and never allow anything to come in whereby even slight dissension may arise between us. Let no gains 
draw you aside to injustice; let not either the threats or the favours of any one cause you to deviate from the 
path of rectitude. See how short life is: think, ye that exercise judicial authority, before what judge ye must at 
some time go. It is therefore to be diligently considered that we shall leave all gains behind us here, and that 
of harmful gains we shall carry with us to the judgment the pleas only that are against us for them. Those 
advantages, then, are to be sought by us which death may in no wise take away, but which the end of the 
present life may shew to be such as will endure for ever. 

As to what you write concerning the corn, the, magnificent Citonatus asserts very differently that no more has 
been transmitted than what was supplied for replenishing the public granary in satisfaction of what was due 

for the past indiction. Give attention to tiiis matter, since, if wiiat is transmitted be at all defective, it will be the 
death not of any one single person only, but of the whole people together(2). 

Now for the management of the patrimony of Sicily I have sent, as I think under the guidance of God, such a 
man as you will be in entire accord with, if you are a lover of what is right, as I have found you to be. 
Moreover, as to your desire that I should remember you kindly, I confess the truth when I say that, unless any 
injustice should creep in from the snares of the ancient foe I have learnt thy Glory's modesty to be such that I 
shah not blush to be thy friend. 

EPISTLE III. 

TO PAUL, SCHOLASTICUS, 

Gregory to Paul, &c. 

However strangers smile upon me on account of the dignity of my priestly office, this I take not much account 
of; but I do grieve not a little at your smiling upon me on this account, seeing that you know what I long for, 
and yet suppose me to have received advancement. For to me it would have been the highest 
advancement, if what I wished could bare been fulfilled; if I could have accomplished my desire, which you 
have been long acquainted with, in the enjoyment of longed-for rest. Yet, since I am now detained in the city 
of Rome, tied by the chains of this dignity, I have something wherein I may even rejoice in addressing your 
Glory, seeing that, when the most eminent lord the ex -consul Leo comes, I suspect that you will not remain in 
Sicily; and when thou thyself also, tied by thine own dignity, shalt come to be detained in Rome, thou wilt 
come to know what sorrow and what bitterness I suffer. But when the magnificent lord Maurentius, the 
Chartularius, comes to you, I pray thee concur with him in regard to the present straits of the Roman city, 
since outside we are stabbed without cease by hostile swords. But we are still more heavily pressed by 
danger within through a sedition of the soldiers. Further, we commend to your Glory in all respects Peter our 
sub-deacon, whom we have sent to rule the patrimony of the Church. 

EPISTLE IV. 

TO JOHN, BISHOP OF C0NSTANTIN0PLE(3). 

Gregory to John, Bishop of Constantinople. If the virtue of charity consists in the love of one's neighbour, and 
we are commanded to love our neighbours as ourselves, how is it that your Blessedness does not love me 
even as yourself? For I know with what ardour, with what anxiety, you wished to fly from the burden of the 
episcopate; and yet you made no opposition to this same burden of the episcopate being imposed on me. 
It is evident, then, that you do not love me as yourself, seeing that you have wished me to take on myself that 
load which you were unwilling should be imposed on you. But since I, unworthy and weak, have taken 
charge of an old and grievously shattered ship (for on all sides the waves enter, and the planks, battered by 
a daily and violent storm, sound of shipwreck), I beseech thee by Almighty God to stretch out the hand of thy 
prayer to me in this my danger, since thou canst pray the more strenuously as thou standest further removed 
from the confusion of the tribulations which we suffer in this land. 

My synodical epistle I will transmit with all possible speed, having despatched Bacauda, our brother and 
fellow-bishop, immediately after my ordination, as the bearer of this letter, while pressed by many and 
serious engagements. 

EPISTLE V. 

TO THEOCTISTA, SISTER OF THE EMPEROR. 

Gregory to Theoctista, &c 

With how great devotion my mind prostrates itself before your Venerableness I cannot fully express in 
words; nor yet do I labour to give utterance to it, since, even though I were silent, you read in your heart your 
own sense of my devotion. I wonder, however, that you withdrew your countenance, till of late bestowed on 
me, from this my recent engagement in the pastoral office; wherein, under colour of episcopacy, I have been 
brought back to the world; in which I am involved in such great earthly cares as I do not at all remember 
having been subjected to even in a lay state of life. For I have lost the deep joys of my quiet, and seem to 
have risen outwardly while inwardly falling down. Whence I grieve to find myself banished far from the face 
of my Maker. For I used to strive daily to win my way outside the world, outside the flesh; to drive all 
phantasms of the body from the eyes of my soul, and to see incorporeally supernal joys; and not only with 
my voice but in the core of my heart I used to say. My heart hath said unto Thee, I have sought Thy face. Thy 

face, Lord, will I seek (Ps. xxvi. 8). Moreover desiring nothing, fearing nothing, in this world, I seemed to 
myself to stand on a certain summit of things, so that I almost believed to be fulfilled in me what I had learnt 
of the Lord's promise through the prophet, I will lift thee up upon the high places of the earth (Isai. Iviii. 14). For 
he is lifted up upon the high places of the earth who treads under foot through looking down upon them in his 
mind even the very things of the present world which seem lofty and glorious. But, having been suddenly 
dashed from this summit of things by the whirlwind of this trial, I have fallen into fears and tremors, since, 
even though I have no fears for myself, I am greatly afraid for those who have been committed to me. On 
every side I am tossed by the waves of business, and sunk by storms, so that I may truly say, I am come 
into the depth of the sea, and the storm hath overwhelmed me (Ps. Ixviii. 3(4)). After business I long to return 
to my heart; but, driven therefrom by vain tumults of thoughts, I am unable to return. From this cause, then, that 
which is within me is made to be far from me, so that I cannot obey the prophetic voice which says. Return to 
your heart, transgressors (Isai. xlvi. 8). But, pressed by foolish thoughts, I am impelled only to exclaim. My 
heart hath failed me (Ps. xxxix. 13(5)). I have loved the beauty of the contemplative life as a Rachel, barren, 
but keen of sight and fair (Gen. xxix.), who, though in her quietude she is less fertile, yet sees the light more 
keenly. But, by what judgment I know not, Leah has been coupled with me in the night, to wit, the active life; 
fruitful, but tender-eyed; seeing less, but bringing forth more. I have longed to sit at the feet of the Lord with 
Mary, to take in the words of His mouth; and lo, I am compelled to serve with Martha in external affairs, to be 
careful and troubled about many things (Luke x. 39, seq.). A legion of demons having been, as I believed, 
east out of me, I wished to forget those whom I bad known, and to rest at the feet of the Saviour; and lo it is 
said to me, so as to compel me against my will. Return to thine house, and declare how great things the 
Lord hath done for thee (Mark v. 19). But who in the midst of so many earthly cares may be able to preach 
the wondrous works of God, it being already difficult for me even to call them to mind? For, pressed as I am 
in this office of dignity by a crowd of secular occupations, I see myself to be of those of whom it is written. 
While they were being raised up thou didst cast them down (Ps. Ixxii. 18(6)). For he said not. Thou didst east 
them down after they had been raised up, but while they were being raised up; because all bad men fall 
inwardly, while through the support of temporal dignity they seem outwardly to rise. Wherefore their very 
raising up is their fall, because, while they rely on false glory, they are emptied of true glory. Hence, again, 
he says. Consuming away as smoke shall they consume away (Ps. xxxvi. 20(7)). For smoke in rising 
consumes away, and in extending itself vanishes. And so indeed it comes to pass when present felicity 
accompanies the life of a sinner, since whereby he is shewn to be exalted, thereby it is brought about that he 
should cease to be. Hence, again, it is written. My God, make them like a wheel (Ps. Ixxxii. 14(8)). For a 
wheel is lifted up in its hinder parts, and in its fore parts falls. But to us the things that are behind are the 
goods of the present world, which we leave behind us; butthe things that are before are those which are 
eternal and permanent, to which we are called, as Paul bears witness, saying. Forgetting those things which 
are behind, and reaching forth to those things which are before (Phil. ill. 13). The sinner, therefore, when he is 
advanced in the present life, is made to be as a wheel, since, while falling in the things which are before, he 
is lifted up in the things which are behind. For, when he enjoys in this life the glory which he must leave 
behind, he falls from that which comes after this life. There are indeed many who know how so to control their 
outward advancement as by no means to fall inwardly thereby. Whence it is written, God casteth not away 
the mighty, seeing that He also Himself is might (Job xxxvi. 5). And it is said through Solomon, A man of 
understanding shall possess governments (Prov. i. 5). But to me these things are difficult, since they are 
also exceedingly burdensome; and what the mind has not received willingly it does not control fitly. Lo, our 
most serene Lord the Emperor has ordered an ape to be made a lion. And, indeed, in virtue of his order it 
can be called a lion, but a lion it cannot be made. Wherefore his Piety must needs himself take the blame of 
all my faults and short-comings, having committed a ministry of power to a weak agent 

EPISTLE VI. 

TO NARSES, PATRICIAN (9). 

Gregory to Narses, &c 

In describing loftily the sweetness of contemplation, you have renewed the groans of my fallen state, since I 
hear what I have lost inwardly while mounting outwardly, though undeserving, to the topmost height of rule. 
Know then that I am stricken with so great sorrow that I can scarcely speak; for the dark shades of grief block 
up the eyes of my soul. Whatever is beheld is sad, whatever is thought delightful appears to my heart 
lamentable For I reflect to what a dejected height of external advancement I have mounted in falling from the 
lofty height of my rest. And, being sent for my faults into the exile of employment from the face of my Lord, I 
say with the prophet, in the words, as it were of destroyed Jerusalem, He who should comfort me hath 
departed far from me (Lam. i. 16). But when, in seeking a similitude to express my condition and title, you 
frame periods and declamations in your letter, certainly, dearest brother, you call an ape a lion. Herein we 

see that you do as we often do, when we call mangy whelps pards or tigers. For I, my good man, have, as it 
were, lost my children, since through earthly cares I have lost works of righteousness. Therefore call me not 
Noemi. that is fair; but call me Mara, for I am full of bitterness (Ruth i. 20). But as to your saying that I ought not 
to have written, "That you should plough with bubali(1) in the Lord's field," seeing that when in the sheet 
shewn to the blessed Peter both bubali and all wild beasts were presented to view; thou knowest thyself that 
it is subjoined. Slay and eat (Acts x. Thou, then, who hadst not yet slain these beasts, why didst thou already 
wish to eat them through obedience? Or knowest thou not that the beast about which thou wrotest refused to 
be slain by the sword of thy mouth? Thou must needs, then, satisfy the hunger of thy desire with those whom 
thou hast been able to prick and slay (Lit., to slay through compunction)(2). 

Further, as to the case of our brethren, I think that, if God gives aid, it will be as thou hast written. It was not, 
however, by any means right for me to write about it at present to our most serene lords, since at the very 
outset one should not begin with complaints. But I have written to my well-beloved son, the deacon 
Honoratus(3), that he should mention the matter to them in a suitable manner at a seasonable time, and 
speedily inform me of their reply. I beg greetings to be given in my behalf to the lord Alexander, the lord 
Theodorus(4), my son Marinus, the lady Esicia, the lady Eudochia, and the lady Dominica. 

EPISTLE VII. 

TO ANASTASIUS, PATRIARCH OF ANTI0CH(5). 

Gregory to Anastasius, &c. 

I have found what your Blessedness has written to be as rest to the weary, as health to the sick, as a fountain 
to the thirsty, as shade to the oppressed with heat. For those words of yours did not seem even to be 
expressed by the tongue of the flesh, inasmuch as you so disclosed the spiritual love which you bear me as 
if your soul itself were speaking. But very hard was that which followed, in that your love enjoined me to bear 
earthly burdens, and that, having first loved me spiritually, you afterwards, loving me as I think in temporal 
wise, pressed me down to the ground with the burden you laid upon me; so that, losing utterly all uprightness 
of soul, and forfeiting the keen vision of contemplation, I may say, not in the spirit of prophecy, but from 
experience, I am bowed down and brought low altogether (Ps. cxviii. 107(6)). For indeed such great burdens 
of business press me down that my mind can in no wise lift itself up to heavenly things. I am tossed by the 
billows of a multitude of affairs, and, after the ease of my former quiet, am afflicted by the storms of a 
tumultuous life, so that I may truly say, I am come into the depth of the sea, and the storm hath overwhelmed 
me (Ps. Ixviii. 3(7)). Stretch out, therefore, the hand of your prayer to me in my danger, you that stand on the 
shore of virtue. But as to your calling me the mouth and the lantern of the Lord, and alleging that I profit many, 
this also adds to the load of my iniquities, that, when my iniquity ought to have been chastised, I receive 
praises instead of chastisement. But with what a bustle of earthly business I am distracted in this place, I 
cannot express in words; yet you can gather it from the shortness of this letter, in which I say so little to him 
who I love above all others. Further, I apprize you that I have requested our most serene lords with all 
possible urgency to allow you to come to the threshold of Peter, the prince of the apostles, with your dignity 
restored to you, and to live here with me so long as it may please God; to the end that, as long as I am 
accounted worthy of seeing you, we may relieve the weariness of our pilgrimage by speaking to each other 
of the heavenly country. 

EPISTLE IX. 

TO PETER THE SUBDEACON. 

Gregory to Peter, &c. 

Gregory, a servant of God, presbyter and abbot of the monastery of Saint Theodore in the province of Sicily 
constituted in the territory of Panormus, has given us to understand that men of the farm of Fulloniacus, which 
belongs to the holy Roman Church, are endeavouring to encroach on the boundaries of the farm of 
Gerdinia, bordering on the said farm of the holy Roman Church, which they [i.e. monks of St. Theodore] 
have possessed without dispute for innumerable years. And for this cause we desire you to go to the city of 
Panormus, and investigate the question in such sort (with the view of the right of possession remaining with 
those who have had it heretofore) that, if you shall find that the aforesaid monastery of Saint Theodore has 
possessed the boundaries concerning which the dispute has arisen without disturbance for forty years, you 
shall not allow it to suffer any damage, even though it were to the advantage of the holy Roman Church, but 
provide in all ways for its undisturbed security. But, if the agents of the holy Roman Church should shew that 
the monastery has not been in possession without dispute of its right for forty years, but that any question 
has been raised within that time concerning the said boundaries, let it be set at rest peaceably and legally 

by arbitrators chosen for the purpose. For not only do we wish that questions of wrong-doing that have never 
yet been mooted should be raised, but also that such as have been raised by others than ourselves should 
be speedily set at rest. Let thy Experience, therefore, cause all to be so effectively adjusted, that no 
question relating to this matter may be hereafter referred to us again. Further, we desire that the testament of 
Bacauda, late Xenodochus, continue valid as when first made. The month of November: ninth Indiction. 

EPISTLE X. 

TO BACAUDA AND AGNELLUS, BISHOPS. 

Gregory to Bacauda, &c 

The Hebrews dwelling in Terracina have petitioned us for licence to hold, under our authority, the site of their 
synagogue which they have held hitherto. But, inasmuch as we have been informed that the same site is so 
near to the church that even the sound of their psalmody reaches it, we have written to our brother and 
fellow-bishop Peter that, if it is the case that the voices from the said place are heard in the church, the Jews 
must cease to worship there. Therefore let your Fraternity, with our above-named brother and fellow-bishop, 
diligently inspect this place, and if you find that there has been any annoyance to the church, provide 
another place within the fortress, where the aforesaid Hebrews may assemble, so that they may be able to 
celebrate their ceremonies without impediment (8). But let your Fraternity provide such a place, in case of 
their being deprived of this one, that there be no cause of complaint in future. But we forbid the aforesaid 
Hebrews to be oppressed or vexed unreasonably; but, as they are permitted, in accordance with justice, to 
live under the protection of the Roman laws, let them keep their observances as they have learnt them, no 
one hindering them: yet let it not be allowed them to have Christian slaves. 

EPISTLE XI. 

TO CLEMENTINA, PATRICIAN(9). 

Gregory to Clementina, &c. 

Having received your Glory's letter speaking of the passing away of the late Eutherius of magnificent 
memory, we give you to understand that our mind no less than yours is disturbed by such a sorrow, in that 
we see how men of approved repute are by degrees removed from this world, whose ruin is already 
evidenced in the actual effects of the causes thereof. But it becomes us to withdraw ourselves from it by the 
wise precaution of conversion(l), lest it involve us too in its own ruin. And indeed our sorrow for the loss of 
friends ought to be the more tolerable as our condition of mortality requires from us that we should lose 
them. Nevertheless, for the loss of aid to our carnal life He Who granted permission for its removal is 
powerful to console, and to come Himself as a comforter into the vacant place. 

That we are unable to accede to your request that the deacon Anatholius should be sent to you is due to the 
circumstances of the case, and not to any rigorous austerity. For we have appointed him our steward (2), 
having committed our episcopal residence to his management. 

EPISTLE XII. 

TO JOHN, BISHOP OF URBS VETUS 

(Orvieto). 

Gregory to John, &c. 

Agapitus, abbot of the monastery of St. George, informs us that he endures many grievances from your 
Holiness; and not only in things that might be of service to the monastery in time of need, but that you even 
prohibit the celebration of masses in the said monastery, and also interdict burial of the dead there. Now, if 
this is so, we exhort you to desist from such inhumanity, and allow the dead to be buried, and masses to be 
celebrated there without any further opposition, lest the aforesaid venerable Agapitus should be compelled 
to complain anew concerning the matters referred to. 

EPISTLE XVI 

TO SEVERUS, BISHOP OF AQUILEIA(3). 

Gregory to Severus, &c. 

As, when one who walks through devious ways takes anew the right path, the Lord embraces him with all 

eagerness, so afterwards, when one deserts the way of truth. He is more saddened with grief for him than 
He rejoiced over him with joy when he turned from error; since it is a less degree of sin not to l<now the truth 
than not to abide in it when l<nown: and what is committed in error is one thing, but what iS perpetrated 
l<nowingly is another. And we, from having formerly rejoiced in thy being incorporated in the unity of the 
Church, are now the more abundantly distressed for thy dissociation from the catholic society. Accordingly 
we desire thee, at the instance of the bearer of these presents, according to the command of the most 
Christian and most serene Emperor, to come with thy adherents to the threshold of the blessed Apostle 
Peter, that, a synod being assembled by the will of God, judgment may be passed concerning the doubt 
that is entertained among you. 

EPISTLE XVII. 

TO ALL THE BISHOPS OF ITALY. 

Gregory to all, &c. 

Inasmuch as the abominable Autharit(4) during this Easter solemnity which has been lately completed, 
forbade children of Lombards being baptized in the catholic faith, for which sin the Divine Majesty cut him off, 
so that he should not see the solemnity of another Easter, it becomes your Fraternity to warn all the 
Lombards in your districts, seeing that grievous mortality is everywhere imminent, that they should reconcile 
these their children who have been baptized in Arian heresy to the catholic faith, and so appease the wrath 
of the Almighty Lord which hangs over them. Warn, then, those whom you can; with all the power of 
persuasion you possess seize on them, and bring them to a right faith; preach to them eternal life without 
end; that, when you shall come into the sight of the strict judge, you may be able, in consequence of your 
solicitude, to shew in your own persons a shepherd's gains. 

EPISTLE XVIII. 

TO PETER THE SUBDEACON. 

Gregory to Peter, &c. 

We have been informed that Marcellus of the Barutanian Church, who has had penance assigned him in the 
monastery of Saint Adrian in the same city of Panormus, not only is in want of food, but also suffers 
inconvenience from scarcity of clothing. Therefore we hold it necessary to enjoin your Activity by this 
present order to appoint for him as much as you may see to be needful in the way of food clothing and 
bedding for his own maintenance, and provision for his servant; so that his want and nakedness may be 
provided for with such timely care that what you assign to this same man may be reckoned afterwards to 
your own account. So act, therefore, that you may both fulfil our command, and also by ordering this very 
thing well you may be able yourself to partake of the profit of the same. Further, there is this other matter that 
we enjoin you to look to without regard to the old custom that has now grown up; namely, that if any cities in 
the province of Sicily, for their sins, are known to be without pastoral government through the lapses of their 
priests, you should see whether there be any worthy of the office of priesthood among the clergy of the 
churches themselves, or out of the monasteries, and, after first enquiring into the gravity of their behaviour, 
send them to us, that the flock of each place may not be found destitute for any length of time through the 
lapse of its pastor. But if you should discover any vacant place in which no one of the same church is found 
fitted for such a dignity, send us word after the like careful enquiry, that some one may be provided whom 
God may have judged worthy of such ordination. For it is not right that from the deviation of one the Lord's 
flock should be in danger of wandering abroad among precipices without a shepherd. For thus both the 
administration of places will go on, and there will remain no suspicion of the lapsed being restored to their 
former rank; and so may they repent the better. 

EPISTLE XIX. 

TO NATALIS, BISHOP OF SAL0NA(5). 

Gregory to Natalis, &c. 

The acts of your synod which you have transmitted to us, in which the Archdeacon Honoratus is 
condemned, we perceive to be full of the seed of strifes, seeing that the same person is at one and the 
same time advanced to the dignity of the priesthood against his will, and removed from the office of the 
diaconate as though unworthy of it. And, as it is just that no one who is unwilling should be advanced by 
compulsion, so I think we must be of opinion that no one who is innocent should be deposed from the 

ministry of iiis order unjustly. Nevertlieless, since discord liateful to God excuses tliy part in tiie transaction, 
we admonisii tiiee to restore iiis place and administration to the Archdeacon Honoratus, and agree to 
supply him with attendance sufficient for his divine ministry. If cause of offence is still fomented between you, 
let the aforesaid Archdeacon submit himself to our audience and enquiry, when admonished to do so, and 
let thy love send to us a person instructed in the case, that in the presence of both, the Lord assisting us, we 
may be able to decide what justice approves without respect of persons. 

EPISTLE XX. 

TO HONORATUS, DEACON OF SALONA. 

Gregory to Honoratus, &c. 

Having read the contradictory letters which thou and thy bishop have addressed to us against each other, 
we grieve that there is so little charity between you. Nevertheless we enjoin thee to continue in the 
administration of thy office, and, if the cause of offence between you can, under the power of grace, be 
settled on the spot, we believe it will be greatly to the advantage of your souls. But in case the discord 
between you has so set you in arms against each other that you have no will to allay the swelling of your 
offence, do thou without delay come to be heard before us, and let thy bishop send to us on his own behalf 
such person as he may choose, furnished with instructions; that, after minutely considering the whole case, 
we may settle what may appear fit between the parties. But we would have thee know that we shall make 
strict enquiry of thee on all points, as to whether the ornaments(6), either those of thine own church, or such 
as have been collected from various churches, are being now kept with all care and fidelity. For, if any of 
them shall be found to have been lost through negligence or through any person's dishonesty, thou wilt be 
involved in the guilt of this, being, in virtue of thy office of Archdeacon, peculiarly responsible for the custody 
of the said church. 

EPISTLE XXI. 

TO NATALIS, BISHOP OF SAL0NA(7). 

Gregory to Natalis, &c. 

We have received at the bands of the deacon Stephen, whom you sent to us, the letters of thy Reverence, 
wherein you congratulate us on our promotion. And truly what has been offered in the kindness and 
earnestness of charity demands full credence, reason having prompted your pontifical order to rejoice with 
us. We therefore, being cheered by your greeting, declare in conscience that I undertook the burden of 
dignity with a sick heart. But, seeing that I could not resist the divine decrees, I have recovered a more 
cheerful frame of mind. Wherefore we write to entreat your Reverence that both we and the Christian flock 
committed to our care may enjoy the succour of your prayers, to the end that in the security of that protection 
we may have power to overcome the hurricanes of these times. 
The month of February, ninth indiction 

EPISTLE XXV. 

TO JOHN, BISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE, AND THE OTHER PATRIARCHS. 

Gregory, to John of Constantinople, Eulogius of Alexandria, Gregory of Antioch, John of Jerusalem, and 
Anastasias, Ex-Patriarch of Antioch. A paribus(8). 

When I consider how, unworthy as I am, and resisting with my whole soul, I have been compelled to bear the 
burden of pastoral care, a darkness of sorrow comes over me, and my sad heart sees nothing else but the 
shadows which allow nothing to be seen. For to what end is a bishop chosen of the Lord but to be an 
intercessor for the offences of the people? With what confidence, then, can I come as an intercessor for the 
sins of others to Him before Whom I am not secure about my own? If perchance any one should ask me to 
become his intercessor with a great man who was incensed against him, and to myself unknown, I should at 
once reply, I cannot go to intercede for you, having no knowledge of that man from familiar acquaintance 
with him. If then, as man with man, I should properly blush to become an intercessor with one on whom I had 
no claim, how great is the audacity of my obtaining the place of intercessor for the people with God, whose 
friendship I am not assured of through the merit of my life! And in this matter I find a still more serious cause 
of alarm, since we all know well that, when one who is in disfavour is sent to intercede with an incensed 
person, the mind of the latter is provoked to still greater severity. And I am greatly afraid lest the community 
of believers, whose offences the Lord has so far indulgently borne with, should perish through the addition of 

my guilt to theirs. But, wiien in one way or anotiier I suppress tiiis fear, and witii mind consoled give myself to 
the care of my pontifical office, I am deterred by consideration of the immensity of this very task. 
"For indeed I consider with myself what watchful care is needed that a ruler may be pure in thought, chief in 
action, discreet in keeping silence, profitable in speech, a near neighbour to every one in sympathy, 
exalted above all in contemplation, a companion of good livers through humility, unbending against the 
vices of evil-doers through zeal for righteousness(9)." All which things when I try to search out with subtle 
investigation, the very wideness of the consideration cramps me in the particulars. For, as I have already 
said, there is need of the greatest care that "the ruler be pure in thought, &c." [A long passage, thus 
beginning, and ending with "beyond the limit of order," is found also in Regula Pastoralis, Pt. II. ch. 2, which 
see.] 

Again, when I betake myself to consider the works required of the pastor, I weigh within myself what intent 
care is to be taken that he be "chief in action, to the end that by his living, he may point out the way of life to 
them that are put under him, &c." [See Reg. Past., Pt. II. ch. 3, to the end.] 

Again, when I betake myself to consider the duty of the pastor as to speech and silence, I weigh within 
myself with trembling care how very necessary it is that he should be discreet in keeping silence and 
profitable in speech, "lest he either utter what ought to be suppressed or suppress what ought to be uttered, 
&c." [See Reg. Past., III., 4, down to "keep the unity of the faith."] 

Again, when I betake myself to consider what manner of man the ruler ought to be in sympathy, and what in 
contemplation, I weigh within myself that he "should be a near neighbour to every one in sympathy, and 
exalted above all in contemplation, to the end that through the bowels of loving-kindness, &c." [See Reg. 
Past, Pt. II. ch. 5, to the end.] 

Again, when I betake myself to consider what manner of man the ruler ought to be in humility, and what in 
strictness, I weigh within myself how necessary it is that he "should be, through humility, a companion to 
good livers, and, through the zeal of righteousness rigid against the vices of evil-doers &c." [See Regula 
Pastoralis, Pt. II. ch. 6, down to "towards the perverse;" there being only a slight variation, not affecting the 
sense, in the wording of the concluding clause.] For hence it is that "Peter who had received from God, &c." 
[See Reg. Past., Pt. II. ch. 6, down to "dominates over vices rather than over his brethren."] He orders well 
the authority he has received who has learnt both to maintain it and to keep it in check. He orders it well who 
knows how both through it to tower above sins, and with it to set himself on an equality with other men. 
Moreover, the virtue of humility ought to be so maintained that the rights of government be not relaxed; lest, 
when any prelate has lowered himself more than is becoming, he be unable to restrain the life of his 
subordinates under the bond of discipline; and the severity of discipline is to be so maintained that 
gentleness be not wholly lost through the over-kindling of zeal. For often vices shew themselves off as 
virtues, so that niggardliness would fain appear as frugality, extravagance as liberality, cruelty as righteous 
zeal, laxity as loving-kindness. Wherefore both discipline and mercy are far from what they should be, if one 
be maintained without the other. But there ought to be kept up with great skill of discernment both mercy 
justly considerate, and discipline smiting kindly. "For hence it is that, as the Truth teaches (Luke x. 34), the 
man is brought by the care of the Samaritan, &c." [See Reg. Past., Pt. II. ch. 6, down to "manna of 
sweetness."] 

Thus, having undertaken the burden of pastoral care, when I consider all these things and many others of 
like kind, I seem to be what I cannot be, especially as in this place whosoever is called a Pastor is 
onerously occupied by external cares; so that it often becomes uncertain whether he exercises the function 
of a pastor or of an earthly noble. And indeed whosoever is set over his brethren to rule them cannot be 
entirely free from external cares; and yet there is need of exceeding care lest he be pressed down by them 
too much. "Whence it is rightly said to Ezekiel, The priests shall not shave their heads, &c."[See Reg. Past., 
Pt. II., ch.7,totheend.] 

But in this place I see that no such discreet management is possible, since cases of such importance hang 
over me daily as to overwhelm the mind, while they kill the bodily life. Wherefore, most holy brother, I 
beseech thee by the Judge who is to come, by the assembly of many thousand angels, by the Church of the 
firstborn who are written in heaven, help me, who am growing weary under this burden of pastoral care, with 
the intercession of thy prayer, test its weight oppress me beyond my strength. But, being mindful of what is 
written, Pray for one another, that ye may be healed (James v. 16), I give also what I ask for. But I shall 
receive what I give. For, while we are joined to you through the aid of prayer, we hold as it were each other 
by the hand while walking through slippery places, and it comes to pass, through a great provision of 
charity, that the foot of each is the more firmly planted in that one leans upon the other. 
Besides, since with the heart man believeth unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto 
salvation, I confess that I receive and revere, as the four books of the Gospel so also the four Councils: to 
wit, the Nicene, in which the perverse doctrine of Arius is overthrown; the Constantinopolitan also, in which 
the error of Eunomius and Macedonius is refuted; further, the first Ephesine, in which the impiety of Nestorius 
is condemned; and the Chalcedonian, in which the pravity of Eutyches and Dioscorus is reprobated. These 

with full devotion I embrace, and adhere to with most entire approval; since on them, as on a four-square 
stone, rises the structure of the holy faith; and whosoever, of whatever life and behaviour he may be, holds 
not fast to their solidity, even though he is seen to be a stone, yet he lies outside the building. The fifth 
council also I equally venerate, in which the epistle which is called that of Ibas, full of error, is reprobated; 
Theodorus, who divides the Mediator between God and men into two subsistences, is convicted of having 
fallen into the perfidy of impiety; and the writings of Theodoritus, in which the faith of the blessed Cyril is 
impugned, are refuted as having been published with the daring of madness. But all persons whom the 
aforesaid venerable Councils repudiate I repudiate; those whom they venerate I embrace; since, they 
having been constituted by universal consent, he overthrows not them but himself, whosoever presumes 
either to loose those whom they bind, or to bind those whom they loose. Whosoever, therefore, thinks 
otherwise, let him be anathema. But whosoever holds the faith of the aforesaid synods, peace be to him 
from God the Father, through Jesus Christ His Son, Who lives and reigns consubstantially God with Him in 
the Unity of the Holy Spirit for ever and ever. Amen. 

EPISTLE XXVI. 

TO ANASTASIUS, PATRIARCH OF ANTIOCH. 

[The beginning of this epistle is the same as that of Epistle VII. to the same Anastasius as far as the words 
"stand on the shore of virtue"; after which it is continued as follows.] 

But, as to your calling me the mouth and lantern of the Lord, and alleging that I profit many by speaking, and 
am able to give light to many, I confess that you have brought me into a state of the greatest doubt in my 
estimate of myself. For I consider what I am, and detect in myself no sign of all this good. But I consider also 
what you are, and I do not think that you can lie. When, then, I would believe what you say, my infirmity 
contradicts me. When I would dispute what is said in my praise, your sanctity contradicts me. But I pray you, 
holy man, let us come to some agreement in this our contest, that, though it is not as you say, it may be so 
because you say it. Moreover, I have addressed my synodical epistle to you, as to the other patriarchs, 
your brethren(1); inasmuch as with me you are always what it has been granted you to be by the gift of 
Almighty God, without regard to what you are accounted not to be by the will of men(2). I have given some 
instructions to Boniface the guardian (defensori), who is the bearer of these presents, for him to 
communicate to your holiness in private. Moreover, I have sent you keys of the blessed apostle Peter, who 
loves you, which are wont to shine forth with many miracles when placed on the bodies of sick persons(3). 

EPISTLE XXVII. 

TO ANASTASIUS, ARCHBISHOP OF CORINTH. 

Gregory to Anastasius, &c. 

In proportion as the judgments of God are unsearchable ought they to be an object of fear to human 
apprehension; so that mortal reason, being unable to comprehend them, may of necessity bow under them 
the neck of a humble heart, to the end that it may follow with the mind's obedient steps where the will of the 
Ruler may lead. I, then, considering that my infirmity cannot reach to the height of the apostolic See, had 
rather have declined this burden, lest, having pastoral rule, I should succumb in action through inadequate 
administration. But, since it is notfor us to go against the will of the Lord who disposes all, I obediently 
followed the way in which it pleased the merciful hand of the Ruler to deal with me. For it was necessary that 
your Fraternity should be informed, even though the present opportunity had not occurred, how the Lord had 
vouchsafed that I, however unworthy, should preside over the apostolic See. Since, then, reason required 
this to be done, and an opportunity having occurred through our sending to you the bearer of these 
presents, that is, Boniface the guardian (defensorem), we are careful not only to offer to your Fraternity by 
letter the good wishes of charity, but also to inform you of our ordination, as we believe you would wish us to 
do. Wherefore let your Charity, by a letter in reply, cause us to rejoice for the unity of the Church and the 
acceptable news of your own welfare; to the end that our bodily absence from each other, which distance of 
place causes us to endure, may become as presence through interchange of letters. We exhort you, also, 
since we have despatched the above-mentioned bearer of these presents on certain necessary business 
to the feet of the most clement prince, and since the mutability of the time is wont to generate many 
hindrances on the way, that your priestly affection would bestow upon him whatever may be necessary 
either in provision for his journey by land or in procuring for him the means of navigation, that through God's 
mercy, he may be able the more quickly to accomplish his intended journey. 

EPISTLE XXVIII. 

TO SEBASTIAN, BISHOP OF RHISINUM [in Dalmatia]. 

Gregory to Sebastian, &c. 

Although I deserved to receive no letters from your Blessedness, yet I also do not forget my own 
forgetfulness; I blame my negligence, I stir up my sluggishness with goads of love, that one who will not pay 
what he owes of his own accord, may learn even under blows to render it. Furthermore, I inform you that I 
have prepared a full representation, with urgent prayers to our most pious lords, to the effect that they ought 
to have sent the most blessed lord patriarch Anastasius, with the use of the pallium granted him, to the 
threshold of the blessed Peter, prince of the apostles, to celebrate with me the solemnities of Mass; to the 
end that, though he were not allowed to return to his See, he might at least live with me, retaining his dignity. 
But of the reason that has arisen for keeping back what I had thus written the bearer of these presents will 
inform you. Nevertheless, ascertain the mind of the said lord Anastasius, and inform me in your letters of 
whatever he may wish to be done in this business(4). 

EPISTLE XXIX. 

TO ARISTOBULUS, EX-PREFECT AND ANTIGRAPHUS(5). 

Gregory to Aristobulus, &c. 

For fully expressing my affection I confess that my tongue suffices not: but your own affection will better tell 
you all that I feel towards you. I have heard that you are suffering from certain oppositions. But I am not 
greatly grieved for this, since it is often the case that a ship which might have reached the depths of the 
ocean had the breeze been favourable is driven back by an opposing wind at the very beginning of its 
voyage, but by being driven back is recalled into port. Furthermore, if you should by any chance receive for 
interpretation a lengthy letter of mine, translate it, I pray you, not word for word, but so as to give the sense; 
since usually, when close rendering of the words is attended to, the force of the ideas is lost. 

EPISTLE XXXIII. 

TO ROMANUS, PATRICIAN, AND EXARCH OF ITALY. 

Gregory to Romanus, &c. 

Even though there were no immediate cause for writing to your Excellency, yet we ought to shew solicitude 
for your health and safety so as to learn through frequent intercommumcation what we desire to hear about 
you. Besides, it has come to our knowledge that Blandus, bishop of the city of Hortanum(6), has been 
detained now for a long time by your Excellency in the city of Ravenna. And the result is that the Church 
decays, being without a ruler, and the people as being without a shepherd; and infants there, for their sins, 
die without baptism(7). And again, since we do not believe that your Excellency has detained him except on 
the ground of some probable transgression, it is proper that a synod should be held to bring to light any 
crime that is charged against him. And, if such fault is found in him as to lead to his degradation from the 
priesthood, it is necessary that we should look out for another to be ordained, lest the Church of God should 
remain nu-tended, and destitute in what the Christian religion does not allow it to be without. But, if your 
Excellency should perceive that the case is otherwise with him than it is said to be, allow him, I pray you, to 
return to his church, that he may fulfil his duty to the souls committed to his charge. 
The month of March; the ninth Indiction. 

EPISTLE XXXIV. 

TO VENANTIUS, EX-MONK, PATRICIAN OF SYRACUSE(8). 

Gregory to Venantius, &c. 

Many foolish men have supposed that, if I were advanced to the rank of the episcopate, I should decline to 
address thee, or to keep up communication with thee by letter. But this is not so; since I am compelled by 
the very necessity of my position not to hold my peace. For it is written. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice 
like a trumpet (Isai. Iviii. I). And again it is written, I have given thee for a watchman unto the house of Israel, 
thou Shalt hear the word at my mouth, and declare it to them from me (Ezek. ill. 17). And what follows to the 
watchman or to the hearer from such declaration being kept back or uttered is forthwith intimated; If, when I 
say to the wicked. Thou shalt surely die, thou declare it not to him, nor speak to him, that he may turn from his 
wicked way and live, the wicked man himself shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine hand. 

Yet if thou declare it to tiie wicl<ed, and lie turn not from iiis iniquity and from iiis wicl<ed way, lie iiimself 
indeed siiall die in iiis iniquity, but tiiou iiast delivered thy soul. Hence also Paul says to the Ephesians, My 
hands are pure this day from the blood of all of you. For I have not shunned to declare unto you all the 
counsel of God (Acts xx. 26, 27). He would not, then, have been pure from the blood of all, had he refused to 
declare unto them the counsel of God. For when the pastor refuses to rebuke those that sin, there is no 
doubt that in holding his peace he slays them. Compelled, therefore, by this consideration, I will speak 
whether you will or no; for with all my powers I desire either thee to be saved or myself to be rescued from 
thy death. For thou rememberest in what state of life thou wast, and knowest to what thou hast fallen without 
regard to the animadversion of supernal strictness. Consider, then, thy fault while there is time; dread, while 
thou canst, the severity of the future judge; lest thou then find it bitter, having shed no tears to avoid it now. 
Consider what is written; Pray that your flight be not in the winter, neither on the Sabbath day (Matth. xxiv. 20). 
For the numbness of cold impedes walking in the winter, and, according to the ordinance of the law, it is not 
lawful to walk on the Sabbath day. He, then, attempts to fly in the winter or on the Sabbath day, who then 
wishes to fly from the wrath of the strict Judge when it is no longer allowed him to walk. Wherefore, while 
there is time, while it is allowed, fly thou from the animadversion which is of so great dreadfulness: consider 
what is written; Whatsoever thine hand findeth to do, do it with thy might; for there is neither work, nor device, 
nor wisdom, in the grave whither thou hastenest (Eccles. ix. 10). By the witness of the Gospel thou knowest 
that divine severity accuses us for idle talk, and demands a strict account of an unprofitable word (Matth. xii. 
36). Consider, then, what it will do for perverse doing, if in its judgment it reprobates some for talking. 
Ananias had vowed money to God (Acts v. 2 seq.), which, afterwards, overcome by diabolical persuasion, 
he withheld. But by what death he was mulcted thou knowest. If then he was deserving of the penalty of 
death who withdrew the money which he had given to God, consider of how great penalty thou wilt be 
deserving in the divine judgment, who hast withdrawn, not money, but thyself, from Almighty God, to whom 
thou hadst devoted thyself in the monastic state of life. Wherefore, if thou wilt hear the words of my rebuke so 
as to follow them, thou wilt come to know in the end how kind and sweet they are. Lo, I confess it, I speak 
mourning and constrained by sorrow for what thou hast done. I scarce can utter words; and yet thy mind, 
conscious of guilt, is hardly able to bear what it hears, blushes, is confounded, remonstrates. If, then, it 
cannot bear the words of dust, what will it do at the judgment of the Creator? And yet I acknowledge the 
exceeding mercy of heavenly grace, in that it beholds thee flying from life, and nevertheless still reserves 
thee for life; that it sees thee acting proudly, and still bears with thee; that through its unworthy servants it 
administers to thee words of rebuke and admonition. So great a thing is this that thou oughtest anxiously to 
ponder on what Paul says; We exhort you, brethren that ye receive not the grace of God in vain: for he saith, 
I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation have I succoured thee. Behold now is the 
acceptable time, behold now is the day of salvation (2 Cor. vi. 1 seq.). 

But I know that, when my letter is received, forthwith friends come about thee, thy literary clients are called in, 
and advice about the purpose of life is sought from the promoters of death; who, loving not thee, but what 
belongs to thee, tell thee nothing but what may please thee at the time. For such, as thou thyself 
rememberest, were those thy former counsellors, who drew thee on to the perpetration of so great a sin. To 
quote to thee something from a secular author(9), "All things should be considered with friends, but the 
friends themselves should be considered first." But, if in thy case thou seekest an adviser, take me, I pray 
thee, as thy adviser. For no one can be more to be relied on for advice than one who loves not what is thine, 
but thee. May Almighty God make known to thy heart with what love and with what charity my heart 
embraces thee, though so far only as not to offend against divine grace. For I so attack thy fault as to love 
thy person; I so love thy person as not to embrace the viciousness of thy fault. If, therefore, thou believest 
that I love thee, approach the threshold of the apostles, and use me as an adviser. But if perchance I am 
supposed to be too keen in the cause of God, and am suspected for the ardour of my zeal, I will call the 
whole Church together into counsel on this question, and whatever all are of opinion should be done for 
good, this I will in no wise contradict, but gladly fulfil and subscribe to what is decided in common. May 
Divine grace keep thee while accomplishing what I have warned thee to do. 

EPISTLE XXXV. 

TO PETER, BISHOP OF TERRACINA. 

Gregory to Peter, &c. 

Joseph, a Jew, the bearer of these presents, has informed us that, the Jews dwelling in the camp of 
Terracina having been accustomed to assemble in a certain place for celebrating their festivities, thy 
Fraternity had expelled them thence, and that they had migrated, and this with thy knowledge and consent, 
to another place for in like manner observing their festivities; and now they complain that they have been 
expelled anew from this same place. But, if it is so, we desire thy Fraternity to abstain from giving cause of 

complaint of this l<ind, and tiiattiiey be allowed, as has been the custom, to assemble in the place which, as 
we have already said, they had obtained with thy knowledge for their place of meeting. For those who 
dissent from the Christian religion must needs be gathered together to unity of faith by gentleness, kindness, 
admonition, persuasion, lest those whom the sweetness of preaching and the anticipated terror of future 
judgment might have invited to believe should be repelled by threats and terrors. It is right, then, that they 
should come together kindly to hear the word of God from you rather than that they should become afraid of 
overstrained austerity. 

EPISTLE XXXVI. 

TO PETER THE SUBDEACON. 

Gregory, bishop, servant of the servants of God, to Peter the Subdeacon. 

The code of instructions which I gave thee on thy going to Sicily must be diligently perused, so that the 
greatest care may be taken concerning bishops, lest they mix themselves up in secular causes, except so 
far as the necessity of defending the poor compels them. But what is inserted in the same code concerning 
monks or clerics ought, I think, in no respect to be varied from. But let thy Experience observe these things 
with such great attention as may fulfil my desire in this regard. Further, it has come to my ears that from the 
times of Antoninus, the defensor, till now, during these last ten years, many persons have endured certain 
acts of violence from the Roman Church, so that some publicly complain of their boundaries having been 
violently invaded, their slaves abstracted, and their moveables carried off by force, and not by any judicial 
process. In all such cases I desire thy Experience to keep intent watch, and whatsoever during these last 
ten years may be found to have been taken away by violence, or retained unjustly in the name of the 
Church, to restore it by authority of this my order to him to whom it is found to belong; lest he who has suffered 
violence should be obliged to come to me, and undertake the labour of so long a journey, in which case it 
could not be ascertained here before me whether or not he spoke the truth. Having regard, then, to the 
majesty of the Judge who is to come, restore all things that have been sinfully taken away, knowing that thou 
bringest great gain to me, if thou gatherest [heavenly] reward rather than riches. But we have ascertained 
that what the greater part complain of is the loss of their slaves, saying that, if any man's bondman, 
peradventure running away from his master, has declared himself to belong to the Church, the rectors(1) of 
the Church have at once kept him as a bondman belonging to the Church, without any trial of the case, but 
supporting with a high hand the word of the bondman. This displeases me as much as it is abhorrent from 
the judgment of truth. Wherefore I desire thy Experience to correct without delay whatever may be found to 
have been so done: and it is also fit that any such slaves as are now kept in ecclesiastical possession, as 
they were taken away without trial, should be restored before trial; so that, if holy Church has any legitimate 
claim to them, their possessors may then be dispossessed by regular process of law. Correct all these 
things irretractably, since thou wilt be truly a soldier of the blessed apostle Peter if in his causes thou keep 
guard over the truth, even without his receiving anything. But, if thou seest anything that may justly be 
claimed as belonging to the Church, beware lest thou ever try to assert such claim by force; especially as I 
have established a decree under pain of anathema, that tituli may not ever be put by our Church on any 
urban or rural farm(2); but whatever may in reason be claimed for the poor ought also to be defended by 
reason; lest, a good thing being done in a manner that is not good, we be convicted of injustice before 
Almighty God even in what we justly seek. Moreover, I pray thee, let noble laymen, and the glorious 
[Praetor](3) love thee for thy humility, not dread thee for thy pride. And yet, if by any chance thou knowest 
them to be doing any injustice to the indigent, turn thy humility at once into exaltation, so as to be always 
submissive to them when they do well, and opposed to them when they do ill. But so behave that neither thy 
humility be remiss nor thy authority stiff, to the end that uprightness season humility, and humility render thy 
very uprightness gentle. Further, since it has been customary for bishops to assemble here for the 
anniversary(4) of the pontiff, forbid their coming for the day of my ordination, since foolish and vain 
superfluity delights me not. But if they must needs assemble, let them come for the anniversary(4) of Peter, 
the prince of the apostles, to render thanks to him by whose bounty they are pastors. Farewell. Given this 
XVII day of the Kalends of April, in the ninth year of the Emperor Mauricius. 

EPISTLE XXXIX. 

TO ANTHEMIUS, SUBDEAC0N(5). 

Gregory to Anthemius, &c. 

We charged thee on thy departure, and remember to have afterwards enjoined on thee by letter, to take 

care of the poor, and, if thou shouldest find any in those parts to be in want, to inform me by letter: and thou 

hast been at pains to do this with regard to very few. Now, I desire that, as soon as thou hast received this 
present order, thou offer to Pateria, my father's sister, forty solidi for shoe-money for her boys, and four 
hundred modii of wheat; to the lady Palatina, the widow of Urbicus, twenty solidi and three hundred modii of 
wheat; to the lady Viviana, widow of Felix, twenty solidi and three hundred modii of wheat. And let all these 
eighty solidi be charged together in thy accounts. But bring hither with speed the sum of thy receipts, and be 
here, with the Lord's help, by Easter Day. 

EPISTLE XL!. 

TO PETER, SUBDEACON. 

Gregory to Peter, &c. 

The venerable Paulinus bishop of the city of Taurum (Taurianum in Brutia), has told us that his monks have 
been scattered by reason of barbaric invasions, and that they are now wandering through the whole of 
Sicily, and that, being without a ruler, they neither have a care of their souls, nor pay attention to the 
discipline of their profession. On this account we enjoin thee to search out with all care and diligence, and 
collect together, these same monks, and to place them with the said bishop, their ruler, in the monastery of 
Saint Theodorus situate in the city of Messana, that both such as are there now, whom we find to be in need 
of a ruler, and those of his congregation whom you may have found and brought back, may be able, under 
his leadership, to serve the Almighty Lord together. Know also that we have signified this matter to the 
venerable Felix, bishop of the same city, lest anything ordained in the diocese committed to him should be 
disturbed without his knowledge. 

EPISTLE XLII. 

TO ANTHEMIUS, SUBDEAC0N(5). 

Gregory to Anthemius, &c. 

John, our brother and fellow-bishop, in a schedule sent to us by his cleric Justus, has among many other 
things intimated to us as follows: that some monks of the diocese of Surrentum(7) transmigrate from 
monastery to monastery as they please, and depart from the rule of their own abbot out of desire for a 
worldly life; nay even (what is known to be unlawful) that they aim severally at having property of their own. 
Wherefore we command thy Experience by this present order, that no monk be henceforth allowed to 
migrate from monastery to monastery, and that thou permit not any one of them to have anything of his own. 
But, if any one whatever should so presume, let him be sent back with adequate constraint to the monastery 
in which he lived at first, to be under the rule of his own abbot from which he had escaped; lest, if we allow so 
great an iniquity to take its course uncorrected, the souls of those that are lost be required from the souls of 
their superiors. Further, if any of the clergy should chance to become monks, let it not be lawful for them to 
return anew to the same church in which they had formerly served, or to any other; unless one should be a 
monk of such a life that the bishop under whom he had formerly served should think him worthy of the 
priesthood, so that he may be chosen by him, and by him ordained to such place as he may think fit. And 
since we have learnt that some among the monks have plunged into such great wickedness as publicly to 
take to themselves wives, do thou seek them out with all vigilance, and, when found, send them back with 
due constraint to the monasteries of which they had been monks. But neglect not to deal also with the clergy 
who profess monasticism, as we have said above. For so thou wilt be pleasing in the eyes of God, and be 
found partaker of a full reward. 

EPISTLE XLIII. 

TO LEANDER BISHOP OF HISPALIS 

(Seville)(8) 

Gregory to Leander, &c. 

I should have wished to reply to your letters with full application of mind, were I not so worn by the labour of 
my pastoral charge as to be more inclined to weep than to say anything. And this your Reverence will take 
care to understand and allow for in the very text of my letters, when I speak negligently to one whom I 
exceedingly love. For, indeed, I am in this place tossed by such billows of this world that I am in no wise 
able to steer into port the old and gotten ship of which, in the hidden dispensation of God, I have assumed 
the guidance. Now in front the billows rush in, now at the side heaps of foamy sea swell up, now from behind 
the storm follows on. And, disquieted in the midst of all this, I am compelled sometimes to steer in the very 

face of the opposing waters; sometimes, turning tiie siiip aside, to avoid tiie tiireats of tiie billows slantwise. I 
groan, because I feel that through my negligence the bilgewater of vices increases, and, as the storm meets 
the vessel violently, the rotten planks already sound of shipwreck. With tears I remember how I have lost the 
placid shore of my rest, and with sighs I behold the land which still, with the winds of affairs blowing against 
me, I cannot reach. If, then, thou lovest me, dearest brother, stretch out to me in the midst of these billows the 
hand of thy prayer; that from helping me in my labours thou mayest, in very return for the benefit, be the 
stronger in thine own. 

I cannot, however, at all fully express in words my joy on having learnt that our common son, the most 
glorious King Rechared, has been converted with most entire devotion to the Catholic faith(9). In describing 
his character to me in thy letters thou bast made me love him, though I know him not. But, since you know the 
wiles of the ancient foe, how against conquerors he prepares all the fiercer war, let your Holiness keep 
watch the more warily over him, that he may accomplish what he has well begun, nor lift himself up for good 
works accomplished; that he may keep the faith which he has come to know by the merits also of his life, 
and shew by his works that he is a citizen of the eternal kingdom, to the end that after a course of many 
years he may pass from kingdom to kingdom. 

But with respect to trine immersion in baptism, no truer answer can be given than what you have yourself felt 
to be right; namely that, where there is one faith, a diversity of usage does no harm to holy Church. Now we, 
in immersing thrice, signify the sacraments of the three days' sepulture; so that, when the infant is a third time 
lifted out of the water, the resurrection after a space of three days may be expressed. Or, if any one should 
perhaps think that this is done out of veneration for the supreme Trinity, neither so is there any objection to 
immersing the person to be baptized in the water once, since, there being one substance in three 
subsistences, it cannot be in any way reprehensible to immerse the infant in baptism either thrice or once, 
seeing that by three immersions the Trinity of persons, and in one the singleness of the Divinity may be 
denoted. But, inasmuch as up to this time it has been the custom of heretics to immerse infants in baptism 
thrice, I am of opinion that this ought not to be done among you; lest, while they number the immersions, they 
should divide the Divinity, and while they continue to do as they have been used to do, they should boast of 
having got the better of our custom Moreover, I send to your to me most sweet Fraternity the volumes of 
which I have appended a notice below. What I had spoken in exposition of the blessed Job, which you 
express in your letter your wish to have sent to you, being weak both in sense and language as I had 
delivered it in homilies, I have tried as I could to change into the form of a treatise, which is in course of being 
written out by scribes. And, were I not crippled by the haste of the bearer of these presents, I should have 
wished to transmit to you the whole without diminution; especially as I have written this same work for your 
Reverence, that I may be seen to have sweated in my labours for him whom I love above all others. 
Besides, if you find time allowed you from ecclesiastical engagements, you already know how it is with me: 
even though absent in the body, I behold thee always present with me; for I carry the image of thy 
countenance stamped within the bowels of my heart. Given in the month of May. 

EPISTLE XLIV. 

TO PETER, SUBDEACON OF SICILY. 

Gregory to Peter, &c. 

With regard to our having so long delayed sending off thy messenger, we have been so occupied with the 
engagements of the Paschal festival that we have been unable to let him go sooner. But, with regard to the 
questions on which thou hast desired instruction, thou wilt learn below how, after fully considering them all, 
we have determined them. 

We have ascertained that the peasants(1) of the Church are exceedingly aggrieved in respect of the prices 
of corn, in that the sum appointed them to pay is not kept in due proportion in times of plenty. And it is our will 
that in all times, whether the crops of corn be more or less abundant, the measure of proportion be 
according to the market price(2). It is our will also that corn which is lost by shipwreck be fully accounted for; 
but on condition that there be no neglect on thy part in transmitting it; lest, the proper time for transmitting it 
being allowed to pass by, loss should ensue from your fault(3). Moreover, we have seen it to be 
exceedingly wrong and unjust that anything should be received from the peasants of the Church in the way 
of sextariatics(4), or that they should be compelled to give a larger modius than is used in the granaries of 
the Church. Wherefore we enjoin by this present warning that corn may never be received from the peasants 
of the Church in modii of more than eighteen sextarii; unless perchance there be anything that the sailors are 
accustomed to receive over and above, the consumption of which on board ship they themselves attest. 
We have also ascertained that on some estates(5) of the Church a most unjust exaction is practised, in that 
three and a half [modii] in seventy are demanded by the farmers(6);-a thing shameful to be spoken of. And 
yet even this is not enough; but something besides is said to be exacted according to a custom of many 

years. This practice we altogetiier detest, and desire it to be utterly extirpated from tiie patrimony. But, 
wiietiier in tiiis or in otiier minute imposts, let thy Experience consider what is paid too much per pound, and 
what is in any way unfairly received from the peasants; and reduce all to a fixed payment, and, so far as the 
powers of the peasants go, let them make a payment in gross amounting to seventy-two(7): and let neither 
grains(8) beyond the pound, nor an excessive pound, nor any further imposts beyond the pound, be 
exacted; but, through thy valuation, according as there is ability to pay, let the payment be made up to a 
certain sum, that so there may be in no wise any shameful exaction. But, lest after my death these very 
imposts, which we have disallowed as extras but allowed in augmentation of the regular payments, should 
again in any way be put on additionally, and so the sum of the payment should be found to be increased 
and the peasants be compelled to pay additional charges over and above what is due, we desire thee to 
draw up charters of security, to be signed by thee, declaring that each person is to pay such an amount, to 
the exclusion of grains (siliquoe), imposts, or granary dues. Moreover, whatever out of these several items 
used to accrue to the rector [sc. patrimonii], we will that by virtue of this present order it shall accrue to thee 
out of the total sum paid. 

Before all things we desire thee carefully to attend to this; that no unjust weights be used in exacting 
payments. If thou shouldest find any, break them and cause true ones to be made. For my son the servant of 
God, Diaconus, has already found such as displeased him; but he had not liberty to change them. We will, 
then that, saving excepted cibaria of small value(9), nothing else beyond the just weights be exacted from 
the husbandmen(l) of the Church. 

Further, we have ascertained that the first charge of burdatio(2) exceedingly cripples our peasants, in that 
before they can sell the produce of their labour they are compelled to pay taxes; and, not having of their own 
to pay with, they borrow from public pawnbrokers(3), and pay a heavy consideration for the 
accommodation; whence it results that they are crippled by heavy expenses. Wherefore we enjoin by this 
present admonition that thy Experience advance to them from the public fund all that they might have 
borrowed from strangers, and that it be repaid by the peasants of the Church by degrees as they may have 
wherewith to pay, lest, while for a time in narrow circumstances, they should sell at too cheap a rate what 
might afterwards have sufficed for the payment of the due, and even so not have enough. 
It has come to our knowledge also that immoderate fees(4) are received on the marriages of peasants: 
concerning which we order that no marriage fees shall exceed the sum of one solidus. If any are poor, they 
should give even less; but if any are rich, let them by no means exceed the aforesaid sum of a solidus. And 
we desire no part of these marriage fees to be credited to our account, but that they should go to the benefit 
of the farmer (conductorem). 

We have also ascertained that when some farmers die their relatives are not allowed to succeed them, but 
that their goods are withdrawn to the uses of the Church: with regard to which thing we decree that the 
relatives of the deceased who live on the property of the Church shall succeed them as their heirs, and that 
nothing shall be withdrawn from the substance of the deceased. But, if any one should leave young children, 
let discreet persons be chosen to take charge of their parents' goods, till they come to such an age as to be 
able to manage their own property. 

We have ascertained also that, if any one of a family has committed a fault, he is required to make amends, 
not in his own person, but in his substance: concerning which practice we order that, whosoever has 
committed a fault, he shall be punished in his own person as he deserves(5). Moreover, let no present 
(commodum) be received from him, unless perchance it be some trifle which may go to the profit of the 
officer who may have been sent to him. We have ascertained also that, as often as a farmer has taken away 
anything unjustly from his husbandman, it is indeed required from the farmer, but not restored to him from 
whom it was taken: concerning which thing we order that whatever may have been taken away by violence 
from any one of a family be restored to him from whom it was taken away, and not accrue to our profit, lest 
we ourselves should seem to be abettors of violence. Furthermore, we will that, if thy Experience should at 
any time despatch those who are under thy command in causes that arise beyond the limits of the 
patrimony, they may indeed receive small gratuities from those to whom they are sent; yet so that they 
themselves may have the advantage of them: for we would not have the treasury of the Church defiled by 
base gains. We also command thy Experience to see to this: that farmers never be appointed on the 
estates of the Church for a consideration (commodum); lest, a consideration being looked for, the farmers 
should be frequently changed; of which changing what else is the result but that the Church farms are never 
cultivated? But lest also the leases [i.e. by the Church to the farmers] be adjusted according to the sum of 
the payments due. We desire thee to receive no more from the estates of the Church on account of the 
store-houses and stores beyond what is customary; but let thine own stores which we have ordered to be 
procured be procured from strangers. 

It has come to our ears that three pounds of gold have been unjustly taken away from Peter the farmer of 
Subpatriana; concerning which matter examine closely Fantinus the guardian (defensorem(6)); and, if they 
have manifestly been unjustly and improperly taken, restore them without any delay. We have also 

ascertained that the peasants have paid a second time the bu dation(7) which Theodosius had exacted 
from them but had failed to pay over, so that they have been taxed twice. This was done because his 
substance was not sufficient for meeting his debt to the Church. But, since we are informed through our son, 
the servant of God Diaconus, that this deficiency can be made good out of his effects, we will that fifty-seven 
solidi be repaid to the peasants without any abatement, lest they should be found to have been taxed twice 
over. Moreover, if it is the case that forty solidi of his effects remain over and above what will indemnify the 
peasants (which sum thou art said also to have in thy hands), we will that they be given to his daughter, to 
enable her to recover her effects which she had pawned. We desire also her father's goblet (batiolam) to be 
restored to her. 

The glorious magister militum Campanianus had left twelve solidi a year out of the Varronian estate to his 
notary John; and this we order thee to pay every year without any hesitation to the granddaughter of Euplus 
the farmer, although she may have received all the chattels of the said Euplus, except perhaps his cash; 
and we desire thee also to give her out of his cash five-and-twenty solidi. A silver saucers is said to have 
been pawned for one solidus, and a cup for six solidi. After interrogating Dominicus the secretary, or others 
who may know, redeem the pledge, and restore the aforesaid little vessels. 

We thank thy Solicitude for that, after I had enjoined thee, in the business of my brother, to send him back Ills 
money, thou hast so consigned the matter to oblivion as if something had been said to thee by the last of thy 
slaves But now let even thy Negligence-I cannot say thy Experience-study to get this done; and whatever 
of his thou mayest find to be in the hands of Antoninus send back to him with all speed. 
In the matter of Salpingus the Jew a letter has been found which we have caused to be forwarded to thee, in 
order that, after reading it and becoming fully acquainted with his case and that of a certain widow who is 
said to be implicated in the same business, thou mayest make answer as may appear to thee just 
concerning the fifty-one solidi which are known to be returnable, so that the creditors may in no way be 
defrauded unjustly of the debts due to them. 

A moiety of his legacy has been given to Antoninus; a moiety will be redeemed: which moiety we desire to 
be made up to him out of the common substance; and not to him only, but also to the guardians 
(defensoribus) and strangers (pergrims) to whom he [the testator has left anything under the title of a legacy. 
To the family (familice) also we desire the legacy to be paid; which, however, is our concern. Having, then, 
made up the account for our part, that is for three-quarters, make the payment(9). 
We desire thee to give something out of the money of the Church of Canusium to the clergy of the same 
Church, to the end that they who now suffer from want may have some sustenance; and that, if it should 
please God that a bishop should be ordained, he may have a maintenance. 

As to lapsed(1) priests, or any others of the clergy, we desire thee in dealing with their property to keep free 
from any contamination. But seek out the poorest regular monasteries which know how to live according to 
God, and consign the lapsed to penance in these monasteries; and let the property of the lapsed go to the 
benefit of the place in which they are consigned to penance, to the end that those who have the care of their 
correction may have aid themselves from their means. But, if they have relations, let their property be given 
to their legitimate relations; yet so that an allowance for those to whom they have been consigned for 
penance be sufficiently provided. But, if any of an ecclesiastical community, whether priests, levites, or 
monks, or clerics, or any others, shall have lapsed, we will that they be consigned to penance, but that the 
Church shall retain its claim to their property. Yet let them receive for their own use enough to maintain them 
during their penance, lest, if left destitute, they should be burdensome to the places whereto they have been 
consigned. If any have relations on the ecclesiastical domain, let their property be delivered to them, that it 
may be preserved in their hands subject to the Church's claim. 

Three years ago the subdeacons of all the churches in Sicily, in accordance with the custom of the Roman 
Church, were forbidden all conjugal intercourse with their wives. But it appears to me hard and improper that 
one who has not been accustomed to such continency, and has not previously promised chastity, should 
be compelled to separate himself from his wife, and thereby (which God forbid) fall into what is worse. 
Hence it seems good to me that from the present day all bishops should be told not to presume to make 
any one a subdeacon who does not promise to live chastely; that so what was not of set purpose desired in 
the past may not be forcibly required, but that cautious provision may be made for the future. But those who 
since the prohibition of three years ago have lived continently with their wives are to be praised and 
rewarded, and exhorted to continue in their good way. But, as for those who since the prohibition have been 
unwilling to abstain from intercourse with their wives, we desire them not to be advanced to a sacred order; 
since no one ought to approach the ministry of the altar but one who has been of approved chastity before 
undertaking the ministry. 

For Liberatus the tradesman, who has commended himself to the Church, dwelling on the Cincian estate, we 
desire thee to make an annual provision; which provision do thou estimate thyself as to what it ought to be, 
that it may be reported to me and charged in thy accounts. With regard to the present indiction I have 
already got information from our son the servant of God Diaconus. 

One John, a monk, has died and left Fantinus the guardian (defensorem) his heir to the extent of one half. 
Hand over to the latter what has been left him, but charge him not to presume to do the like again. But 
appoint what he should receive for his work, so that it be not fruitless to him; and let him remember that one 
who lives on the pay of the Church should not pant after private gains. But, if anything should accrue to the 
Church, without sin and without the lust of concupiscence, through those who transact the business of the 
Church, it is right that these should not be without fruit of their labour. Still let it be reserved for our judgment 
how they should be remunerated(2). 

As to the money of Rusticianus, look thoroughly into the case, and carry out what appears to thee to be just. 
Admonish the magnificent Alexander(3) to conclude the cause between himself and holy Church; which if he 
peradventure shall neglect to do, do thou, in the fear of God and with honour preserved, bring this same 
cause to an issue as thou art able We desire thee also to expend something in this business; and, if it can 
be done, let him be spared the cost of what has to be given to others, provided he terminates the cause 
which he has with US. 

Restore without any delay the donation of the handmaiden of God(4) who has lapsed and been sent into a 
monastery, to the end that (as I have said above) the same place that bears the toil of attending to her may 
have provision for her from what she has. But recover also whatever of hers is in the hands of others, and 
hand it over to the aforesaid monastery. 

Send to us the payments of Xenodochius of Via Nova to the amount thou hast told us of, since thou hast 
them by thee. But give something, according to thy discretion, to the agent whom thou hast deputed in the 
same patrimony. 

Concerning the handmaiden of God who was with Theodosius, by name Extranea, it seems to me that thou 
shouldest give her an allowance, if thou thinkest it advantageous, or at any rate return to her the donation 
which she made. The house of the monastery which Antoninus had taken from the monastery, giving thirty 
solidi for it, restore thou without the least delay, the money being repaid. After thoroughly investigating the 
truth restore the onyx phials(5), which I send back to thee by the bearer of these presents. 
If Saturninus is at liberty and not employed with thee, send him to us. Felix, a farmer under the lady 
Campana, whom she had left free and ordered to be exempt from examination, said that seventy-two solidi 
had been taken from him by Maximus the sub-deacon, for paying which he asserted that he sold or pledged 
all the property that he had in Sicily. But the lawyers said that he could not be exempt from examination 
concerning acts of fraud. However, when he was returning to us from Campania, he perished in a storm. We 
desire thee to seek out his wife and children, to redeem whatever he had pledged, repay the price of what 
he had sold, and moreover provide them with some maintenance; seeing that Maximus had sent the man 
into Sicily and there taken from him what he alleged. Ascertain, therefore, what has been taken from him, 
and restore it without any delay to his wife and children. React all these things over carefully, and put aside 
all that familiar negligence of thine. My writings which I have sent to the peasants cause thou to be read over 
throughout all the estates, that they may know in what points to defend themselves, under our authority, 
against acts of wrong; and let either the originals or copies be given them. See that thou observe everything 
without abatement: for, with regard to what I have written to thee for the observance of justice, I am absolved; 
and, if thou art negligent, thou art guilty. Consider the terrible Judge who is coming: and let thy conscience 
now anticipate His advent with fear and trembling, lest it should then fear [not?] without cause, when heaven 
and earth shall tremble before Him. Thou hast heard what I wish to be done: see that thou do it. 

EPISTLE XLVI. 

TO PETER THE SUBDEACON, 

Gregory to Peter, &c. 

The divine precepts admonish us to love our neighbours as ourselves; and, seeing that we are enjoined to 
love them with this charity, how much more ought we to succour them by supplies to their carnal needs, that 
we may relieve their distress, if not in all respects, yet at least with some support. Inasmuch, then, as we 
have found that the son of the most worthy Godiscalchus is in distress, not only from loss of sight, but also 
from want of food, we hold it necessary to provide for him as far as possible. Wherefore we enjoin thy 
Experience by this present order to supply to him for sustaining life twenty-four modii of wheat every year, 
and also twelve modii of beans and twenty decimates(6) of wine; which may afterwards be debited in thy 
accounts. So act, therefore, that the bearer of these presents may have to complain of no delay in receiving 
the gifts of the Lord, and that thou mayest be found partaker in the well administered benefit. 

EPISTLE XLVII. 

TO VIRGILIUS, BISHOP OF ARELATE (Aries) AND THEODORUS, BISHOP OF MASSILIA 

(Marseilles). 

Gregory to Virgilius, Bishop of Arelate, and Theodorus, Bishop of IVIassilia, in Gaul. 
Though the opportunity of a suitable time and suitable persons has failed me so far for writing to your 
Fraternity and duly returning your salutation the result has been that I can now at one and the same time 
acquit myself of what is due to love and fraternal relationship, and also touch on the complaint of certain 
persons which has reached us, with respect to the way in which the souls of the erring should be saved. 
Very many, though indeed of the Jewish religion, resident in this province, and from time to time travelling lot 
various matters of business to the regions of Massilia, have apprized us, that many of the Jews settled in 
those parts have been brought to the font of baptism more by force than by preaching. Now, I consider the 
intention in such cases to be worthy of praise, and allow that it proceeds from the love of our Lord. But I fear 
lest this same intention, unless adequate enforcement from Holy Scripture accompany it, should either have 
no profitable result, or even (which God forbid) the loss of the souls which we wish to save should further 
ensue. For, when any one is brought to the font of baptism, not by the sweetness of preaching, but by 
compulsion, he returns to his former superstition, and dies the worse from having been born again. Let, 
therefore, your Fraternity stir up such men by frequent preaching, to the end that through the sweetness of 
their teacher they may desire the more to change their old life. For so our purpose is rightly accomplished, 
and the mind of the convert returns not again to his former vomit. Wherefore discourse must be addressed 
to them, such as may burn up the thorns of error in them, and illuminate what is dark in them by preaching, so 
that your Fraternity may through your frequent admonition receive a reward for them, and lead them, so far 
as God may grant it, to the regeneration of a new life. 

EPISTLE XLVIII. 

TO THEODORUS, DUKE OF SARDINIA. 

Gregory to Theodorus, &c. 

The justice which you bear in your mind you ought to shew in the light of your deeds. Now Juliana, abbess of 
the monastery of Saint Vitus which Vitula of venerable memory had once built, has intimated to us that 
possession of the aforesaid monastery is claimed by Donatus, your official; who, seeing himself to be 
fortified by your patronage, scorns to have resort to a judicial examination of the case. But now let your Glory 
enjoin this same official, with the aforesaid hand-maiden of God, to submit the matter to arbitration to the end 
that whatever may be decided as to the question in dispute by the judgment of the arbitrators may be 
carried into effect; so that, whatever he may find he has to lose or keep, what he does may not be done as a 
deed of virtue, but set down to the justice of the law. 

Further, Pompeiana, a religious lady, who is known to have established a monastery in her own house, has 
complained that the mother of her deceased son-in-law wishes to annul his will, to the end that her son's last 
disposition of his property may be made of none effect. On this account we hold it necessary with paternal 
charity to exhort your Glory to lend yourself willingly, with due regard to justice, to pious causes, and kindly 
order that whatever these persons have a rightful claim to be secured to them. Now, we beseech the Lord to 
direct the way of your life propitiously, and grant you a prosperous administration of your dignified office. 

EPISTLE XLIX. 

TO HONORATUS, DEAC0N(7). 

Gregory to Honoratus, &c. 

Since we have undertaken, however undeserving, a place of government, it is our duty to succour our 
brethren in need, so far as our power extends. Januarius, then, our brother and fellow-bishop of the 
metropolitan city of Caralis (Cagliari), has been here in the city of Rome, and informed us that the glorious 
magister militum, Theodorus, who is known to have received the dukedom of the island of Sardinia, is doing 
many things there contrary to the commands of our most pious lords, whereby with fitting clemency and 
gentleness they removed many hardships of proprietors, or of citizens of their empire. Wherefore we desire 
you at a suitable time to represent the case to our most pious lords in accordance with what the provincials 
of the aforesaid island justly and reasonably demand; seeing that on a previous occasion also their sacred 
imperial letters were sent to the glorious Magister militum Edancius, who was in the seventh indiction duke of 
Sardinia, in which they ordered all these present grievances to be redressed, to the end that their 
commands, proceeding from the bountifulness of their piety, might be observed unshaken by dukes who 
might come in course of time to be in power, and that the benefit thereof might not be squandered away by 
administrators; that so a quiet life might be led under the clement empire of our lords, and for the ordinance 

which with tranquil mind they grant to their subjects they might receive multiplied compensation at the 
coming of the eternal judge. 

EPISTLE L. 

TO ANTHEMIUS THE SUBDEAC0N(3). 

Gregory to Anthemius, &c. 

Even as, through the ordering of God as it hath pleased Him, we have received the place of government, so 
ought we to be solicitous for the souls committed to us. Now we find that in the Eumorphian island(9), in 
which, as is well known, there is an oratory of the blessed Peter, Prince of the Apostles, a large number of 
men with their wives from various patrimonies have fled to it for refuge, through stress of barbarian ferocity(1) 
This we consider inexpedient: for, there being other places of refuge near at hand, why should women have 
their abode there with monks? Wherefore we enjoin thy Experience by this present order from this time 
forward to allow no woman, whether she be under ecclesiastical jurisdiction or any other, to take up her 
abode or tarry there; but let them provide for themselves a place of refuge (there being, as has been said 
above, so many in the neighbourhood) wherever they may choose; so that all intercourse with women may 
henceforth be put an end to; lest, if we should desist from taking all the care we can, and guarding against 
the snares of the enemy, we henceforth (which God forbid) should be culpable in case of anything wrong 
taking place. Delay not, therefore, to give to the abbot Felix, the bearer of these presents, one thousand five 
hundred pounds of lead, which he is known to be in want of in the same island, which may be charged 
afterwards in thy accounts, when the whole quantity shall be known. So proceed, then, that thou mayest 
provide thyself with some, if any can be profitably used for the buildings of the same island. Moreover, since 
congregations of monks in the islands are exposed to hardship, we forbid boys under eighteen years of 
age to be received into these monasteries. Or, if there are any now there, let thy Experience remove them, 
and send them to the city of Rome. We desire thee in all respects to observe this in Palmaria also and the 
other islands. 

EPISTLE Lll. 

TO SYMMACHUS THE DEFENS0R(2). 

Gregory to Symmachus, &c. 

My son Boniface the deacon has told me that thy Experience had written to say that a monastery built by 
Labina, a religious lady, is now ready for monks to be settled in it. And indeed I praised thy solicitude; but 
we wish that some other place than that which has been assigned for the purpose should be provided; but 
with the condition, in view of the insecurity of the time, that one above the sea be looked out for, which is 
either fortified by its position, or at all events can be fortified without much labour. So may we send monks 
thither, to the end that the island itself, hitherto without a monastery, may be improved by having this way of 
life upon it. 

For carrying out and providing for this business we have given directions to Horosius, the bearer of this 
present order, with whom thy Experience must go round the shores of Corsica, and if any more suitable 
place in the possession of any private person should be found, we are prepared to give a suitable price, 
that we may be able to make some secure arrangement. We have enjoined the aforesaid Horosius to 
proceed to the island Gorgonia; and let thy Experience accompany him, and do you so avenge the evils 
that we have ascertained to have found entrance there that through the punishment you shall inflict the 
aforesaid island may remain corrected for the future also. Let the same abbot Horosius set in order the 
monasteries of this island, and so hasten to return to us. Let, then, thy Experience so act that in both these 
matters, that is, both in providing for monasteries in Corsica, and in correcting the monks of Gorgonia, thou 
mayest make haste to obey, not our will, but that of Almighty God. 

Moreover we desire that the priests who abide in Corsica shall be forbidden to have any intercourse with 
women, except it may be a mother, or a sister, or a wife, towards whom chastity should be observed(3). But 
to the three persons about whom thy Experience has written to my son the aforesaid deacon Boniface, give 
whatsoever thou deemest sufficient for them, since they are in grievous need; and this we will allow thee 
afterwards in thy accounts. Given in the month of July. 

EPISTLE LVI. 

TO PETER, SUBDEACON. 

Gregory to Peter, &c. 

Being exceedingly desirous of observing tiie festivals of saints, we have thought it needful to address this 
our letter of direction to thy Experience, informing thee that we have arranged for the dedication with all 
solemnity, with the help of the Lord, in the month of August, of the Oratory of the Blessed Mary lately built in 
the cell of brethren where the abbot Marinianus is known to preside, to the end that what we have begun 
may through the Lord's operation be completed. But, inasmuch as the poverty of that cell requires that we 
should assist in that day of festival, we therefore desire thee to give for celebrating the dedication, to be 
distributed to the poor, ten solidi in gold, thirty amphorae of wine, two hundred lambs, two area of oil, twelve 
wethers, and a hundred hens, which may be afterwards charged in thy accounts. Provide therefore for this 
being done at once without any delay, that our desires, God granting it, may take speedy effect. 

EPISTLE LVII. 

TO SEVERUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Severus, &c. 

We learn from thy Fraternity's epistle that, with regard to the choice of a bishop, some are agreed in favour 
of Ocleatinus, with whom, since we disallow him, they need not further concern themselves(4). But give 
notice to the inhabitants ofthat city that, if they should find any one in their own Church fit for that work, they all 
transfer their choice to him. Otherwise the bearer of these presents will point out a person, of whom I have 
told him, in favour of whom the notification of the election should be made. Do you, moreover, be prudent 
and careful with regard to your visitation of the same Church, that its property may be preserved inviolate, 
and its interests attended to after the accustomed manner under your management. 

EPISTLE LVIII. 

TO ARSICINUS DUKE, THE CLERGY, BILITY, AND COMMON PEOPLE (ordini et plebi) OF 
THE CITYOF ARIMINUM. 

Gregory to Arsicinus, &c. 

How ready is the devotion of your love in expectation of a pontiff the text of the report which you have 
addressed to us shews. But, since the ordainer ought in such cases to be exceedingly careful, we are 
watching over this case with due deliberation. And so we warn your Charity by this present writing that no 
one need trouble himself to apply to us in favour of Ocleatinus: but, if any one is found in your own city to 
undertake this work with profit, so that he cannot be objected to by us, let your choice concur in his favour. 
But, if no one should be found fit for it, we have mentioned to the bearers of these presents one to whom you 
may no less accord your consent. But do you with one accord pray faithfully, that, whosoever may be 
ordained, he may be able both to be profitable to you and to display priestly service worthy of our God. 

EPISTLE LXI. 

TO GENNADIUS, PATRICIAN AND EXARCH OF AFRICA. 

Gregory to Gennadius, &c. 

That you have unceasingly the fear of God before your eyes, and pursue justice, the subdued necks of 
enemies testify; but, that the grace of Christ may keep your Glory in the same prosperity, restrain, as you 
have been wont, with speedy prohibition whatever things you discover to be committed wrongfully, so that, 
fortified with the arms of justice, you may overcome hostile attacks with the power of faith, which is the top of 
all virtue. Now Marinianus, our brother and fellow-bishop of the city of Turris(5) has tearfully represented to 
us that the poor of his city are being vexed everywhere, and afflicted by expenses in the! way of gifts or 
payments(6); and further that the religious(7) of his church endure serious molestation from the men of 
Theodorus the magister militum, and suffer bodily injuries; and that this thing is breaking out to such a pitch 
that (shocking to say) they are thrust into prison, and that he himself also is seriously hindered by the 
aforesaid glorious person in causes pertaining to his Church. How opposed such things are, if indeed they 
are true, to the discipline of the republic you yourselves know. And, since it befits your Excellency to amend 
all these things, greeting your Eminence I demand of you that you suffer them to be done no more; but 
straightly order him to abstain from harming the Church, and that none be aggrieved by burdens laid upon 
them, or payments(8), beyond what reason allows, and that, if there should be any suits, they be determined 
not by the terror of power, but by order of law. I pray you, then, so correct all these things, the Lord inspiring 
you, by the menace of your injunction that the glorious Theodorus and his men may abstain from such 

things, if not out of regard to rectitude, yet at any rate out of fear inspired by your command; tiiat so, to tlie 
advancement of your credit and reward, justice witii liberty may flourisii in tiie parts committed to your 
ciiarge. 

EPISTLE LXII. 

TO JANUARIUS, ARCHBISHOP OF CARALIS (CAGLIARI) IN SARDINIA. 

Gregory to Januarius, &c. 

If our Lord Himself by the testimony of Holy Scripture declares Himself to be the husband of widows and 
father of orphans, we also, the members of His body, ought with the soul's supreme affection to set 
ourselves to imitate the head, and saving justice, to stand by orphans and widows if need be. And, having 
been given to understand that Catella, a religious woman who has a son serving here in the holy Roman 
Church over which under God we preside, is being troubled by the exactions and molestations of certain 
persons, we think it needful to exhort your Fraternity by this letter not to refuse (saving justice) to afford your 
protection to this same woman, knowing that by things of this kind you both make the Lord your debtor and 
bind us to you the more in the bonds of charity. For we wish the causes of the aforesaid woman, whether now 
or in future, to be terminated by your judgment, that she may be relieved from the annoyance of legal 
proceedings, and yet be by no means excused from submitting to a just judgment. Now I pray the Lord to 
direct your life in a prosperous course towards Himself, and Himself to bring you in His mercy to the 
kingdom of glory which is to come. 

EPISTLE LXIII. 

TO JANUARIUS, BISHOP OF CARALIS (Cagliari) IN SARDINIA(9). 

Gregory to Januarius, &c. 

Though your Fraternity in the zeal of righteousness gives fitting attention to the protection of divers persons, 
yet we believe that you will be the more prone to succour those whom a letter from us may commend to you. 
Know then that Pompeiana, a religious woman, has represented to us through one of her people that she 
endures many grievances continually and unreasonably from certain men, and on this account has 
petitioned us to commend her in our letters to you. Wherefore, greeting your Fraternity with the affection of 
charity that is due to you, we have felt that we must needs commend the aforesaid woman to you, that, with 
due regard to justice, thy Fraternity may not allow her to be aggrieved in any way contrary to equity, or to be 
subjected to any expense unadvisedly. But if it should happen that she has any suits, let the matter of 
dispute be debated before chosen arbitrators, and whatsoever shall be decided, let it be so carried into 
effect quietly through your assistance that both reward may accrue to you for such a work, and she who has 
been commended by our letters may rejoice in having found justice. 

EPISTLE LXVI. 

TO FELIX, BISHOP OF MESSANA (Messene). 

Gregory to Felix, &c. 

Customs which are found to bring a burden upon churches it becomes us in our consideration to 
discontinue, lest any should be forced to contribute to quarters from which they ought rather to look for 
contributions. Accordingly, it is thy duty to preserve intact the custom of the clergy and others, and to transmit 
to them every year what has been accustomed: but for the future we forbid thee to transmit anything to us. 
And, since we take no delight in presents (xeniis)(1), we have received with thanks the Palmatianoe(2) which 
thy Fraternity has sent us, but have caused them to be sold for an adequate price, which we have 
transmitted separately to thy Fraternity, for fear lest thou shouldest have felt the expense. Further, since we 
have learnt that thy Charity is desirous of coming to us, we admonish thee by the present letter not to take 
the trouble of coming: but pray for us, that the more we are separated by length of way, the more we may be 
joined one to another in mind, with the help of Christ, by charity; to the end that, siding each other by mutual 
supplication, we may resign our office unimpaired to the Judge that is to come. 

EPISTLE LXVII. 

TO PETER, SUBDEACON. 

Gregory to Peter, &c. 

If with kind disposition we meettiie needs of our neigiibours by sinewing compassion, we sliall undoubtedly 
find the Lord mercifully inclined to our petitions. Now we have learnt that Pastor, who labours under 
exceeding weakness of sight, having a wife and two slaves, who also bad formerly been with the glorious 
lady Jonatha, is suffering from great need. Wherefore, we admonish thy Experience, by the writing of this 
present order, not to delay giving him for his sustenance three hundred modii of wheat, and also as many 
modii of beans, which may afterwards be charged in thy accounts. So act, then, as both thyself to obtain the 
benefit of reward for thy good service, and to carry our orders into effect. In the month of August. 

EPISTLE LXXII. 

TO PETER, SUBDEACON. 

Gregory to Peter, &c. 

Thou hast learnt from a former letter(3) that we have desired our brethren and fellow-bishops dwelling in the 
island of Sicily to assemble here for the anniversary of the blessed Peter the apostle. But, seeing that their 
suit with the magnificent Justin the ex-praetor(4) has meanwhile hindered them, and that there is not now 
sufficient time for coming and returning, we do not wish them to be troubled before winter. But Gregory of 
Agrigentum, Leo of Catana, and Victor of Panormus, we by all means desire to come to us before winter(5). 
Further, get together from strangers(6) corn of this year's growth to the value of fifty pounds of gold, and lay it 
up in Sicily in places where it will not rot, that we may send thither in the month of February as many ships as 
we can to convey this corn to us. But, in case of our delaying to send ships, do thou thyself provide some, 
and, with the help of the Lord, transmit this same corn to us in February, with the exception, however, of the 
corn which we expect to have sent to us now, according to custom, in the months of September or October. 
Let thy Experience, then, so proceed that, without annoyance to any husbandman (colonus) of the Church(7), 
the corn may be collected, since there has been here such a scanty crop that, unless by God's help corn be 
collected from Sicily, there is a serious prospect of famine. But keep guard in all ways over the ships that 
have always been assigned to the use of Holy Church, as the letters also addressed to thee by the glorious 
ex-consul Leo concur in directing thee to do. Moreover, many come hither desiring sundry lands or islands 
belonging to our Church to be leased to them; and some, indeed, we refuse, but to others we have already 
granted their request. But let thy Experience see to the advantage of Holy Church, remembering that thou 
hast before the most sacred body of the blessed apostle Peter received power over his patrimony. And, 
though letters should reach you from hence, allow nothing to be done in any way to the disadvantage of the 
patrimony, since we neither remember to have given, nor are disposed to give away, any thing without good 
reason. 

EPISTLE LXXIV. 

TO GENNADIUS, PATRICIAN AND EXARCH OF AFRICA. 

Gregory to Gennadius, &c. 

As the Lord hath made your Excellency to shine with the light of victories in the military wars of this life, so 
ought you to pose the enemies of the Church with all activity of mind and body, to the end that from both 
kinds of triumph your reputation may shine forth more and more, when in forensic wars, too, you firmly resist 
the adversaries of the Catholic Church in behalf of the Christian people, and bravely fight ecclesiastical 
battles as warriors of the Lord. For it is known that men heretical in religion, if they have liberty allowed them 
to do harm (which God forbid), rise strenuously against the catholic faith, to the end that they may transfuse, if 
they can, the poison of their heresy to the corrupting of the members of the Christian body. For we have 
learnt that they are lifting up their necks against the Catholic Church, the Lord being opposed to them, and 
desire to pervert the faith of the Christian profession. But let your Eminence suppress their attempts, and 
subdue their proud necks to the yoke of rectitude(8). Moreover, order the council of catholic bishops to be 
admonished not to appoint their primate on the ground of his standing, without regard to the merits of his life, 
since before God it is not the more distinguished rank, but the action of a better life, that is approved(9). But 
let the primate himself live, not, as is customary, here and there in the country, but in one city according to 
their selection, to the end that he may be better able to bring to bear the influence of the dignity that has 
fallen to him in resisting the Donatists. Moreover, if any from the Council of Numidia should desire to come to 
the Apostolic See, permit them to do so; and stop any who may be disposed to bring charges against their 
character. Great increase of glory will accrue to your Excellency with the Creator, if through you the union of 
the divided churches could be restored. For when He beholds the girls granted by Him given back to His 
glory. He bestows gifts so much the more abundantly as He sees the dignity of His religion to be thereby 

enlarged. Furthermore, bestowing on you, as is due, tiie affection of our paternal charity, we beseech the 
Lord to make your arm strong for subduing your enemies, and to sharpen your soul with zeal for the faith like 
the edge of a quivering sword. 

EPISTLE LXXV. 

TO GENNADIUS, PATRICIAN, AND EXARCH THROUGHOUT AFRICA. 

Gregory to Gennadius, Patrician, &c. 

Had not such great success of the military exploits of your Excellency arisen from the merit of your faith and 
from the grace of the Christian religion, it would not have been so greatly to be wondered at, since we know 
that the like has been granted to military leaders of old time. But when, God granting it, you forestall future 
victories, not by carnal provision, but rather by prayers, it becomes a matter of astonishment how your glory 
comes down upon you, not from counsels of this world, but from God, who bestows it from above. For where 
is not the renown of your deserts in people's mouths? And report goes that it is not from a desire of, 
shedding blood that you constantly court these wars, but for the sake of extending the republic in which we 
see that God is worshipped, to the • end that the name of Christ may be spread abroad through subject 
nations by preaching of the faith. For, as your outward deeds of valour make you eminent in this life, so also 
the inward adornment of your character, proceeding from a clean heart, glorifies you in making you partaker 
of celestial joys to come. For we have learnt that your Excellency has done very many things of advantage 
for feeding the sheep of the blessed Peter, Prince of the apostles, so as to have restored to him no small 
portions of his patrimony, which had been denuded of their proper cultivators, by supplying them with 
Datitian settlers. Whatever, then, with Christian disposition you confer on him, you receive retribution for 
through hope in the judgment to come. Wherefore we have thought fit to commend to your Eminence 
Hilarus(1), who is also the hearer of these presents, that you may bestow on him (though ever with regard to 
justice) your accustomed affection in matters wherein he may intimate his need of your help. Now, 
addressing to you the greeting of our paternal charity, we beseech our God and Saviour mercifully to 
protect your Eminence for the consolation of the holy republic, and to fortify you with the strength of His arm 
for spreading His name more and more through the neighbouring nations. 

EPISTLE LXXVII. 

TOALLTHE BISHOPS OF NUMIDIA. 

Gregory to all the Bishops of Numidia. 

If ever, most dear brethren in Christ, a troublesome mixture of tares intrudes itself among green corn, it is 
necessary for the hand of the husbandman to root it up entirely, lest the future fruit of the fertile corn should be 
obstructed. Wherefore let us too, who, however unworthy, have undertaken the cultivation of the field of the 
Lord, hasten to render the corn pure from all offence of tares, that the field of the Lord may fructify with more 
abundant increase. Now you requested through Hilarus our chartulary(2) from our predecessor of blessed 
memory that you might retain all the customs of past time, which, from the beginnings of the ordinances of 
the blessed Peter, Prince of the apostles, long antiquity has so far retained. And we, indeed, according to 
the tenour of your representation, allow your custom (so long as it clearly makes no claim to the prejudice of 
the catholic faith)to remain undisturbed, whether as to constituting primates or as to other points; save that 
with respect to those who attain to the episcopate from among the Donatists, we by all means forbid them to 
be advanced to the dignity of primacy, even though their standing should denote them for that position(3). 
But let it suffice them to take care of the people committed to them, without aiming at the topmost place of the 
primacy in preference to those prelates whom the Catholic faith hath both taught and engendered in the 
bosom of the Church. Do you, therefore, most dear brethren, anticipate our admonitions in the zeal of the 
charity of the Lord, knowing that the strict Judge will bring into examination all we do, and will approve every 
one of us with regard not to the prerogative of a higher rank, but to the merits of our works. I beseech you, 
therefore, love ye one another mutually, having peace among yourselves in Christ, and with one purpose of 
heart oppose ye heretics and enemies of the Church. Be ye solicitous for the souls of your neighbours: 
persuade all ye can to faith by the preaching of charity, holding before them also the terror of the future 
judgment; inasmuch as ye are appointed to be shepherds, and the Lord of the docks expects from the 
shepherds to whom He has committed them the fruit of a multiplied flock. And if He should foresee an 
augmentation of His own flock through your bestowal of more diligent care upon it. He will assuredly adorn 
you with manifold gifts of the heavenly kingdom. Furthermore, addressing to you the greeting of fraternal 
love, I pray the Lord that He would make you, whom He has chosen to be shepherds of souls, worthy in His 
sight, and Himself so order our deeds here that He may accept them as they deserve in the future life. 

EPISTLE LXXVIII. 

TO LEO, BISHOP IN CORSICA. 

Gregory to Leo, &c. 

Our pastoral charge constrains us to come with anxious consideration to the succour of a church that is 
destitute of the control of a priest(4). And, inasmuch as we have learnt that the church of Saona for many 
years, since the death of its pontiff, has been thus entirely destitute, we have thought it needful to enjoin on 
thy Fraternity the work of visiting it, to the end that through thy ordering its welfare may be promoted. In this 
church also and in its parishes we grant thee licence to ordain deacons and presbyters; concerning whom, 
however, let it be thy care to make diligent enquiry, that they be not personally in any respect such as are 
rejected by the sacred canons. But whomsoever thy Fraternity has perceived to be worthy of so great a 
ministry, having ascertained that their manners and actions fit them for ordination, them, by permission of our 
authority, thou mayest freely promote to the aforesaid office. We desire thee, therefore, to make use of all 
the property of the above named church as though thou wert its proper pontiff, until we write to thee again. 
Be, then, so diligent and careful in all these matters that through thy ordering all things may, with the help of 
God, be salubriously arranged to the Church's profit. 

EPISTLE LXXIX. 

TO MARTINUS, BISHOP IN CORSICA. 

Gregory to Martinus, &c. 

To those who ask for what is just it behoves us to lend a kindly ear, to the end both that the petitioners may 
find the remedies they hope for, and that the anxious care of a shepherd be not wanting to the Church. And 
inasmuch as the church of Tanates, in which thy Fraternity was formerly adorned with sacerdotal dignity, has 
for its sins been so taken possession of and ruined by hostile savagery that no further hope remains of thy 
returning thither, we appoint thee, by authority of these presen's, undisputed cardinal priest(5) in the Church 
of Saona, which has now been long deprived of the aid of a pontiff. Do thou therefore so arrange and order 
all things according to the injunctions of the canons with vigilant care in the love of God, that both thy 
Fraternity may rejoice in having attained thy desires, and the Church of God may be filled with answering joy 
for having received thee as Cardinal pontiff. 

EPISTLE LXXX. 

TO THE CLERGY AND NOBLES OF CORSICA. 

Gregory to the Clergy, &c. ... A paribus(6). 

Although for a long time it has caused you no sorrow that the Church of God should be without a pontiff, yet 
as for us, we are both compelled by the charge of the office we bear and bound especially by the charity of 
our love for you, to take thought for its government, knowing that in its supervision lies at the same time 
advantage to your souls. For, if the care of a shepherd be wanting to a flock, it easily falls into the snares of 
the lier in wait. Accordingly, inasmuch as the church of Saona has long been deprived of the aid of a priest, 
we have held it necessary to constitute Martinus, our brother and fellow-bishop, cardinal priest of the 
same(7), but to enjoin on Leo our brother and fellow-bishop the work of its visitation. To the latter we have 
also granted licence to ordain presbyters and deacons in it and in its parishes, and have permitted him to 
make use of its property so long as be shall be there, as though he were its proper pontiff. And so we 
admonish you by these present writings that your Charity receive the aforesaid visitor with all devotion, and 
shew him obedience in whatever is reasonable, as becomes sons of the Church, to the end that, supported 
by your devotion, he may be able to accomplish all that is found to conduce to the advantage of the 
above-named church. 

REGISTER OF THE EPISTLES OF SAINT GREGORY 
THE GREAT, BOOK II 

BOOK II 

EPISTLE III. 

TO VELOX, MAGISTER MILITIUM. 

Gregory to Velox, &c.. 

We informed your Glory some time ago tiiat soldiers had been prepared to come to your parts; but, 
inasmuch as your letter had signified to us that the enemy were collected and were marching hitherward, we 
for this reason have detained them here. But now it appears to be advantageous that a certain number of 
soldiers should be sent to you, whom let thy Glory be careful to admonish and exhort to be prepared for toil. 
And, when you find an opportunity, confer with our glorious sons Maurilius and Vitalianus, and do whatever, 
with the help of God, they may appoint you to do for the advantage of the republic. And, should you 
ascertain that the unspeakable Ariulph(1) is making an incursion hitherward or to the parts about Ravenna, 
do you labour in his rear, as becomes brave men, to the end that your renown may by God's help advance 
still more in the republic from the quality of your labour. This, however, before all, we admonish you to do: to 
release without any delay or excuse the family of Maloin and Adobin, Vigild and Grussing(2), who are known 
to be with the glorious Magister militum Maurilius, to the end that the men of the aforesaid Maurilius, when 
they come to your parts, may without any impediment march along with them. 
[In Colbert, and Paul, diac. Die. V. Kal. Oct. Indict. 10.] 

EPISTLE VI. 

TO THE NEAPOLITANS. 

Gregory to the clergy, nobles, gentry, and commonalty(3) dwelling at Naples. 
Although the sincere devotion of spiritual sons in behalf of their mother Church needs no exhortation, 
nevertheless, it ought to be stirred up by letter, lest it should suppose itself slighted. On this account I 
approach your love with an admonition of paternal charity, that with many tears and with one accord we may 
render thanks to our Redeemer, who has not suffered you to walk along pathless ways under so perverse a 
teacher, but has made publicly known the crimes of your unworthy pastor. For Demetrius, to wit, who even 
before had not deserved to be called a bishop, has been found to be involved in transactions to such an 
extent and of such a kind that, if he had received judgment without mercy according to the character of his 
deeds, he would undoubtedly have been condemned to a most hard death by both divine and human laws. 
But since, being reserved for penance, he has been deprived of the dignity of the priesthood, we cannot 
suffer the Church of God to remain long without a teacher, since it is laid down by canonical rules that, on the 
death or removal of a pastor, the church should not be long deprived of the priesthood(4). Wherefore, I have 
thought it necessary to admonish your Charity by this present writing that neither delay nor the discord which 
has been wont to generate scandals ensue to hinder your election of a pontiff. But seek you out with all care 
such a person as all by common consent may rejoice in, and as is in no respect rejected by the sacred 
canons; to the end that the office which the most wicked of men had polluted by his evil administration may 
be worthily filled and administered by him, whoever he may be, who, by the grace of Christ, and with His 
approval, shall be ordained. 

EPISTLE VII. 

TO MAXIMIANUS, BISHOP OF SYRACUSE(5). 

Gregory to Maximianus, &c. 

We execute more efficiently our heavenly commission, if we share our burdens with our brethren. For this 
cause we appoint thee, our most reverend brother and fellow-bishop, to have administration over all the 
churches of Sicily in the name of the Apostolical See, so that whosoever there is reckoned as being in a 

condition of religion may by our autiiority be subject to tiiy Fraternity, to tiie end tiiat it may not iiereafter be 
necessary for tiiem to mal<e sucii long sea-voyages in resorting to us for slight causes. But if by any chance 
there are matters of difficulty which can by no means be settled by the judgment of thy Fraternity, in these 
only let our judgment be solicited, that so we may occupy ourselves more efficaciously in greater causes, 
being relieved from the least. And be it understood that we give this delegation of authority, not to thy place, 
but to thy person, because we have learnt from thy past life what we may presume of thee in thy future 
conduct. 
The month of December, the tenth Indiction. 

EPISTLE IX. 

TO THE NEAPOLITANS. 

Gregory to the gentry and commonalty (ordini et plebi) residing at Naples. 

The communication you have addressed to us has made manifest what your opinion is of our brother and 
fellow-bishop Paulus(6): and we congratulate you in that your experience of him for a few days has been 
such that you desire to have him as your cardinal bishop(7). But, since in matters of supreme importance 
there ought to be no hasty decision, so we, Christ helping us, will arrange after mature deliberation what is to 
be done hereafter, his character meanwhile, in course of time, having become better known to you. 
Wherefore, most beloved sons, obey ye the aforesaid man, if you truly love him, and with devoted minds 
meet his wishes in peaceful concurrence, to the end that the affection of your mutual charity may so bind you 
to each other, that the enemy who flies about you raging may find no way through any of you for creeping in 
to break up your unanimity. Further, when we shall have perceived the aforesaid bishop offering to God the 
fruit of souls which we long for, God Himself also approving, we will do afterwards whatever divine 
inspiration may suggest to our heart, with regard to his person and to your desire. 

EPISTLE X. 

TO PAULUS, BISHOP OF NAPLES(8). 

Gregory to Paulus, &c. 

If we administer safely the priestly office which we have received, without doubt both Divine assistance and 
the affection of our spiritual sons will not be wanting to us. Wherefore let thy Fraternity take care to shew 
thyself in all things such that the testimony which the clergy, the nobility, and all the people together, of the 
city of Naples bears to thee may be strengthened by the increase of thy goodness. Thou oughtest, then, so 
to bind thyself to continual employment in exhorting the aforesaid people that the Divine husbandman may 
store in his garners the fruit of thy word, which thou shalt have gathered from them by thy labours. But till such 
time as we shall be able, God revealing to us His will, to deliberate concerning the things which our 
aforesaid sons request us should be done, we grant leave for clerics to be ordained from the ranks of the 
laity, and also for manumissions to be solemnly celebrated before thee in the same church. Moreover we 
desire thee to observe without hesitation the customs of the clerical order and of the presbyters of the 
above-named church: and do thou also keep such diligent watch in the instruction of the same, that, 
abstaining from all that is unsuitable or unlawful, they may stand fast, under thy exhortations, ministering with 
due obedience, in the service of our God. The month of January, the tenth Indiction. 

EPISTLE XIL 

TO CASTORIUS, BISHOP OF ARIMINUM. 

Gregory to Castorius, &c. 

The illustrious lady Timothea has intimated to US by a petitionary notification, as is set forth below, that she 
has founded an oratory within the city of Ariminum in a place belonging to her, which she desires to have 
consecrated in honour of the holy cross. And, accordingly, dearest brother, if the said construction is in the 
jurisdiction of thy city, and if it is known that no body has been buried there, then, after reception in the first 
place of a legitimate endowment, that is, of two-thirds of her whole property (excepting slaves), other 
movables and fixtures and live stock, the usufruct being reserved to her for her life, and such endowment 
having been secured by municipal deeds, thou wilt solemnly consecrate the aforesaid oratory without any 
public mass, on the condition that no baptistery shall be constructed in the same place in future times, and 
that thou appoint not a cardinal presbyter(9). And if perchance she should prefer having masses said there, 
let her know that she must ask thy Love for a presbyter, to the end nothing else may be presumed by any 

other priest whatever. Further, thou wilt reverently deposit the holy things(1) she has provided. 

EPISTLE XV. 

TO PAUL, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Paul, &c. 

I appointed thy Fraternity to preside for the present over the church of Naples, to the end that thou mightest 
convert all thou canst to God by persuasive preaching. And, while thou oughtest to be giving thy whole mind 
to this work, thou art in haste to return before bringing forth this fruit to the Lord, and requestest me to settle 
the affairs of this same church speedily, my mind being meanwhile by no means unoccupied in this matter. 
But, being desirous of fortifying securely the well-being of this Church, I hold it needful to consider the matter 
with long continued deliberation, so as to be able to arrange its affairs by the ordination of a worthy whom 
Christ may reveal to us. Wherefore let thy Fraternity meanwhile study to watch for the good of souls, so that 
the Opinion I have of thee may be strengthened by the effect of thy working. All thou hast written concerning 
the deacon Peter has now been made known to us by the ex-consul Theodorus. And so, now that I know 
that he is constant to thee, and, according to thy testimony, studies the advantage of the Church, he ought to 
be afraid of no one's opposition or enmity, but persevere i,t benefiting the Church and serving God all the 
more watchfully as he feels that others have a grudge against him; that so they may have no power at all to 
injure him. Moreover, thy Fraternity ought not hereafter to be suspected with regard to him; since no 
surreptitious proceedings will have effect on me(2). 

EPISTLE XVIII. 

TO NATALIS, BISHOP OF SAL0NA(3). 

Gregory to Natalis, &c 

I have learn,, dearest brother, from many who have come from thy city that, neglecting thy pastoral charge, 
thou occupies, thyself wholly in feastings: which report I should not have believed had not my own 
experience of thy conduct confirmed it. For that thou in nowise art intent on reading, in nowise gives, 
attention to exhortation, but art even ignorant of the very use and purpose of ecclesiastical order, there is 
this in evidence, that thou knowest not how to observe reverence to those who are put over thee. For, when 
thou hadst been forbidden in writing by our predecessor of holy memory to retain in thy heart the soreness 
of thy long displeasure against Honoratus thy archdeacon, and when this had been positively interdicted 
thee by myself also, thou, disregarding the commands of God, and setting at naught our letters, didst 
attempt by a cunning device to degrade the aforesaid Honoratus thy archdeacon under colour of promoting 
him to a higher dignity. Thus it was contrived that, he being removed front the post of archdeacon, thou 
mightest call in another who would have fallen in with thy manner of life, the aforesaid man having, as I think, 
displeased thee for no other cause but that he prevented thee from giving sacred vessels and vestments to 
thy relations. Which case both I now, and my predecessor of holy memory formerly, have wished to subject 
to an accurate investigation; but thou, being conscious of what thou hadst done, hast put off sending hither a 
representative instructed for trial of the case. Wherefore let thy Fraternity, even after admonition so often 
repeated, repent of the error of thy wrongdoing, and restore the aforesaid Honoratus to his post immediately 
on the receipt of my letter. Which if thou shouldest defer doing, know that the use of the pallium, granted thee 
by this See, is taken from thee. But if, even when thou hast lost the pallium, thou still persistest in thy 
contumacy, know that thou art deprived of participation of the body and blood of the Lord. And after this it will 
be needful for us to enquire more fully into the charges against thee, and to consider with the utmost care 
and investigation whether thou shouldest retain even thy episcopate. Him also who, against the rule of 
justice, has consented to be promoted to the place of another we depose from the dignity of the said 
archdeaconry. And, should he presume any longer to minister in this same office, let him know that he is 
deprived of participation in holy communion. Do thou, therefore, dearest brother, in no wise provoke us 
further, lest, having set us at naught when in an attitude of charity towards thee, thou shouldest find us very 
hard in our severity. Having, therefore, restored the archdeacon Honoratus to his place, send to us with 
speed a person instructed in the case, who may be able to shew to me by his allegations how the matter 
should be equitably proceeded with For we have commanded the said archdeacon to come to us, that, 
having heard the assertions of the parties, we may come to whatever decision may be just and 
well-pleasing to Almighty God. For we defend no one on the ground of personal love, but, God helping us, 
keep the rule of justice, putting aside respect to any man's person. 

EPISTLE XIX. 

TO ALL THE BISHOPS OF DALMATIA. 

Gregory to all the bishops constituted throughout Dalmatia. 

Though desiring to visit your Fraternity frequently through the intercourse of letters, yet, when some special 
case demands our attention, we wish to take the opportunity of fulfilling two duties at once, so as both to 
refresh our brotherly souls in the way of visitation and to explain accurately matters that come up for notice, 
lest ignorance of them should leave the mind confused. Now when our brother Natalis, bishop of the city of 
Salona, wished to advance the archdeacon Honoratus to the order of the priesthood, who thereupon 
declined being advanced to a higher order, the latter demanded my predecessor of holy memory, in a 
petition that he sent, that he should not be so advanced against his will. For he alleged that the thing was 
attempted, not for the sake of promoting him, but in consequence of displeasure against him. Thereupon 
our predecessor of holy memory addressed letters to Natalis, our brother and fellow-bishop, interdicting 
him from promoting the archdeacon Honoratus against his will, or retaining in his heart the soreness of the 
displeasure which he had conceived against him. And when we too had laid the same interdiction on the 
said Natalis, he, not only disregarding the commands of God, but also setting at naught our letters, 
attempted, it is said, craftily to degrade the aforesaid archdeacon, in a way contrary to custom, under colour 
of promoting him to a higher dignity. Thus it was contrived that, having removed him from the archdeaconry, 
he might call in another person to minister in the place of the deposed archdeacon. Now we think that this 
Honoratus may have fallen under the displeasure of his bishop on account of having prevented him from 
giving sacred vessels to his relations: and both my predecessor of holy memory formerly and I now have 
wished to investigate the case accurately; but he, conscious of what he had done, has put off sending a 
representative with a view to its trial, test the truth with respect to his doings might appear. We therefore, now 
that he has been already so often admonished by letter, and has so far been pertinaciously obstinate, have 
taken order for his being admonished once more in letters sent to him through the bearer of these presents, 
to the end that he may, immediately on the arrival of the bearer of these presents, receive the archdeacon 
Honoratus into his former place. And if, with heart still hardened, he should contumaciously defer restoring 
him to the said position, we order that for his contumacy so many times exhibited he be deprived of the use 
of the pallium granted to him by this See. But if, even after loss of the pallium, he should persevere in the 
same pertinacity, we order him to be debarred from participation in the body and blood of the Lord. For it is 
right that he should find those severe in justice whom he set at naught when they approached him in charity. 
Wherefore neither do we now deviate from the path of justice, which the aforesaid bishop has despised; but, 
when he whose guilt has by no means been made apparent to us has been restored to his place, we enjoin 
the bishop Natalis to send to us a person with instructions, who may be able by his allegations to prove to 
us the right intentions of the said bishop. For we have caused also the said archdeacon to come to us, that, 
having heard the assertions of both parties, we may decide whatever may be just, whatever may be well 
pleasing to Almighty God. For we defend no one on the ground of personal love, but, God helping us, keep 
the rule of justice without respect to any man's person. 

EPISTLE XX. 

TO ANTONINUS, SUBDEAC0N(4). 

Gregory to Antoninus, &c. 

Honoratus, archdeacon of the Church of Salona, had demanded from my predecessor of holy memory, in a 
petition that he sent, that he should by no means be forced by his bishop to be advanced against his will, in 
a way contrary to custom, to a higher order. 

[Here follows an account of the subsequent proceedings, almost word far word the same as that given in 
Epistle XIX.] 

Wherefore we have thought it right to support thy Experience by the authority of this present order, that thou 
mayest resort to Salona, and at least try by exhortation to induce Natalis, our brother and fellow-bishop, who 
has been admonished by so many letters, to restore the above-mentioned Honoratus to his place 
immediately. But if, as has been his wont, he should contumaciously delay doing this, forbid him by authority 
of the Apostolic See the use of the pallium which has been granted him by this See. But if, even after loss of 
the pallium, thou shouldest find him persevering in the same pertinacity, thou shale deprive the said bishop 
of participation in holy communion. Moreover, him who, against the rule of justice, has consented to be 
promoted to another man's place we order to be deposed from the dignity of the same archdeaconry. And, 
if he should presume to minister further in the same place, we deprive him of participation in holy 
communion. For it is right that he should find those severe in justice whom he sets at naught when 
approaching him in charity. Wherefore, when the archdeacon Honoratus has been restored to his place, let 

the aforesaid bishop, at thy instigation, send to us a person with instructions, who may be able by his 

allegations to prove to us that the bishop's intention is or has been just. 

[What follows corresponds exactly with the conclusion of Epistle XIX.] 

As to our brother and fellow-bishop Malchus(5), thou wilt take care to make him find a surety, that he may 

come to us as soon as possible, to the end that, without any delay or loitering, be may render us an account 

of his proceedings, and so be able to return to his own with security. 

EPISTLE XXII. 

TO ALL THE BISHOPS OF ILLYRICUM.(6) 

Gregory to all the bishops, &c. 

It both affords us joy for your carefulness, and makes your Fraternity safe in your own ordination, if the order 
of ancient custom is maintained. Since, then, we have learnt from the letters which you have sent to us 
through the presbyter Maximianus and the deacon Andreas that the consent of all of you and the will of the 
most serene Prince have concurred in the person of our brother and fellow-bishop John, we feel great 
exultation that, under God's direction, such a one has been advanced to the office of priesthood(7) as the 
judgment of all has approved as worthy. Wherefore, in accordance with your request, we confirm our 
aforesaid brother and fellow-bishop by the authority of our assent in the order of priesthood wherein he has 
been constituted, and declare our ratification of his consecration by sending him the pallium. And since, 
according to custom, we have committed to him vicariate jurisdiction in our stead, we must of necessity take 
the precaution of exhorting your Fraternity that you in no wise hesitate to obey him in matters pertaining to 
ecclesiastical order and the right course of discipline, or in other things not precluded by canonical 
decrees; that the soundness of your judgment in electing him may be declared by the obedience which you 
shew. 

EPISTLE XXIII. 

TO JOHN, BISHOP. 

Gregory to John, Bishop of Prima Justiniana in lllyricum. 

It is clearly a manifest evidence of goodness that the consent of all should concur in the election of one 
person. Since, then, the account which we have received from our brethren and fellow-bishops declared that 
you are summoned to the position of priesthood by the unanimous consent of the whole council and the will 
of the most serene Prince, we have rendered thanks with great exultation to Almighty God our Creator, who 
has made your life and actions so commendable in the past as to bring about (what is exceedingly to your 
credit) your approving yourself to the judgment of all. With them we also fully agree with regard to the person 
of your Fraternity. And we implore Almighty God that, as His Grace has chosen your Charity, so He would 
keep you in all respects under His protection, have sent you the pallium according to custom, and, renewing 
our commission, we appoint you to act as vicar of the Apostolic See, admonishing you that you so shew 
yourself gentle to your subjects that they may be provoked to love you rather than to fear you. And, if 
perchance any fault of theirs should require notice, you will be careful so to correct their transgressions as 
by no means to discard paternal affection from your mind Be watchful and assiduous in the care of the flock 
committed to you, and strict in the zeal of discipline, so that the wolf lying in wait may not prevail to disturb the 
Lord's sheepfold, or have opportunity for deceit, so as to hurt the sheep. Make haste with full purpose of 
heart to win souls to our God; and know that we have received the name of shepherd not for repose, but for 
labour. Let us, then, shew forth in our work what our native denotes. If we weigh with right consideration the 
prerogative of the priesthood, it will be to those who are diligent and do their duty well for honour, but to 
those who are negligent assuredly for a burden. For, as this name, in the sight of God, conducts those who 
labour and are assiduous for the salvation of souls to eternal glory, so in the case of the idle and sluggish it 
tends to punishment. Through our tongue let the people committed to us learn that there is another life. Let 
the teaching of your Fraternity be to them an acceptable spur to urge them on, and your life an example for 
imitation. For your Fraternity's preaching should disclose to them what to love and what to fear, and your 
efficiency in this way should reap the fruit of eternal retribution. But let your deliberate care especially 
constrain you never to attempt to make any unlawful ordinations; but, whenever any are promoted to the 
clerical order, or, it may be, to some higher rank, let them be ordained, not for bribes orentreaties, but for 
merit. In no ordination let any consideration, in any way whatever, surreptitiously reach your Fraternity, lest 
you should be entangled (which God forbid) in the snares of simoniacal heresy. For what shall it profit a 
man, as the Truth says, if he shall gain the whole word, and lose his own soul (Mark viii. 36)? Hence it is 
necessary for us to look to God in all we do, to despise temporal and perishable things, and to direct the 

desire of our heart to the good things of eternity. Your Holiness's present(8) I was altogether unwilling to 
accept, since it were very unseemly for us to seem to have received gifts from our plundered and afflicted 
brethren. But your messengers got the better of me by another argument, proffering it to one from whom your 
Fraternity's offerings may not be withheld(9). For this you ought before all things to study: how you may 
provide imperishable gifts to be offered to the coming judge of souls, to the end that He may have respect 
both to you for your profitable labour, and to us likewise for our exhortation. 

EPISTLE XXVI. 

TO JOHN, BISHOP. 

Gregory to John, &c. 

Inasmuch as we have enjoined on our brothel and fellow-bishop Paulus the work of the visitation of the 
Neapolitan church, therefore let not Fraternity shrink from assuming the visitation of the Nepesine Church, to 
the end that, according to the requirements of the Paschal festivity, whatever the solemnity of divine service 
demands may, through thy operation, be in all respects fulfilled. Until, then, we may be able to consider what 
should be done with regard to our aforesaid brother and fellow-bishop, let thy Fraternity strive to shew 
thyself so skilful and vigilant in all things that the absence of the bishop aforesaid may not at all be felt(1). 
The month of April, the tenth Indiction. 

EPISTLE XXVII. 

TO RUSTICIANA, PATRICIAN(2). 

Gregory to Rusticiana, &c. 

On receiving the epistle of your Excellency I was relieved by the welcome news of your welfare, hoping that 
the Lord in His mercy may protect and direct your life and doings. But I wondered much why you have turned 
from your intention and vow to accomplish a good work in respect of your meditated journey to the holy 
places(3), seeing that, when anything good is by the gift of the Creator conceived in the heart, it is needful 
that it be carried out with quick devotion, lest, while the cunning plotter strives to ensnare the soul, he should 
afterwards suggest impediments, whereby the mind, weakened by occupations, may fail to carry its desires 
into effect. Whence it is necessary that your Excellency should anticipate all impediments that come in the 
way of pious designs, and gasp after the fruit of good work with all the efforts of your heart, that so you may 
succeed in living tranquilly in the present world and gaining possession of a heavenly kingdom in the future. 
But as to what you have written to us of Passivus having attempted to spread some calumnies against you, 
consider, on the other hand, that the most pious emperors have not only been unwilling to listen to them, but 
have also received the author of them roughly; and turn the whole hope of your soul to Him Who powerfully 
prevents men in this world from doing as much harm as they long to do, that so He may beat back the 
wicked intentions of men by the opposition of His arm, and Himself mercifully shatter their attempts, as He 
has been wont to do. I entreat that the glorious lord Appio and the lady Eusebia, the Lord Eudoxius and the 
lady Gregoria, be greeted in my name through you. 

EPISTLE XXIX. 

TO MAURILIUS AND VITALIANUS(4). 

Gregory to Maurilius and Vitalianus, magistris militum. 

On receiving your Glory's letters we gave thanks to God that we were assured of your safety; and we greatly 
rejoiced at your careful provision; and what you wrote about was once prepared. But the magnificent Aldio 
wrote to us after the arrival of your men that Ariulph was already near at hand, and we feared that the 
soldiers sent to you might fall into his hands. Yet here also, so far as God may give aid, our son the glorious 
magister militum has prepared himself against him. But, if the enemy himself should advance hither, let your 
Glory also, as you have been accustomed to do, accomplish what you can in his rear. For we hope in the 
power of Almighty God, and that of the blessed Peter himself, the Prince of the apostles, on whose 
anniversary he desires to shed blood, that he may find him also without delay opposed to him. 

EPISTLE XXX. 

TO MAURILIUS AND VITALIANUS. 

Gregory to Maurilius and Vitalianus, magistris militum(5). 

We have entreated your Glory through our son Vitalianus both by word and letter, charging you to 
communicate with him. But on the eleventh day of the month of January(6) Ariulph sent us this letter which we 
forward to you. Wherefore, when you have read it, see if the people of Suana(7) have stood fast in the 
fidelity they promised to the republic, and take adequate hostages from them, such as you can rely on; and 
moreover bind them anew by oaths, restoring to them what you took from them in the way of a pledge, and 
bringing them to a right mind by your discourses. But, should you quite distinctly ascertain that they have 
treated with Ariulph about their surrender to him, or at any rate have given him hostages, as the letter of 
Ariulph which we have forwarded to you leads us to suspect, then (after wholesome deliberation, lest your 
souls or mine be burdened with respect to our oaths), do ye whatever ye may judge to be of advantage to 
the republic. But let your Glory so act that neither anything be done for which we could be blamed by our 
adversaries, nor (which may the Lord avert) anything neglected which the advantage of the republic 
requires. Furthermore, my glorious sons, take anxious heed, since the enemy, so far as I have ascertained, 
has an army collected, and is said to be stationed at Narina(8); and if, God being angry with him, he should 
resolve to bend his course hitherward, do you plunder his positions so far as the Lord may aid you, or 
certainly let those whom you send carefully require night-watches(9), lest news of any sad event should 
reach us(1). 

EPISTLE XXXII. 

TO PETER, SUBDEACON OF SICILY. Gregory to Peter, &c. 

By information received from Romanus the guardian (defensore) I have learnt that the monastery of 
handmaidens of God which is on the farm of Monotheus has suffered wrong from our church of Villa Nova 
with respect to a farm belonging to the latter, which is said to have been leased to the said monastery. If this 
is so, let thy Experience restore to them the farm, and also the payments from the same farm for the two 
indictions during which thou hast exacted them. Moreover, since many of the Jews dwell on the estates of 
the Church, I desire that, if any of them should be willing to become Christians, some little of their dues be 
remitted to them, to the end that others also, incited by this benefit, may be moved to a like desire. 
Cows which are now barren from age, or bulls which appear to be quite useless, ought to be sold, so that at 
least some profit may accrue from their price. But as to the herds of mares which we keep very unprofitably, I 
wish them all to be dispersed, and four hundred only of the younger kept for breeding; which four hundred 
ought to be presented to the farmers(2)-so many to each, to the end that they may make some return to us 
from them in successive years: for it is very hard for us to spend sixty solidi on the herdsmen, and not get 
sixty pence from these same herds. Let then thy Experience so proceed that some may be divided among 
all the farmers, and others dispersed and converted into money. But so arrange with the herdsmen 
themselves throughout our possessions that they may be able to make some profit by cultivation of the 
ground. All the implements which, either at Syracuse or at Panormus, can be claimed by the Church must be 
sold before they perish entirely from age. 

On the arrival of the servant of God, brother Cyriacus, at Rome I questioned him closely as to whether he 
had communicated with thee about the receiving of a bribe in the cause of a certain woman. And the same 
brother says that he had learnt the state of the case from thy telling him, for that he had been commissioned 
by thee to ascertain who was the person commissioned to pay the bribe. This I believed, and immediately 
received him familiarly into favour, introduced him to the people and clergy, increased his stipend(3), 
placed him in a superior rank among the guardians, praising his fidelity before all, in that he had acquitted 
himself so faithfully in thy service; and I have consequently sent him back to thee. But, inasmuch as thou art 
in great haste, and I , though sick, am desirous of seeing thee, do thou leave some one whom thou hast fully 
proved to take thy place in the Syracusan district, and thyself make haste to come to me, that, if it should 
please Almighty God, we may consult together as to whether thou thyself oughtest to return thither or another 
person should be appointed in thy place. At the same time I have sent Benenatus the notary to occupy thy 
place in the patrimony in the district of Panormus till such time as Almighty God may ordain what pleases 
Him. 

I have strongly rebuked Romanus for his levity, because in the Guest-house (xenodo-chium) which he kept, 
as I have now discovered, he has been taken up more with his own profits than with [heavenly] rewards. 
Him, therefore, if it should haply seem good to thee, leave in thy place. See how thou mayest best fortify him, 
by alarming and admonishing him, that he may act kindly and carefully towards the peasants (rusticos(4)); 
and shew himself towards strangers and townspeople changed and active. In saying this, however, I am not 
selecting any person, but leave this to thy judgment. It is enough for me to have selected an occupier of thy 
place in the district of Panormus; and I wish thee to see thyself to providing one for the Syracusan district. 
When thou comest, bring with thee the moneys and ornaments (orna-menta) on the part, or of the substance 

of Antoninus. Bring also tiie payments of tiie nintii and tentii indictions wiiicii tiiou iiast exacted, and witii tiiem 
all thy accounts. Take care, if it should please God, to cross the sea for this city before the anniversary of 
Saint Cyprian, lest any danger should ensue (which God forbid) from the constellation which always 
threatens the sea at that season. 

Furthermore, I would have thee know that I have no slight compunctions of mind for having been grievously 
set against the servant of God Pretiosus for no grievous fault of his, and driven him from me, sad and 
embittered. And I wrote to the lord bishops requesting him to send the man to me, if willing to do so; but he 
was altogether unwilling. Now him I ought not to distress, nor can I do so; since, occupied as he is in the 
causes of God, he ought to be supported by comfort, not depressed by bitterness. But the said Pretiosus, 
as I hear, is altogether distressed because he cannot return to me. I, however, as I have said, cannot 
distress the lord bishop, who is not willing to send him, and I am doubtful between the two. Do thou then, if in 
thy little diminutive body thou hast the greater wisdom, manage the matter so that I may have my will, and the 
lord bishop be not distressed. Yet, if thou see him to be at all distressed, say no more about it. I have, 
however, taken it amiss that he has excommunicated the lord Eusebius(6), a man of so great age and in 
such bad health. Wherefore it is needful for thee to speak privately to the said lord bishop, that he be not 
hasty in pronouncing sentences, since cases which are to be decided by sentences must needs be 
weighed beforehand with careful and very frequent consideration. 

When the recruiting officers(7) come, who, as I hear, are already raising recruits in Sicily, charge thy 
substitute to offer them some little present(8), so as to render them well-disposed towards him. But, before 
thou comest away, give also something, according to ancient custom, to the praetor's officials; but do it by 
the hands of him thou leavest in thy place, so as to conciliate their favour towards him. Also, lest we should 
seem to them to be at all uncivil, direct thy substitutes to carry out in all respects the orders we have given to 
thy Experience as to what is to be given to any individuals or monasteries. But when thou comest, we will, 
with the help of God consider together how these things should be arranged. The three hundred solidi which 
I sent to be given through thee to the poor I do not think ought to be committed to their discretion. Let them 
carry out, then, those directions I have spoken of with reference to particular places and persons. 
Now I remember having written before now to say that the legacies, which, according to the representation 
of Antoninus the guardian (defensoris), are due from us to monasteries or others, were to be paid as had 
been appointed. And I know not why thy Experience has delayed to accomplish this. Wherefore we desire 
thee to pay in full our portion of these legacies from the moneys of the church, that when thou comest to me, 
thou mayest not leave there the groans of the poor against thee. Bring also with thee at the same time the 
securities which have been found relating to the substance of the same Antoninus. 
I have learnt on the information of Romanus that the wife of Redemptus, when dying, directed by word of 
mouth one silver shell to be sold, and the proceeds given to her freedmen, and also left a silver platter to a 
certain monastery; in respect of both of which bequests we desire her wishes to be fully carried out, lest from 
the least things we be betrayed into greater sins. 

Further, I have learnt on the information of the Abbot Marinianus that the building in the Praetorian Monastery 
is not yet even half completed: which being the case, what can we praise for it but thy Experience's 
fervour(9)? But even now let this admonition rouse thee; and, as far as thou canst, assert thyself in the 
construction of this same monastery. I said that nothing was to be given them for the cost; but I did not 
prohibit their building the monastery. But so proceed as to enjoin in all ways on him whom thou mayest 
depute in thy place at Panormus that he construct this same monastery at the charge of the ecclesiastical 
revenue, and that I may have no more private complaints from the abbot. 

Moreover, I have learnt that thou knowest certain things on the farms, even in considerable numbers, to 
belong to others; but, owing to the entreaty of certain persons or to timidity, thou art afraid to restore them to 
their owners. But, if thou weft truly a Christian, thou wouldest be afraid ofthejudgment of God more than of the 
voices of men. Take notice that I unceasingly admonish thee on this matter; which if thou neglect to set right, 
thou wilt have also my voice for witness against thee. If thou shouldest find any of the laity fearing God who 
might receive the tonsure and become agents under the rector(1), I give my full consent. It will be necessary 
that letters also be sent to them. 

Concerning the case of the son of Commissus the scholasticus(2), thou hast taken advice; and it appears 
that what he claims is not just in law. We are unwilling to burden the poor to their disadvantage; but, 
inasmuch as he has given himself trouble in this matter, we desire thee to give him fifty solidi, which must 
certainly be charged in thy accounts. As to the expense thou hast incurred on the business of the Church in 
the case of Prochisus, either reimburse thyself there out of his revenues, or, should his revenues be clearly 
insufficient for the repayment, thou must needs receive what is due to thee here from the deacon. But 
presume not to say anything about Gelasius the subdeacon, since his crime calls for the severest penance 
even to the end of his life. 

Furthermore, thou has sent me one sorry nag and five good asses. That nag I cannot ride, he is such a sorry 
one; and those good asses I cannot ride, because they are asses. But we beg that, if you are disposed to 

content us, you will let us have something suitable. We desire thee to give to the abbot Eusebius a hundred 
solidi of gold, which must certainly be charged in thy accounts. We have learnt that Sisinnius, who was a 
judge at Samnium, is suffering from grievous want in Sicily, to whom we desire thee to supply twenty 
decimates(3) of wine and four solidi yearly. Anastasius, a religious person (religiosus(4)), is said to be living 
near the city of Panormus in the oratory of Saint Agna, to whom we desire six solidi of gold to be given. We 
desire also six solidi, to be charged in thy accounts, to be given to the mother of Urbicus the Prior(5). As to 
tile case of the handmaiden of God, Honorata, what seems good to me is this: that thou shouldest bring with 
thee when thou comest all her substance which evidently existed before the time of the episcopate of John, 
bishop of Laurinum(6). But let the same handmaiden of God come with her son, that we may speak with her, 
and do whatever may please God. The volume of the Heptateuch(7) out of the goods of Antoninus we 
desire to be given to the Praetorian monastery, and the rest of his books to be brought hither by thee. 

EPISTLE XXXIII. 

TO JUSTINUS, PRAET0R(8). 

Gregory to Justinus, &c. 

The spite of the ancient foe has this way of its own, that in the case of those whom, through God resisting 
him, he cannot delude into the perpetration of evil deeds, he maims their reputation for a time by false 
reports. Seeing, then, that a sinister rumour about our brother and fellow-bishop Leo(9) had disseminated 
certain things inconsistent with his priestly profession, we caused strict and lengthened enquiry to be made 
as to whether they were true, and we have found no fault in him touching the things that had been said. But, 
that nothing might seem to be omitted, and that no possible doubt might remain in our heart, we caused him 
over and above to take a strict oath before the most sacred body of the blessed Peter. And, when he had 
done this, we rejoiced with great exultation that from a proof of this kind his innocence evidently shone forth. 
Wherefore let your Glory receive the aforesaid man with all charity, and shew him reverence such as is 
becoming towards a priest; nor let any doubtfulness remain in your heart touching the charges from which he 
has now been purged. But it lies upon you so to cleave in all respects to the above-named bishop, that you 
may be seen fittingly and becomingly in his person to honour God, whose minister he is. 

EPISTLE XXXIV. 

TO MAXIMIANUS, BISHOP OF SYRACUSE. 

Gregory to Maximianus, &c. 

I remember to have often admonished you to be by no means hasty in passing sentence. And lo, I have 
now learnt that your Fraternity in a fit of anger has excommunicated the most reverend abbot Eusebius. Now 
I am much astonished that neither his former conversation, nor his advanced age, nor his long-continued 
sickness, could turn your mind from wrath. For, whatever his transgression may have been, the very affliction 
of sickness ought to have sufficed as a scourge for him. For to one crushed by divine discipline it was 
superfluous to add human scourges. But perhaps thou hast been allowed to exceed in the case of such a 
person, in order that thou mightest become more cautious in the case of others of less account, and ponder 
long when thou art disposed to smite any one through a sentence. Yet still comfort this same man with a 
sweetness proportionate to the fury with which thou hast exasperated him, since it is very unjust that the very 
persons who have loved thee most should find thee without cause most bitter against themselves. 

EPISTLE XXXVI. 

TO THE ABBOT EUSEBIUS. 

Gregory to Eusebius, &c. 

Let thy Charity believe me that I have been greatly saddened for thy sadness, as though I had myself 
suffered wrong in thee. But, when I afterwards learnt that, even after the most reverend Maximianus, our 
brother and fellow-bishop, had restored thee to his favour and communion, thy Love would not accept 
communion from him, I then knew that what had been done before was just. The humility of God's servants 
ought to appear in a time of affliction: but those who lift themselves up against their superiors shew that they 
scorn to be God's servants. And, indeed, what he once did ought not to have been done; but still it ought to 
have been taken by thee with all humility: and again, when he restored to thee his favour, he ought to have 
been met with thanks. And because it was not so done by thee, I feel that to us in every way there is cause 
for tears. For it is no great thing for us to be humble to those by whom we are honoured; for even any worldly 

man would do this: but we ought especially to be humble to those at whose hands we suffer. For the 
Psalmist says, See my humility before mine enemies (Psal. ix. 14). What life are we leading, if we will not be 
humble even to our fathers? Wherefore, most beloved son, I beseech thee that all bitterness pass away 
from thy heart, lest perchance the end should be near, and the ancient foe should, through the iniquity of 
discord, bar against us the way to the eternal kingdom. Further, we have caused a hundred solidi to be 
given to thy Love through Peter the subdeacon, which I beg thee to accept without offence. 

EPISTLE XXXVII. 

TO JOHN, BISHOP OF SQUILLACIUM (Squillace, in Calabria). 

Gregory to John, &c. 

The care of our pastoral office warns us to appoint for bereaved churches bishops of their own, who may 
govern the Lord's flock with pastoral solicitude. Accordingly we have held it necessary to appoint thee, 
John, bishop of the civitas Lissitana (Lissus, hodie, Alessio?), which has been captured by the enemy, to be 
cardinal(1) in the Church of Squillacium, that thou mayest carry on the cure of souls once undertaken by 
thee, having regard to future retribution. And although, being driven from thine own Church by the invading 
enemy, thou must govern another Church which is now without a shepherd, yet it must be on condition that, in 
case of the former city being set free from the enemy, and under the protection of God restored to its former 
state, thou return to the Church in which thou wast first ordained. If, however, the aforesaid city continues to 
suffer under the calamity of captivity, i thou must remain in this Church wherein thou art by us incardinated(2). 
Moreover, we enjoin thee never to make unlawful ordinations, or allow any bigamist, or one who has taken a 
wife who was not a virgin, or one ignorant of letters, or one maimed in any part of his body, or a penitent, or 
one liable to any condition of service, to attain to sacred orders. And, shouldestthou find any of this kind, 
thou must not dare to advance them. Africans generally, and unknown strangers, applying for ecclesiastical 
orders, on no account accept, seeing that some Africans are Manichaeans, and some have been 
rebaptized; while many strangers, though being in minor orders, are proved to have pretended to a higher 
dignity. We also admonish thy Fraternity to watch wisely over the souls committed to thee, and to be more 
intent on winning souls than on the profits of the present life. Be diligent in keeping and disposing, of the 
goods of the Church, that the coming Judge, when He comes to judge, may approve thee as having in all 
respects worthily executed the office of shepherd which thou hast taken upon thee. 

EPISTLE XLI. 

TO CASTORIUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Castorius, Bishop of Ariminum (Rimini). 

What lamentable supplications have been poured out to us by Luminosus, abbot of the monastery of St. 
Andrew and St. Thomas, in the city of Ariminum, appears from the text of the subjoined petition. With regard 
to this matter we exhort thy Fraternity that, on the death of the abbot of this same monastery, thy church shall 
under no pretext interfere in scheduling or taking charge of the property of the said monastery, acquired or 
to be acquired. And we desire thee to ordain as abbot of the same monastery none other but him whom the 
whole congregation may by common consent demand as being worthy in character and apt for monastic 
discipline. Moreover, we entirely forbid public masses to be celebrated there by the bishop, lest occasion 
be given for popular assemblies in the retreats of God's servants, and also lest too frequent an entrance of 
women be a cause of scandal (which God forbid), especially to the simpler souls. Further, we ordain that this 
paper by us written shall be carefully held to, and kept in force and unadulterated in all future time by thee 
and the bishops that shall be ordained after thee; that so, with the help of God, both thy church may be 
content with its own rights and no more, and also the said monastery, being subject henceforth to none but 
general or canonical jurisdiction, and free from all annoyances and vexations, may accomplish its divine 
work with the utmost devotion of heart. 

[In place of the epistle as above given the following, with the appended paper on the privileges of 
monasteries, is found in some Codices.] 

GREGORY TO CASTORIUS, BISHOP OF ARIMINUM. 

What lamentable supplications Luminosus, abbot of the monastery of Saints Andrew and Thomas, in the 
city of Ariminum, has poured out to us, appears from the text of the subjoined petition. For from his account 
we learn that in very many monasteries the monks have suffered many prejudices and annoyances from 
prelates. It is therefore the duty of thy Fraternity to make provision for their future quiet by a wholesome 

arrangement, to the end that those who have their conversation therein in God's service may, His grace 
assisting them, persevere with minds free from disturbance. But, lest from a custom which ought to be rather 
amended than continued, any one should presume to cause any kind of annoyance to monks, it is 
necessary that the things which we have caused to be enumerated below should be so carefully observed 
by the fraternity of bishops that no possible occasion of introducing disquiet may be found hereafter. 

Of the privileges of Monasteries. 

We therefore interdict in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and forbid by the authority of the blessed Peter, 
Prince of the apostles, in whose stead we preside over this Roman Church, that any bishop or secular 
person hereafter presume in any way to devise occasions of interfering with regard to the revenues, 
property, or writings of monasteries, or of the cells or vills thereto appertaining, or have recourse to any 
tricks or exactions: but, if any case should by chance arise as to land disputed between their churches and 
any monasteries, and it cannot be arranged amicably, let it be terminated without intentional delay before 
selected abbots and other fathers who fear God, sworn upon the most holy Gospels. Also on the death of 
the abbot of any congregation, let no stranger be ordained, or any but one of the same congregation whom 
the society of the brethren shall of its own accord have elected unanimously, and who shall have been 
elected without fraud or venality. But, if they cannot find a suitable person among themselves, let them in like 
manner elect some one from some other monastery to be ordained. Nor, when an abbot has been 
constituted, let any person whatever on any pretext be put over him, unless perchance (which God forbid) 
crimes be apparent Which are shewn to be punishable by the sacred canons. Likewise the rule is to be 
observed, that monks must not, without the consent of the abbot, be removed from monasteries for 
constituting other monasteries, or for sacred orders, or for any clerical office. We also disallow 
ecclesiastical schedules of the property of a monastery to be made by bishops. But if, circumstances 
requiring it, the abbot of a place should have questions with other abbots concerning property that has 
come into possession, let the matter be terminated also by their counsel or judgment. On the death also of 
an abbot let not the bishop on any pretext intermeddle in the scheduling or taking charge of the property of 
the monastery, acquired, or given, or to be acquired. We also entirely forbid public masses to be 
celebrated by him in a convent, lest in the retreats of the servants of God and their places of refuge any 
opportunity for a popular concourse be afforded, or an unwonted entrance of women should ensue, which 
would be by no means of advantage to their souls. Nor let him dare to place his episcopal chair there, or 
have any power whatever of command, or of holding any ordination, even the most ordinary, unless he 
should be requested to do so by the abbot of the place; that so the monks may always remain under the 
power of their abbots: and let no bishop detain a monk in any church without a testimonial and permission 
from his abbot, or promote one without such permission to any dignity. We ordain, then, that this paper by us 
written be kept to for all future time, in force and unadulterated, by all bishops; that both they may be content 
with the rights of their own churches and no more, and that the monasteries be subject to no ecclesiastical 
conditions, or compelled services, or obedience of any kind to secular authorities (saving only canonical 
jurisdiction(3)), but, freed from all vexations and annoyances, may accomplish their divine work with the 
utmost devotion of heart. 

EPISTLE XLII. 

TO LUMINOSUS, ABBOT. 

Gregory to Luminosus, abbot of the monastery of Saint Thomas of Ariminum. 
We were glad to receive thine own and thy congregation's petition, and accede to thy requests, in 
accordance with the statutes of the Fathers and with form of law. For to our brother and fellow-bishop 
Castorius a letter has been sent by our order, whereby we have taken away entirely from him and his 
successors all power to harm thy monastery; so that neither may he any longer come among you to be a 
burden to you, nor schedules be made of the property of the monastery, nor any public procession(4) take 
place there; this only jurisdiction being still left to him, that he must ordain in the place of a deceased abbot 
another whom the common consent of the congregation may have chosen as worthy. But now, these things 
being thus accomplished, be you diligent in the work of God, and assiduously devote yourselves to prayer, 
lest you should seem not so much to have sought security of mind for prayer, as to have wished to escape 
strict episcopal control over you while living amiss. 

EPISTLE XLVI. 

TO JOHN, BISHOP. 

Gregory to John, Bishop of Ravenna(5). 

That I have not replied to the many letters of your Blessedness attribute not to sluggishness on my part, but 
to weakness, seeing that, on account of my sins, when Ariulph, coming to the Roman city, killed some and 
mutilated others, I was affected with such great sadness as to fall into a colic sickness. But I wondered much 
why it was that that well-known care of your Holiness for me was of no advantage to this city and to my 
needs. When, however, your letters reached me, I became aware that you are indeed taking pains to act, 
but yet have no one on whom you can bring your action to bear. I therefore attribute it to my sins that this 
man(6) with whom we are now concerned both evades fighting against our enemies and also forbids our 
making peace; though indeed at present, even if he wished us to make it, we are utterly unable, since 
Ariulph, having the army of Authar and Nordulf, desires their subsidies(7) to be given him ere he will deign to 
speak to us at all about peace. 

But, as to the case of the bishops of lstria(8), I have learnt the truth of all you had told me in your letters from 
the commands which have come to me from the most pious princes, bid ding me abstain for the present 
from compelling them. I indeed feel with you, and rejoice greatly in your zeal and ardour, with regard to what 
you have written, and acknowledge myself to have become in many ways your debtor. Know nevertheless 
that I shall not cease to write with the greatest zeal and freedom on this same matter to the most serene 
lords. Moreover the animosity of the aforesaid most excellent Romanus Patricius ought not to move you, 
since, as we are above him in place and rank, we ought so much the more to tolerate with forbearance and 
dignity any light conduct on his part. 

If, however, there is any opportunity of prevailing with him, let your Fraternity work upon him, so that we may 
make peace with Ariulph, if to some small extent we may, since the soldiery have been removed from the 
city of Rome, as he himself knows. But the Theodosiacs(9), who have remained here, not having received 
their pay, are with difficulty induced to guard the walls; and how shall the city subsist, left destitute as it is by 
all, if it has not peace? 

Furthermore, as to the gift redeemed from captivity, about whom you have written to us asking us to enquire 
into her origin, we would have your Holiness know that an unknown person cannot easily be traced. But as 
to what you say about one who has been ordained being ordained again, it is exceedingly ridiculous, and 
outside the consideration of one disposed as you are, unless perchance some precedent is adduced 
which ought to be taken into account in judging him who is alleged to have done any such thing. But far be it 
from your Fraternity to entertain such a view. For, as one who has been once baptized ought not to be 
baptized again, so one who has been once consecrated cannot be consecrated again to the same order. 
But in case of any one's attainment of the priesthood having been accompanied by slight misdemeanour, 
he ought to be adjudged to penance for the misdemeanour, and yet return his orders. 
With regard to the city of Naples(1), in view of the urgent insistance of the most excellent Exarch, we give you 
to understand that Arigis(2), as we have ascertained, has associated himself with Ariulph, and is breaking 
his faith to the republic, and plotting much against this same city; to which unless a duke be speedily sent, it 
may already be reckoned among the lost. 

As to what you say to the effect that alms should be sent to the city of the schismatic Severus which has 
been burnt(3), your Fraternity is of this opinion as being ignorant of the bribes that he sends to the Court in 
opposition to us. And, even though these were not sent, we should have to consider that compassion is to 
be shewn first to the faithful, and afterwards to the enemies of the Church. For indeed there is near at hand 
the city Fanum, in which many have been taken captive, and to which I have already in the past year 
desired to send alms, but did not venture to do so through the midst of the enemy. It therefore seems to me 
that you should send the Abbot Claudius thither with a certain amount of money, in order to redeem the 
freemen whom he may find there detained in slavery for ransom, or any who are still in captivity. But, as to 
the sum of money to be thus sent, be assured that whatever you determine will please me. If, moreover, you 
are treating with the most excellent Romanus Patricius for allowing us to make peace with Ariulph, I am 
prepared to send another person to you, with whom questions of ransom may be better arranged. 
Concerning our brother and fellow-bishop Natalis(4) I was at one time greatly distressed, in that I had found 
him acting haughtily in certain matters; but, since he has himself amended his manners, he has overcome 
me and consoled my distress. In connexion with this matter admonish our brother and fellow-bishop 
Malchus(5) that before he comes to us he render his accounts, and then depart elsewhere if it is necessary. 
And if we find his conduct good, it will perhaps be necessary for us to restore to him the patrimony which he 
had charge of. 

EPISTLE XLVII. 

TO DOMINICUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Dominicus, Bishop of Carthage(6). 

We have received with the utmost gratification the letters of your Fraternity, which have reached us 
somewhat late by the hands of Donatus and Quodvultdeus, our most reverend brethren and fellow-bishops, 
and also Victor the deacon with Agilegius the notary. And though we thought that we had suffered loss from 
the tardiness of their coming, yet we find gain from their more abundant charity; seeing that from this delay in 
point of time there appears no interruption, but rather increase of the love which, by the mercy of God, 
through your contemplation of the priestly office, your practice of reading, and your maturity of age, we know 
to be already firmly planted in you. For it would not flow so largely from you, had it not very many most 
abundant veins in your heart. Let us, therefore, most holy brother, hold fast with unshaken firmness this 
mother and guard of virtues. Let not the tongues of the deceitful diminish it in us, or any snares of the ancient 
enemy corrupt it. For this joins what is divided, and keeps together what is joined. This lifts up what is lowly 
without tumour; this brings down what is lifted up without dejection. Through this the unity of the universal 
Church, which is the knitting together of the Body of Christ, rejoices in its several parts through the mind's 
equalization of them, though having in it dissimilarity from the diversity of its members. Through this these 
members both exult in the joy of others, though in themselves afflicted, and also droop for the sorrows of 
others, though in themselves joyful. For seeing that, as the teacher of the Gentiles testifies, if one member 
suffers anything, the other members suffer with it, and if one member glories, all the members rejoice with it, I 
doubt not that you groan for our perturbation, as it is quite certain that we rejoice for your peace. 
Now as to your Fraternity rejoicing with us on our ordination, it, displays to me the affection of most sincere 
charity. But I confess that a force of sorrow strikes through my soul from contemplation of this order of 
ministry. For heavy is the weight of priesthood; seeing that it is necessary for a priest, first to live so as to be 
an example to others, and then to be on his guard not to lift up his heart because of the example which he 
shews. He should ever be thinking of the ministry of preaching, considering with most intense fear how that 
the Lord, when about to depart to receive for Himself a kingdom, and giving talents to His servants, says. 
Trade ye till I come (Luke xix. 13). Which trading surely we carry on only if by our living and our speaking we 
win the souls of our neighbours; if by preaching the joys of the heavenly kingdom we strengthen all that are 
weak in divine love; if by terribly sounding forth the punishments of hell we bend the froward and the timid; if 
we spare no one against the truth; if, given to heavenly friendships, we fear not human enmities. And indeed 
it was in thus shewing himself that the Psalmist knew that he had offered a kind of Sacrifice to God, when he 
said,. Did I not hale them, O God, that hated thee, and was I not grieved with thine enemies! Yea I hated them 
with a perfect hated, and they became enemies unto me (Ps. cxxxviii. 217). But in view of this burden I 
tremble for my infirmity, and look to the returning of the Master of the house, after receiving His kingdom, to 
take account of us. But with what heart shall I bear His coming, if from the trading I undertook I render Him no 
gain, or almost none? Do thou, therefore, most dear brother, help me with thy prayers; and what thou seest 
me to fear for myself, consider daily on thine own account with anxious dread. For through the bond of 
charity both what I say of myself is thy concern, and what I desire thee to do is mine. 
Further, as to what your Fraternity writes about ecclesiastical privileges, keep to this without any hesitation, 
since, as we defend our own rights, so we observe those of several churches. Nor do I through partiality 
grant to any Church whatever more than it deserves, nor do I under the instigation of ambition derogate from 
any what belongs to it by right; but I desire to honour my brethren in all ways, and study accordingly that 
each may be advanced in honour, so long as there can be no opposition to it of right on the part of one 
against the other. Further, I greatly rejoice with you in the manners of your messengers, in whom it has been 
shewn me how much you love me, in that you have sent to me elect brethren and sons. 
Given the tenth of the Kalends of August, tenth indiction. 

EPISTLE XLVIII. 

TO COLUMBUS, BISH0P(8). 

Gregory to Columbus, &c. 

It is known, most dear brother In Christ, that the ancient enemy, who by cunning persuasion deposed the first 
man from the delights of Paradise to this life of care, and in him even then inflicted the penalty of mortality on 
the human race, does now with the same cunning, so as more easily to seize the flock, endeavour to infect 
the shepherds of the Lord's sheep with infused poisons, and already to claim them as his own by right. But 
we, who, though unworthy, have undertaken the government of the Apostolic See in the stead of Peter the 
prince of the apostles, are compelled by the very office of our ponflflcate to resist the general enemy by all 
the efforts in our power. Now the bearers of these presents, Constanflus and Mustellus, have in a petition 
presented to us given us to understand, and the deacons of the Church of Pudentiana constituted in the 
province of Numidia assert, that Maximianus, prelate of the same Church, corrupted by a bribe from the 
Donatists, has by a new licence allowed a bishop to be made in the place where he lives; which thing. 

though previous usage allowed it, is prohibited from remaining and continuing by the catholic faith(9). On this 
account, then, we have deemed it necessary to exhort thy Fraternity by these present writings that, when 
Hilarus our chartularius comes to thee, this same case be subjected to a thorough and wise investigation in 
an united general council of bishops, having the terror of the coming judge before their eyes. And if this 
charge should be proved with sufficient evidences by the bearers of these presents against the aforesaid 
bishop, let him by all means be degraded from the dignity and office which he enjoys, that both he may 
return to the gains of penitence through acknowledgment of his fault, and others may not presume to attempt 
such things. 

For it is right that one who has sold our Lord Jesus Christ to a heretic for money received, as is said to have 
been done, should be removed from handling the mysteries of His most holy body and blood. Further, if, 
apart from this accusation, there is any contest afoot among them, as is contained in the petition of the 
deacons themselves, with respect to certain wrongs or private transactions, this let thy Fraternity with our 
aforesaid chartularius fully enquire into with evidence adduced, and decide it according to justice between 
all the parties. 

But, further, we have learnt through the information given us by the bearers of these presents that the heresy 
of the Donatists is for our sins spreading daily, and that very many, leave being given them through venality, 
are being baptized a second time by the Donatists. How serious a matter this is, brother, it behoves us with 
the whole bent of our minds to consider. Lo, the wolf tears the Lord's flock, no longer stealthily in the night, but 
in the open light; and we see him advance in the slaughter of the sheep, and with no solicitude, with no darts 
of words, do we oppose him. What fruits, then, of a multiplied flock shall we shew to the Lord, if even that of 
which we have undertaken the feeding we see with easy mind mangled by the wild beast? Let us therefore 
study to inflame our hearts by imitation of earthly shepherds, who often keep watch through winter nights, 
pinched with showers and frost, lest even one sheep, and perchance not a profitable one, should perish. 
And, if the prowler should have bitten it with greedy mouth, how do they busy themselves, with what 
palpitations of heart do they pant, with what cries do they leap forward to rescue the captured sheep, 
stimulated by the pressing need, lest anything lost through their carelessness should be required of them by 
the lord of the flock! Let us then watch, lest anything should perish: and, if anything should by chance have 
been seized, let us bring it back to the Lord's flock by the cries of divine discourses, that He who is the 
Shepherd of shepherds may mercifully vouchsafe to approve us in His judgment as having kept watch over 
His sheepfold. This also it is needful for you to attend to wisely; that, if there should be any proper petiflon on 
the part of the same bishop against the bearers of these presents, it should be thoroughly enquired into; 
and, if haply they themselves also should rightly deserve to be smitten for their own fault, we pronounce that 
they should by no means be spared on the ground of their having had the toil of resorting to us. 
In the month of August, tenth indiction. 

EPISTLE XLIX. 

TO JANUARIUS, ARCHBISHOP. 

Gregory to Januarius, archbishop of Caralis (Cagliari). 

If with integrity of heart we consider the priestly office which we administer, the concord of personal charity 
ought so to unite us with our sons that, as we are fathers in name, so we should be proved by our affection to 
be so in deed. While, then, we ought to be such as has been said above, we wonder why such a mass of 
complaints has arisen against thy Fraternity. We still indeed hesitate to believe it: but, that we may be able 
to ascertain the truth, we have sent to your parts John the notary of our See, supported by our injuncflon, who 
may compel all parties to abide the judgment of chosen arbitrators, and by his own execuflon carry their 
judgments into effect. Wherefore we exhort thy Fraternity by this present writing to consider well with thyself 
beforehand the merits of the cases; and, if you flnd that you have taken or hold anything unjustly, in 
consideraflon of your priesthood to restore it before trial. 

Now, among numerous complaints, the most distinguished Isidore has complained of having been 
excommunicated and anathematised by thy Fraternity for invalid reasons. And, when we had wished to 
learn from one of thy clergy who was here for what cause this had been done, he gave us to understand that 
it had been done for no other cause than that the man had done thee an injury. This distresses us 
exceedingly; since, if it is so, thou shewest that thou dost not think of heavenly things, but givest signs of 
having thy conversation among things of earth, having brought to bear the malediction of anathema to 
avenge a private wrong; which is a thing forbidden by the sacred rules. Wherefore for the future be 
thoroughly circumspect and careful, and presume not to inflict any such penalty again for vindication of thine 
own wrongs. For, shouldestthou do anything of the kind, know that it will afterwards be avenged on thyself. 

EPISTLE LI. 

TO ALL BISHOPS. 

Gregory to all bishops in the matter of the Three Chapters(1). 

I have received your letters with the utmost gratification: but I shall have far abundant joy, if it should be my 
lot to rejoice in your return from error. Now the forefront of your Epistle notifies that you suffer severe 
persecution. But persecution, if endured irrationally, is of no profit at all unto salvation. For it is impious in any 
one to expect a recompense of reward for sin. For you ought to know, as the blessed Cyprian says, that it is 
not the suffering that makes the martyr, but the cause for which he suffers. This being so, it is exceedingly 
incongruous for you to glory in the persecution whereof you speak, seeing that you are not thereby at all 
advanced towards eternal rewards. Let, then, purity of faith bring your Charity back to your mother church 
who bare you; let no bent of your mind dissociate you from the unity of concord; let no persuasion deter you 
from seeking again the right way. For in the synod which dealt with the three chapters it is distinctly evident 
that nothing pertaining to faith was subverted, or in the least degree changed; but, as you know, the 
proceedings had reference only to certain individuals; one of whom, whose writings evidently deviated from 
the rectitude of the Catholic Faith, was not unjustly condemned(2). 

Moreover, as to what you write about Italy among other provinces having been especially scourged since 
that time, you ought not to twist this into a reproach, since it is written. Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, 
and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth (Hebr. xii. 6). If, then, it is as you say, Italy has been since that 
time the more loved by God, and in all ways approved, having been counted worthy of enduring the 
scourge of the Lord. But, since it is not as ye try to make out by way of insulting over her, attend ye to 
reason. 

After the Pope Vigilius of illustrious memory, having been appointed in the royal city(3), promulgated a 
sentence of condemnation against Theodora, then empress, or against the Acephali(4), the city of Rome 
was then attacked and captured by enemies. Does it follow from this that the Acephali had a good case, or 
that they were unjustly condemned, because such things happened after their condemnation? Away with the 
thought! For it is not fit that either any one of you, or any others who have been instituted in the mysteries of 
the Catholic Faith, should say or in any way acknowledge this. This then being recognized, retire ye even 
now at length from the determination you have come to. Wherefore, that full satisfaction may be infused into 
your minds, and all doubt removed, with respect to the three chapters, I have judged it of advantage to send 
you the book which my predecessor of holy memory. Pope Pelagius, had written on this subject(5). Which 
book if you should be willing to read again and again, putting aside the spirit of wilful self-defence, I have 
confidence that you will follow it in all respects, and, notwithstanding all, return to union with us. But if 
henceforth, after perusal of this book, you should decide to persist in your present determination, you will 
doubtless shew that you gave yourselves up not to reason but to obstinacy. Wherefore once more, in a 
spirit of compassion, I admonish your Charity, that, inasmuch as under God the purity of our faith has 
remained inviolate in the matter of the Three Chapters, ye put away from you all swelling of mind, and return 
to your mother the Church, who expects and invites her sons; and this all the more speedily as you know that 
she expects you daily. 

EPISTLE Lll. 

TO NATALIS, BISH0P(6). 

Gregory to Natalis, Bishop of Salons. 

As though forgetting the tenour of former letters, I had determined to say nothing to your Blessedness but 
what should savour of sweetness: but, now that in your epistle you have recurred in the way of 
argumentation to preceding letters, I am once more compelled to say perhaps some things that I had rather 
not have said. 

For in defence of feasts your Fraternity mentions the feast of Abraham, in which by the testimony of Holy 
Scripture he is said to have entertained three angels (Gen. xviii.). In view of this example, neither will we 
blame your Blessedness for feasting, if we come to know that you entertain angels. Again you say that 
Isaac gave a blessing to his son when satiated (Gen. xxvii. 27). Now as to both these things in the Old 
Testament-since they were so done in the way of history as still to have a meaning in the way of 
allegory-would that we could so read through the accounts of the things done as to perceive and take 
thought for the things to be done. For indeed the one, in saluting one only of the three angels, declared the 
Persons of the Trinity to be of one Substance; the other blessed his son when satiated, because one who is 
filled with divine banquets has his senses extended into the power of prophecy. But the words of Holy Writ 
are divine banquets. If, then, you read diligently-if, drawing example from what is outward, you penetrate 
what is inward-you will be satiated, as it were, from hunting in the field, and fill the stomach of the soul, so as 

to be able to announce things to come to your son placed before you, to wit to the people you have taken in 
charge. But one who prophesies anything of God is already in the dark as to this world; for it is assuredly 
right and fit that he whose senses are bright inwardly through intelligence should see less through 
concupiscence here below. 

Take, therefore, these things to yourselves; and, if you know yourselves to be such as I have said, you 
need not at all doubt of our esteem. I also find your Blessedness rejoicing if you bear the name of "a 
gluttonous man" along with the world's Creator. As to this I briefly comment thus; that, if you are called so 
falsely, you do truly bear this name along with the world's Creator; but, if it is true of you, who can doubt that it 
was false of Him? A like name does not avail to acquit you, if the cause for it is unlike. For even the thief who 
was condemned to die endured the cross with Him; but a like crucifixion did not acquit him whom his own 
guilt bound. But now I beseech God with all the prayers I can offer that not the name only, but the cause for it, 
may join your most holy Fraternity to our Creator. 

Further, your Holiness in your letters rightly praises feasts which are made with the intention of bestowing 
charity. But yet you should know that they then truly proceed from charity, when at them the lives of the 
absent are not backbitten, no one is censured in derision, and no idle tales about secular affairs, but the 
words of sacred reading, are heard; when the body is not pampered more than is needful, but only its 
weakness refreshed, that it may be kept in health for the practice of virtue. If, then, you thus conduct 
yourselves in your feasts, I own that you are masters of abstinence. 

As to your alleging to me the testimony Of the apostle Paul, where he says. Let not him that eateth not judge 
him that eateth (Rom. xiv. 3), I think that this was altogether out of place, seeing both that I am not one that 
eateth not, and also that Paul did not here mean to say that the members of Christ, who are mutually bound 
to each other in His body, that is to say in his Church, with the bond of charity, should have no care whatever 
for each other. If, indeed, I had nothing to do with thee, nor thou with me, I should rightly be compelled to hold 
my peace, lest I should blame one whom I could not mend. This precept, then, was given only with 
reference to persons who go about to judge those who have not been committed to their care. But now that 
we, by the ordering of God, are one, we should be much in fault were we to pass over in silence what calls 
for our correction. Lo, thy Fraternity has taken it amiss to have been blamed by me about feasts, while I, who 
surpass thee in my position, though not in my life, am ready to be found fault with by all, and by all to be 
amended. And him only do I esteem to be a friend to me, through whose tongue I wipe off the stains of my 
soul before the appearance of the strict judge. 

But as to what you say, most sweet brother, about your being unable to read because of the pressure of 
tribulations upon you, I think this avails little for your excuse, since Paul says. Whatsoever things are written 
are written for our instruction, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope (Rom. 
XV. 4). If, then, holy Scripture has been prepared for our comfort, we ought by so much the more to read it as 
we find ourselves the more wearied under the burden of tribulations. But if we are to rely only on that 
sentence which you quote in your letter, wherein the Lord says. When they deliver you up, take no thought 
how or what ye shall speak, for it shall be given you in that hour what ye shall speak; far it is not ye that 
speak, but the Spirit of your Father that speaketh in you (Matth. x. 19), I say that Holy Scriptures have been 
given us in vain, if, being filled with the Spirit, we have no need of external words. But, dearest brother, 
trusting in God without doubt, when we are straightened in a time of persecution, is one thing; what we ought 
to do when the Church is at peace is another. For it is our duty, through this same Spirit, to learn by reading 
now what we may be able to shew forth also in suffering, should cause arise. 

Now, I rejoice exceedingly that you declare in your letter that you are giving attention to exhortation. For thus 
I know that you are wisely fulfilling the duties of your position, if you take pains to draw others also to your 
Maker. But your saying in the same sentence that you are not like me saddens me at once, after I had 
begun to rejoice, since I think that it is in derision that you give me praises which in truth I do not recognize as 
due. However, I give thanks to Almighty God that through you heretics are being recalled to holy Church. But 
it is needful for you to have a care that those also who are contained in the bosom of holy Church live so that 
they be not her adversaries through their evil lives. For, if they give themselves not to heavenly desires, but 
to earthly lusts and pleasures, sons of strangers are being nourished in her bosom. 
Now as to your declaring that you cannot possibly be ignorant of the degrees of ecclesiastical rank, I too 
fully know them with regard to you; and I am therefore much distressed that, if you knew the order of things, 
you have failed, to your greater blame, in knowing it with regard to me. For, after letters had been addressed 
to your Blessedness by my predecessor anti myself in the cause of the archdeacon Honoratus, then, the 
sentence of both of us being set at nought, the said Honoratus was deprived of the rank belonging to him. 
Which thing if any one of the four patriarchs had done, such great contumacy could by no means have been 
allowed to pass without the most grievous offence. Nevertheless, now that your Fraternity has returned to 
your proper position, I do not bear in mind the wrong done either to myself or to my predecessor. 
But as to your saying that what has been handed down and guarded by my predecessors ought to be 
observed in our times also, far be it from me to infringe in any church the statutes of our ancestors with 

regard to my fellow priests, since I do myself an injury if I disturb the rights of my brethren. But when your 
accredited messengers arrive, I shall know the rights of the case between you and the aforesaid 
archdeacon Honoratus; and my own personal examination of it will shew you that, if you have the support of 
justice on your side, you will sustain no injury from me; as indeed you never have done. But in case justice 
supports the plea of the often-before-named Honoratus, I will shew by my acquittal of him that in judgment I 
have no knowledge even of persons whom I knew. 

Concerning the article of excommunication which, if I may say so, was of necessity added to our letters 
(though even the second and the third time with a condition interposed), your Blessedness complains 
unreasonably, since the apostle Paul says. Having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience (2 Cor. x. 6). 
But let these things pass: let us return to what concerns us now. For, if the lord Natalis acts as he should do, I 
cannot but be friends with him, knowing how much I am a debtor to his affection. 

EPISTLE LIV. 

Here follows the Epistle of Saint Licinianus, bishop, concerning the Book of Rules, 
addressed to Saint Gregory, pope of the city of Rome (7). 

To the most blessed lord pope Gregory, Licinianus, bishop. 

The Book of Rules issued by Thy Holiness, and by the aid of divine grace conveyed to us, we have read 
with all the more pleasure for the spiritual rules which we find contained in it. Who can fail to read that with 
pleasure wherein by constant meditation he may find medicine for his soul; wherein, despising the fleeting 
things of this world which vary in their mutability, he may open the eyes of his soul to the settled estate of 
eternal life? This book of thine is a palace of all virtues. In it prudence fixes the boundary line between good 
and evil; jusflce gives each one his own, while it subjects the soul to God, and the body to the soul. In it 
fortitude also is found ever the same in adversity and in prosperity, being neither broken by opposiflon nor 
lifted up by success. In it temperance subdues the rage of lust, and discriminately imposes a limit upon 
pleasures. In it thou comprehendest all things that pertain to the partaking of eternal life: and not only for 
pastors layest down a rule of life, but also to those who have no office of government thou suppliest a rule of 
life. For pastors may learn in thy fourfold division what they should be in coming to this office; what life they 
should lead after coming to it; how and what they should teach, and what they should do to avoid being lifted 
up in so high a posiflon as that of priesthood. This excellent teaching of thine is attested by the holy ancient 
fathers, doctors, and defenders of the Church; Hilary, Ambrose Augustin, Gregory Nazianzen: these all bear 
tesflmony to thee as did the prophets to the apostles. Saint Hilary says, in expounding the words of the 
Apostle who was the teacher of the Genflles, "For so he signifles that the things belonging to discipline and 
morals serve to the good desert of the priesthood, if those things also which are necessary for the science 
of teaching and guarding the faith shall not be wanflng among the rest'; since it does not all at once 
constitute a good and useful priest only to act innocently, or only to preach knowingly, seeing that, though a 
man be innocent, he profits himself only unless he be learned, and that he that is learned is without the 
authority of a teacher unless he be innocents." Saint Ambrose gives attestaflon to this book of thine in the 
books which he wrote about Duties (de officiis). Saint Augusfln gives attestaflon, saying, "In acflon dignity 
should not be loved in this life, neither power; since all things under the sun are vain. But the work itself which 
is done by means of this dignity or power, if it is rightly and profitably done, this is what avails for that weal of 
subjects which is according to God. Wherefore the Apostle says, 'He that desireth the office of a bishop 
desireth a good work.' He wished to explain what episcopus means; that it is a title denoflng work, not 
dignity. For it is a Greek word derived hence;-that he who is put over others overlooks those whom he is put 
over, to wit, as taking care of them; for episcopacy is overlooking. Therefore, if we choose, we may say in 
Latin that to exercise the office of a bishop is to overlook; so that one who delights to be over others and not 
to profit them may understand that he is no bishop. For so it is that no one is prohibited from longing to 
become acquainted with truth, for which purpose leisure is to be commended; but as to a posiflon of 
superiority, without which the people cannot be. governed, though it may be held and administered 
becomingly, it is unbecoming to covet it. Wherefore charity seeks holy leisure, so as to have flme for 
perceiving and defending the truth. But if [the burden of government] be imposed, it is to be undertaken on 
account of the obligaflon of charity. But not even so should delight in the truth be altogether forsaken, lest the 
former sweetness should be withdrawn, and the present obligation be oppressive' (Lib. viii. de Trinit, num. 

1). 

Saint Gregory attests, whose style thou followest, and after whose example thou didst desire to hide thyself 
in order to avoid the weight of priesthood; which weight, of what sort it is, is clearly declared in the whole of 
thy book: and yet thou bearest what thou wast afraid of. For thy burden is borne upwards, not downwards; 
not so as to sink thee to the depths, but to lift thee to the stars; whilst by the grace of God, and the merit of 
obedience, and the efficiency of good work, that is made sweet which seemed to have heaviness through 

human weakness. For thou sayest the things that are in agreement with the apostles and with apostolic men. 
For, being fair, thou hast said things fair, and in them hast shewn thyself fair. I would not have thee liken 
thyself to an ill-favoured painter painting fair things, seeing that spiritual teaching issues from a spiritual soul. 
The human painter is by most men esteemed more highly than the inanimate picture. But put not this down to 
flattery or adulation, but to truth: for it neither becomes me to lie, nor thee to commend what is false. I then, 
though plainly sincere, have seen thee and all that is thine to be fair, and have seen myself as ill-favoured 
enough in comparison with thee. Wherefore I thee pray by the grace of God which abounds in thee that thou 
reject not my prayer, but willingly teach me what I confess myself ignorant of. For we are compelled of 
necessity to do what thou teachest. 

For, when there is no skilled person found for the sacerdotal office, what is to be done but that an unskilled 
one such as I am, should be ordained? Thou orderest that no unskilled one should be ordained. But let thy 
prudence consider whether it may not suffice him for skill to know Jesus Christ and Him crucified: for, if this 
does not suffice, there will, according to this book, be no one who can be called skilled: and so no one will 
be a priest, if none, unless he be skilled, should be one. For with open front we resist bigamists, lest the 
sacrament should be thus corrupted. What if the husband of one wife should have touched a woman before 
his wife? What if he should not have had a wife, and yet should not have been without touch of a woman? 
Comfort us with thy pen, that we may not be punished either for our own sin or that of others. For we are 
exceedingly afraid lest we should be forced to do what we ought not to do. Lo, obedience must be paid to 
thy precepts, that such a one may be made a priest as apostolical authority approves; and such a one as is 
sought is not found. Thus faith will cease which cometh of hearing; baptism will cease, if there should be no 
one to baptize; those most holy mysteries will cease which are effected through priests and ministers. In 
either case danger remains: either such a one must be ordained as ought not to be, or there must be no one 
to celebrate or administer sacred mysteries. 

A few years ago Leander, Bishop of Hispalis, on his return from the royal city, saw us in passing, and told us 
that he had some homilies issued by your Blessedness on the Book of Job. And, as he passed by in haste, 
he did not shew them to us as we requested. But thou wrotest afterwards to him about trine immersion, and 
saidest in thy letter, as I am told, that thou wast dissatisfied with that work, and hadst determined on maturer 
consideration to change those homilies into the form of a treatise(9). 

We have indeed six books of Saint Hilary, Bishop of Pictavia, which he turned into Latin from the Greek of 
Origen: but he has not expounded the whole of the book of holy Job in order. And I am not a little surprised 
that a man so very learned and so holy should translate the silly tales of Origen about the stars. I, most holy 
father, can in no wise be persuaded to believe that the heavenly luminaries are rational spirits. Holy 
Scripture not declaring them to have been made either along with angels or along with men. Let then your 
Blessedness deign to transmit to my littleness not only this work, but also the other books on morals which in 
this Book of Rules thou speakest of having composed. For we are thine, and are delighted to read what is 
thine. For to me it is a desirable and glorious thing, as thy Gregory says, to learn even to extreme old age. 
May God the Holy Trinity vouchsafe to preserve your crown unharmed for instructing His Church, as we 
hope, most blessed father. 

REGISTER OF THE EPISTLES OF SAINT GREGORY 
THE GREAT, BOOK III 

BOOK III 

EPISTLE I. 

TO PETER, SUBDEACON. 

Gregory to Peter, Subdeacon of Campania. 

What a crime lias been committed in tiie Lucullan fort against our brother and fellow-bishop Paul(1) the 
account which has been sent to us has made manifest. And, inasmuch as the magnificent Scholasticus, 
judge of Campania, happens at the present time to be with us here, we have especially enjoined on him the 
duty of visiting the madness of so great perversity with strict correction. But, since the bearer of the aforesaid 
account has requested us to send some one to represent ourselves, we therefore send the subdeacon 
Epiphanius, who, together with the aforesaid judge, may be able to investigate and ascertain by whom the 
sedition was raised or investigated, and to visit it with suitable punishment. Let thy Experience then make 
haste to give aid in this case with all thy power, to the end both that the truth may be ascertained, and that 
vengeance may proceed against the guilty parties. Wherefore, since the slaves of the glorious Clementina 
are said to have had to do with this same crime, and to have used language calculated to stir up the 
sedition, do thou subject them strictly to immediate punishment, nor let your severity be relaxed in 
consideration of her person, since they ought to be smitten all the more as they have transgressed out of 
mere pride as being the servants of a noble lady. But you ought also to make thorough enquiry whether the 
said lady was privy to so atrocious a crime, and whether it was perpetrated with her knowledge, that from 
our visitation of it all may learn how dangerous it is not only to lay hands on a priest, but even to transgress 
in words against one. For, if anything should be done remissly or omitted in this case, know that thou 
especially wilt have to bear the blame and the risk; nor wilt thou find any plea for excuse with us. For in 
proportion as this business will commend thee to us if it be most strictly investigated and corrected, know 
that our indignation will become sharp against thee, if it be smoothed over. 

Moreover, for the rest, if any slaves from the city should have taken refuge in the monastery of Saint 
Severinus, or in any other church of this same fort, as soon as this has come to thy knowledge, by no means 
allow them to remain there, but let them be brought to the church within the city; and, if they should have just 
cause of complaint against their masters, they must needs leave the church with suitable arrangements 
made for them. But, if they should have committed any venial fault, let them be restored without delay to their 
masters, the latter having taken oath to pardon them. 

EPISTLE II. 

TO PAULUS, BISH0P(2). 

Gregory to Paulus, &c. 

Although it has distressed us in no slight degree to hear of the injury that thou hast suffered, yet we have 
matter of consolation in learning that the affair is to thy credit, in that, so far as the account sent to us has 
disclosed the facts, thou hast suffered in the cause of uprightness and equity. Wherefore, that it may 
redound to the greater glory of thy Fraternity, this occurrence ought neither to shake thy constancy nor turn 
thee aside from the way of truth. For it is to the greater reward of priests if they continue in the path of truth 
even after injuries. But, lest the madness of such great impiety should remain unpunished, and pernicious 
insubordination break out to a worse degree, we have enjoined the magnificent Scholasticus, judge of 
Campania, who is at present here, that he should avenge what has been done with the repression it 
deserves. But, inasmuch as thy men have requested us to commission some One to represent ourselves, 
know that we have for this reason sent to Naples the subdeacon Epiphanius, who may be able, with the 
judge above named, to investigate and ascertain the truth, to the end that by his instancy he may cause 
worthy vengeance to be executed on those who may be shewn to have instigated or perpetrated so great a 
crime. 

EPISTLE III. 

TO JOHN, ABB0T(3) 

Gregory to John, &c. 

Thy Love has requested me that brother Boniface might be ordained Prior (proepositus)(4) in thy 

monastery; as to which request I wonder much why it has not been done before. For since the time when I 

caused him to be given to thee thou oughtest already to have ordained him. 

With regard to the tunic of Saint I have been altogether gratified by thy anxiety to tell me of it. But let thy Love 

endeavour to send me this tunic, or (better still) this same bishop who has it, with his clergy and with the tunic 

itself, to the end that we may enjoy the blessing thereof, and be able to derive benefit from this bishop and 

his clergy. I have been desirous of putting an end to the cause that is pending with Florianus, and have 

already advanced to him as much as eighty solidi, which I believe he proposes should be given him in 

compensation for the monastery's debt; and I am altogether desirous that this cause should be settled, 

inasmuch as Stephen the chartularius is said to be urgent that the aforesaid Florianus should transfer it to 

public cognizance, and it is distasteful to us to be engaged in a public lawsuit. Wherefore we must needs 

make some concession, so as to be able to bring this same cause to a composition. When this shall have 

been done, we will inform your Love of it. 

But do thou give thy whole attention to the souls of the brethren. Let it be now enough that the reputation of 

the monastery has been stained through your negligence. Do not often go abroad. Appoint an agent for 

these causes, and do thou leave thyself time for reading and prayer. 

Be attentive to hospitality; as far as thou art able, give to the poor; yet so as to keep what ought to be 

restored to Florianus. 

Moreover, among the brethren of thy monastery whom I see I do not find addiction to reading. Wherefore 

you must needs consider how great a sin it is, that God should have sent you alimony from the offerings of 

others, and you should neglect learning the commandments of God. 

Further, with regard to the six twelfths, unless we see the original deed, or a copy of it, we can do nothing. But 

I have sent an order to the servant of God, Florentinus, that, if the truth should be made apparent to him, he 

restore to you the six twelfths; after the restoration of which we will either grant the remaining six twelfths on 

lease or commute the revenue. 

EPISTLE V. 

TO PETER, SUBDEACON. 

Gregory to Peter, Subdeacon of Campania. 

As we have no wish to disturb the privileges of laymen in their judgments, so, when they judge wrongfully, we 
desire thee to resist them with moderate authority. For to restrain violent laymen is not to act against the 
laws, but to support law. Since then Deusdedit, the son-in-law of Felix of Orticellum, is said to have done 
violent wrong to the bearer of these presents, and still unlawfully to detain her property, in such sort that the 
dejection of her widowhood is found not to move his compassion, but to confirm his malice, we charge thy 
Experience that against the aforesaid man, as well as in other cases wherein the aforesaid woman asserts 
that she suffers prejudice, thou afford her the succour of thy protection, and not allow her to be oppressed by 
any one whatever, lest either thou be found to neglect what without prejudice to equity is commanded thee, 
or widows and other poor persons, finding no help where they are, be put to expense by the length of the 
journey hither. 

EPISTLE VI. 

TO JOHN, BISHOP. 

Gregory to John, bishop of Prima Justiniana(6). 

After the long afflictions which Adrian, bishop of the city of Thebae, has endured from his fellow-priests, as 
though they bad been his enemies, he has fled for refuge to the Roman city. And though his first 
representation had been against John, bishop of Larissa, to wit that in pecuniary causes he had given 
judgment without regard to the laws, yet after this he complained most grievously rather against the person 
of thy Fraternity, accusing thee of having deposed him unjustly from the degree of priesthood. But we, giving 
no credence to petitions that have not been enquired into, perused the acts of the proceedings, whether 
before our brother and fellow-bishop John, or before thy Fraternity. And indeed concerning the judgment of 
the above-named John, bishop of Larissa, which was suspended on appeal, both the most pious 

emperors, in their orders sent to tiie bisiiop of Corintii, iiave sufficiently decreed, and we iiave decreed also, 
Christ helping us, in our letters directed through the bearers of these presents to the aforesaid John of 
Larissa. But having ventilated the conflicting judgments, the examination of which the imperial commands 
had committed to thee, and inspected the series of proceedings held before the bishop John concerning 
the incriminated persons, we find that thou hast investigated almost nothing pertaining to the questions 
named and assigned to thee for decision, but by certain machinations hast produced witnesses against the 
deacon Demetrius, who were to allege with a view to the condemnation of this same bishop, that they had 
heard this Demetrius bearing testimony concerning the said bishop;-a thing not even lawful to be heard of. 
And when Demetrius in person denied having done so, it appears that, contrary to the custom of the 
priesthood and canonical discipline, thou gavest him into the hands of the praetor of the province as a 
deacon deposed from his dignity(7). And when, mangled by many stripes, he might perchance have said 
some things falsely against his bishop under the pressure of torment, we find that to the very end of the 
business he confessed absolutely nothing of the things about which he was interrogated. Neither do we find 
anything else in the proceedings themselves, whether in the depositions of witnesses or in the declaration 
of Adrian, to his disadvantage. But it is only that thy Fraternity, I know not with what motive, in contempt of law, 
human and divine, has pronounced an abrupt sentence against him; which, even though it had not been 
suspended on appeal, being pronounced in contravention of the laws and canons, could not rightly in itself 
have stood. Further, after, as is abundantly evident, the appeal had been handed to thee, we wonder why 
thou hast not sent thy people to us to render an account of thy judgment according to the undertaking 
delivered to our deacon Honoratus by the representatives of thy church. This omission convicts thee either 
of contumacy or of trepidation of conscience. If, then, these things which have been brought before us have 
the rampart of truth, inasmuch as we consider that, taking advantage of your vicariate jurisdiction under us, 
you are presuming unjustly, we will, with the help of Christ, decree further concerning these things, according 
to the result of our deliberations. 

But as regards the present, by the authority of the blessed Peter, Prince of the apostles, we decree that, the 
decrees of thy judgment being first annulled and made of none effect, thou be deprived of holy communion 
for the space of thirty days, so as to implore pardon of our God for so great transgression with the utmost 
penitence and tears. But, if we should come to know that thou hast been remiss in carrying out this our 
sentence, know thou that not the injustice only, but also the contumacy, of thy Fraternity will have to be more 
severely punished. But, as to our aforesaid brother and fellow-bishop Adrian, condemned by thy sentence, 
which, as we have said, was consistent with neither canons nor laws, we order that he be restored, Christ 
being with him, to his place and rank; so that neither may he be injured by the sentence of thy Fraternity 
pronounced in deviation from the path of justice, nor may thy Charity remain uncorrected; that so we may 
appease the indignation of the future judge. 

EPISTLE VII. 

TO JOHN, BISHOP. 

Gregory to John, bishop of Larissa. 

Our brother Adrian, bishop of the city of Thebae, has come to Rome, bitterly complaining of having been 
condemned, neither lawfully nor canonically, on certain charges by thy Fraternity, and also by John, bishop 
of Prima Justiniana. And, when for a long time we saw no representative of the opposite party arrive here 
who might have replied to his objections, we delivered for perusal(8), with a view to the necessary 
ascertainment of the truth, the proceedings which had taken place before you. From these we ascertained 
that John and Cosmas, deacons who had been deposed from their office, one for frailty of the body and the 
other for fraudulent dealing with ecclesiastical property, had sent a representation to our most pious 
emperors against him, with respect to pecuniary matters and also criminal charges. 
They, in their commands sent to thee, desired thee (that is with strict observance of law and canons) to take 
cognizance of the matter so as to pass a sentence firm in law as to the pecuniary questions, but, as to the 
criminal charges, to report to their Clemency after a searching examination. Now if thy Fraternity had 
received in a right frame of mind these such right commands, you would never have accepted for a general 
accusation of their bishop men removed from their own office for their transgressions, and already hostilely 
disposed; especially as by their representation addressed to our most pious lords their untruthfulness is 
detected, in that they declared that they made it with the consent of all the clergy. 
Yet after this, to touch briefly and summarily on some of the proceedings before thee, the first head of 
accusation was concerning the Theban deacon Stephen, whom the bishop Adrian had failed to deprive of 
the dignity of his order, though supposed to have been aware of his most shameful life As to this head, no 
witnesses were produced to show that bishop Adrian had any know ledge of the matter, except that Stephen 
alone, a man of shameful life and on his own confession to be condemned, is alleged to have said so. The 

second charge made against him appears to have been concerning infants having been debarred by his 
order from receiving holy baptism, and so having died with the filth of sin unwashed away. But none of the 
witnesses brought forward against him declared their knowledge of anything of the kind having come under 
the notice of bishop Adrian, but said that they had learnt it from the mothers of the infants, whose husbands, it 
is said, had been removed from the church for their crimes. But even so they did not declare that the hour of 
death had overtaken those infants while unbaptized, as was contained in the invidious representation of the 
accusers, it being evident that they had been baptized in the city of Demetrias. So much then for the criminal 
charges. 

But, as to the pecuniary matters, after what manner they were adjudged by thee is attested by the enquiry of 
the men deputed by the prince in pursuance of the most pious order of the most serene princes(9). For, 
when the oft-named Adrian had appealed against thy sentence, then, so far as we have ascertained from 
the depositions of four witnesses which were laid before John, bishop of Prima Justiniana, he was thrust into 
most close confinement, and forced by thy Fraternity to produce a document in which be confessed the 
charges brought against him. And it is true that in the document so produced by him he is found to have 
assented to thy sentence as to pecuniary matters. But the criminal charges he touched on in an indefinite 
and dubious sort of way, so that both thy purpose might be frustrated by the raising of certain clouds, and he 
might afterwards the better escape from his confession in the obscurity of a perplexed mode of speech. And 
when the appeal handed in by his people, and the rest of the proceedings under thy cognizance, had been 
reported to the most pious princes, and Honoratus, deacon of our See, with the glorious antigraphus(l) 
Sebastian having been deputed, as we have said, he was exempted by the most serene lords from all 
further orders. But, by what sought out contrivances I know not, another imperial order was again elicited, 
requiring John, bishop of Prima Justiniana, to enquire closely and pass judgment concerning all the 
aforesaid charges. In which trial all bishop Adrian's clergy, and Demetrius the deacon, the latter in the midst 
of torments, declared that all this calumny against bishop Adrian had been got up by the contrivance of thy 
Fraternity. Nor were any of the criminal charges that had been made in thy audience against the bishop 
Adrian proved. But there came up, contrary to canons and laws, another cruel and crafty enquiry directed 
against his deacon Demetrius and other persons, in the course of which nothing was discovered for which 
the oft-mentioned Adrian could have been lawfully condemned, but rather ground for his acquittal. But with 
respect to John, prelate of the city of Prima Justiniana, and his most iniquitous and abominable judgment, 
we shall take further measures. As to bishop Adrian, we find both that he has laboured under thy enmity in a 
way ill-befitting thy priestly character, and that he has been condemned in pecuniary matters for no just 
cause by the sentence of thy Fraternity. 

Since then, having been deposed also by the above-said John bishop of Prima Justiniana in contravention 
of law and canons, he could not be left deprived of his rank and honour, we have decreed that he be 
reinstated in his church, and recalled to the order of his proper dignity. And, though thou oughtest to have 
been deprived of the communion of the Lord's body, for that, setting at naught the admonition of my 
predecessor of holy memory, whereby he exempted him and his church from the jurisdiction of thy authority, 
thou hast again presumed to retain some jurisdiction over them, yet we, decreeing more humanely, and still 
allowing thee the sacrament of communion, decree that thy Fraternity shall abstain from all exercise of the 
jurisdiction formerly held by thee over him and his church; but that, according to the written instructions of our 
predecessor, if any case should possibly arise, whether touching the faith, or criminal, or pecuniary, against 
the aforesaid Adrian our fellow-priest, it be either taken cognizance of, if the question be a slight one, by 
those who are or may be our representatives in the royal city, or, if it be an arduous one, it be brought hither 
to the Apostolic See, to the end that it may be heard and decided before ourselves. But, if thou shouldest 
attempt at any time, on any pretext or by any surreptitious device, to contravene these our ordinances, know 
that we decree thee to be deprived of holy communion, and not to partake of it except at the close of thy life, 
unless upon leave granted by the Roman pontiff. For this we lay down as a rule, agreeably to the teaching 
of the holy fathers, that whosoever knows not how to obey the holy canons, neither is he worthy to minister or 
receive the communion at the holy altars. Moreover let thy Fraternity restore to him without any delay the 
sacred property, or any other, movable or immovable, which thou art said to retain so far; a specification 
whereof, that has been handed to us, we append to this letter. Concerning which if any question arises 
between you, we desire it to be considered by our representative in the royal city. 

EPISTLE VIII. 

TO NATALIS, ARCHBISHOP. 

Gregory to Natalis, archbishop of Salona(2). 

Whilst every kind of business demands(3) anxious investigation of the truth, what pertains to deposition from 

sacerdotal rank should be considered with especial strictness, since here the matter in hand is not 

concerning persons constituted in a iiumble position, but, as it were, concerning reversal of divine 
benediction. Tiiis consideration lias also moved us to exhort your Fraternity with respect to the person of 
Florentius, bishop of the city of Epidaurus. For indeed we have been told that he had been accused on 
certain criminal charges, and that, without any canonical proof being sought, and without previous sentence 
of any sacerdotal council, he has been deposed from his office of dignity, not by law, but by authority. 
Inasmuch, then, as no man can be removed from the rank of episcopacy except for just causes by the 
concordant sentence of priests, we exhort your Fraternity to cause the aforesaid man to be recalled from the 
banishment into which he has been driven, and his case enquired into in a consultation of bishops. And, 
should he be convicted by canonical proof of the charges brought against him, without doubt he must be 
visited with canonical punishment. But, should the facts be found by the synodical inquisition to be otherwise 
than had been supposed, it is necessary both that his accusers should dread the rigour of justice, and that 
the incriminated person should have the approbation of his innocence preserved inviolate. But we have 
committed by our order the execution of the above-mentioned business to Antoninus, our subdeacon, to the 
end that decisions may be come to in accordance with the laws and canons, and, with the help of the Lord, 
be carried into effect. 

EPISTLE IX. 

TO ANTONINUS, SUBDEAC0N(4). 

Gregory to Antoninus, &c. 

It has come to our ears that Florentius, bishop of the city of Epidaurus, his property having first been seized, 
has been condemned, for certain crimes not proved, without a sacerdotal council. And, inasmuch as he 
ought not to suffer canonical punishment, no canonical sentence having been pronounced for his 
condemnation, we enjoin thy Experience to urge upon our brother and fellow-bishop Natalis that he should 
cause the aforesaid man to he recalled from the banishment into which he is said to have been driven. And 
a council of bishops having been assembled, if the charges brought against him should be canonically 
proved, we will that the sentence of our aforesaid brother and fellow-bishop Natalis shall take effect against 
him. But, should he be absolved by a general judgment, thou must not permit him to be subject to prejudice 
on the part of any one, and must carefully and rigorously insist on his aforesaid property being restored to 
him. It is therefore needful that the heavier thou feelest the burden of such negotiations to be, with the maturer 
and more vigilant execution thou take pains to fulfil them. 

EPISTLE X. 

TO SAVINUS, SUBDEAC0N(5). 

Gregory to Savinus, &c. 

Bad men have gone forth and disturbed your minds, understanding neither what they say nor whereof they 
affirm, pretending that in the times of Justinian of pious memory something was detracted from the faith of the 
holy synod of Chalcedon, which with all faith and all devotion we venerate. And in like manner all the four 
synods of the holy universal Church we receive as we do the four books of the holy Gospel. But concerning 
the persons with respect to whom something had been done after the close of the synod, there was 
something ventilated in the times of Justinian of pious memory: yet so that neither was the faith in any 
respect violated, nor anything else done with regard to these same persons but what had been determined 
at the same holy synod of Chalcedon. Moreover, we anathematize any one who presumes to detract 
anything from the definition of the faith which was promulgated in the said synod, or, as though by amending 
it, to change its meaning: but, as it was there promulgate, so in all respects we guard it. Thee, therefore, 
most dear son, it becomes to return to the unity of Holy Church, that thou mayest end thy days in peace; lest 
the malignant spirit, who cannot prevail against thee through thy other works, may from this cause find a way 
at the day of thy departure of barring thy entrance into the heavenly Kingdom. 

EPISTLE XII. 

TO MAXIMIANUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Maximianus, bishop of Syracuse 

I wrote some time ago to your Fraternity desiring you to send to the Roman city those who had alleged 
anything against Gregory, bishop of the city of Agrigentum(6). And we exhort you by this present epistle that 
this should be immediately done. Wherefore hasten to send with speed the persons themselves, and the 

rest of the documents, that is the reports of proceedings and the petitions that have been given in. Nor do 
we allow any delay or excuse to be sought; to the end that, when they have been sent, as we have said, with 
speed to the Roman city, we may know how, with the help of God, we may most advantageously deal with 
him. 

EPISTLE XV. 

TO SCHOLASTICUS, JUDGE. 

Gregory to Scholasticus, judge of Campania. 

While we were greatly distressed in our care for the city of Naples, bereaved of the solace of a priest(7), the 
arrival of the bearers of these presents with the decree for the election of our subdeacon Florentius, had 
afforded us some relief under so great a burden of thought. But, when it appeared that our said subdeacon, 
flying from the very city, had deprecated his ordination with tears, know ye that our sadness increased, as if 
from some heavier dispensation. Wherefore, greeting you well, we exhort your Greatness to assemble the 
chief men or the people of the city, so as to take thought for the election of another, who may be worthy to be 
promoted to the priesthood with the consolation of Christ. Then, the decree having been solemnly passed, 
and transmitted to this city, let the ordination proceed, with the help of Christ, among yourselves. But, should 
you not find a suitable person on whom you can agree, at any rate choose ye three upright and wise men, to 
be sent to this city as representing the community, and to whose judgment the whole population may assent. 
Perhaps, when they come hither, they will find such a one as may be ordained as your bishop without 
reproach, to the end that your bereaved city may neither within itself want an inspector of its deeds, nor, 
when the care of a priest is supplied to it, afford entrance to hostile snares from without. 

EPISTLE XXII. 

TO ANTONINUS, SUBDEACON. 

Gregory to Antoninus, Subdeacon, Rector of the patrimony in Dalmatia. 

It is commonly reported in these parts that our brother and fellow-bishop, Natalis of the Church of Salona, is 
dead. If this is true, let thy Experience with all speed and all care hasten to admonish the clergy and people 
of that city that with one consent they elect a priest for ordination; and, when the nomination of the person 
who may be elected has been made, thou wilt take care to transmit it to us, that he may be ordained with our 
consent, as has been the case from ancient times. And this above all things thou must look to, that in this 
election neither any bribery in any way whatever come in, nor the patronage of any persons whatever 
prevail. For if one is elected through the patronage of certain persons, he is obliged out of deference to 
them to comply with their wishes after his ordination, and so it comes to pass that the possessions of that 
church are lessened, and ecclesiastical order, is not maintained. They must, therefore, under thy 
superintendence, elect such a person as will not be unsuitably subservient to the will of any one, but one 
who in the adornment of his life and conversation may be found worthy of such a high degree. But of the 
possessions or ornaments of the same church cause an inventory to be faithfully written out in thy presence. 
And, lest any of the possessions themselves should be lost, admonish Respectus the deacon and 
Stephanus the chief notary (primicerium notariarum) to take sole charge of these possessions, warning 
them that they will have to make good out of their own substance any diminution of them that may have 
arisen from their negligence. 

Moreover, strictly charge Malchus(8), our brother and fellow-bishop, that he refrain entirely from 
intermeddling in this matter. For, should we learn that anything has been done or attempted by him against 
our will, let him know that he will incur no slight guilt and danger. But of this also take care to warn him, that be 
mast be careful to set down and complete the accounts of our patrimony which he has had in charge; for 
doing which let him make baste, laying aside all excuses, to come to us from the Sicilian parts. Let him, then, 
in no wise presume to meddle with the affairs of the Church of Salona, lest he should be under further liability 
to it, and possibly found culpable. For he is said to have many things belonging to the aforesaid church; and 
report goes that he was well-nigh the prime mover in the sale of its possessions, and in other unlawful 
doings. And, should this be found in manifest truth to be as it is said to be, he may be certain that it will by no 
means remain unavenged. 

Let any necessary expenses be defrayed by the steward who was in office at the time of the aforesaid 
bishop's death, that so he may explain his accounts to the future bishop as he knows them to be. All the 
things that we have enjoined on thee to be done it is certainly necessary that thou shouldest do with the 
advice of our son, the magnificent and most eloquent Ma reel I us (9), to the end that thou mayest be able to 
carry out carefully and effectively all that is contained in this paper of directions, and that no blame for 

negligence may belong to thee. 

EPISTLE XXIX. 

TO THE PRESBYTERS AND CLERGY OF MEDIOLANUM (Milan)(1). 

Gregory to the presbyters, deacons, and clergy of the church of Mediolanum. 

We have received your Love's epistle, which, though it bore no subscription, was accredited by the persons 
of the bearers, the presbyter Magnus and the cleric Hippolytus. Having read it, we find that you are all 
agreed in favour of our son Constantius, deacon of your church, who has been well known to me for long. 
And, when I represented the Apostolical See in the royal city, he stuck close to me for a long time; but i 
never found anything in him that could at all be found fault with. Nevertheless, since it has been for long my 
deliberate determination to interfere in no man's favour with a view to his undertaking the burden of pastoral 
care, I can but follow up your election with my prayers that Almighty God, who is ever prescient of our future 
doings, may supply you with a pastor such that in his tongue and manners you may be able to find pastures 
of divine exhortation; one in whose disposition humility may shine forth together with rectitude, and severity 
with loving-kindness; one who may be able to shew you the way of life not in his speaking only but also in 
his living; that so from his example your love may learn to sigh with longing for the eternal country. 
Wherefore, most dear sons, we, warned by our sense of the censorship of our office, urge you in this matter 
of getting yourselves a bishop that none of you look to your own gain without regard to the common 
advantage, lest, if any one is eager after his own individual interest, he should be deceived by a frivolous 
estimate: for the mind that is bound by cupidity does not examine with a free judgment a person's claims to 
preference. Considering, therefore, what things are profitable for all, pay ye ever in all things most complete 
obedience to him whom Divine grace may put over you. For, when once put over you, he must not be further 
judged by you; though now he ought to be the more thoroughly judged as he may not be judged hereafter. 
But, when with God's leave a pastor has been consecrated for you, commit ye yourselves to him with all 
your heart, and in him serve the Lord the Almighty, who has put him over you. 

But, inasmuch as supernal judgment is wont to provide pastors for peoples according to their deservings, 
do you seek spiritual things, love heavenly things, despise things temporal and fugitive; and hold it for most 
certain that you will have a pastor who shall please God, if you in your own doings please God. Lo, all the 
things of this world, which we used to hear from the sacred page were doomed to perish, we see already 
ruined. Cities are overthrown, camps uprooted, churches destroyed; and no tiller of the ground inhabits our 
land. Among ourselves who are left, very few in number, the sword of man incessantly rages along with 
calamities wherewith we are smitten from above. Thus we see before our eyes the evils which we long ago 
beard should come upon the world, and the very regions of the earth have become as pages of books to 
us. In the passing away, then, of all things, we ought to take thought how that all that we have loved was 
nothing. View, therefore, with anxious heart the approaching day of the eternal judge, and by repenting 
anticipate its terrors. Wash away with tears the status of all your transgressions. Allay by temporal 
lamentation the wrath that hangs over you eternally. For our loving Creator, when He shall come for 
judgment, will comfort us with all the greater favour as He sees now that we are punishing ourselves for our 
own transgressions. 

We are now sending to you, by the favour of God, John our subdeacon, the bearer of these presents, to this 
end;-that, with the help of Almighty God, he may see to your bishop-elect being consecrated after the 
manner of his predecessor. For, as we demand our rights from others, so we conserve their several rights to 
all. 

EPISTLE XXX. 

TO JOHN, SUBDEACON. 

Gregory to John, &c 

Inasmuch as it is manifest that the Apostolic See is, by the ordering of God, set over all Churches, there is, 
among our manifold cares, especial demand for our attention, when our decision is awaited with a view to 
the consecration of a bishop. Now on the death of Laurentius, bishop of the church of Mediolanum, the 
clergy reported to us that they had unanimously agreed in the election of our son Constantius, their deacon. 
But, their report not having been subscribed, it becomes necessary, that we may omit nothing in the way of 
caution, for thee to proceed to Genua (Genoa), supported by the authority of this order(2). And, inasmuch as 
there are many Milanese at present there under stress of barbarian ferocity, thou must call them together, 
and enquire into their wishes in common. And, if no diversity of opinion separates them from the unanimity of 
the election-that is to say, if thou ascertainest that the desire and consent of all continues in favour of our 

aforesaid son, Constantius,-then thou art to cause him to be consecrated by his own bishops, as ancient 
usage requires, with the assent of our authority, and the help of the Lord; to the end that through the 
observance of such custom both the Apostolic See may retain the power belonging to it, and at the same 
time may not diminish the rights which it has conceded to others. 

EPISTLE XXXI. 

TO ROMANUS. 

Gregory to Romanus, Patrician, and Exarch of Italy. 

We believe that your Excellency is already aware of the death of Laurentius, bishop of the church of 
Mediolanum. And since, so far as we have learnt from the report of the clergy, all have agreed in the 
election of our son Constantius, deacon of the same church, it was necessary for us, for keeping up old 
usage, to send a soldier of our church, to cause him in whose favour he finds the will and consent of all to 
concur unanimously to I be consecrated by his own bishops, as ancient usage requires, though still with our 
assent. Wherefore, greeting you with fatherly affection as in duty bound, we request your Excellency to 
vouchsafe your support, justice approving, to the aforesaid Constantius, whether elected or not, whenever 
need may arise; to the end that this service may both exalt you here before your enemies, and commend 
you beforehand in the future life before God. For he is one of mine, and was once associated with me on 
very intimate terms. And you ought to hold as yours, and to love peculiarly, those whom you know to be 
ours. 

EPISTLE XXXII. 

TO HONORATUS, ARCHDEACON. 

Gregory to Honoratus, Archdeacon of Salona(3). 

The mandates of ourselves and of our predecessor had reached thy Love not long ago, in which thou wert 
acquitted of the charges calumniously brought against thee; and we ordered thee to be reinstated without 
any dispute in the order of thy rank. But, inasmuch as again after no great lapse of time, thou camestto the 
city of Rome complaining of some improper proceedings among you concerning the alienation of sacred 
vessels, and as, while we had persons with us here who might have replied to thy objections, Natalis, thy 
bishop, departed this life, we have judged it necessary to confirm further by this present letter those same 
mandates, both our predecessor's and our own, which (as has been said) we sent not long ago for thy 
acquittal. Wherefore, acquitting thee fully of all the charges brought against thee, we will that thou continue 
without any dispute in the rank of thy order, so that the question raised by the aforesaid man may not on any 
pretext prejudice thee in the least degree. Moreover, as to the heads of thy complaint, we have straitly 
charged Antoninus, subdeacon and rector in your parts of the patrimony of holy Church over which, by 
God's providence, we preside, that, if he should find ecclesiastical persons implicated in them, he decide 
these cases with the utmost strictness and authority. But, in case of the business being with such persons as 
the vigour of ecclesiastical jurisdiction cannot reach, he is to deposit the proofs under each particular head 
among the public acts, and transmit them to us without any delay, that, being accurately informed, we may 
know how, with the help of Christ, to dispose of the matter. 

EPISTLE XXXIII. 

TO DYNAMIUS, PATRICIAN. 

Gregory to Dynamius, Patrician of Gaul. 

He who administers faithfully what is other's shews how well he dispenses what is his own. And this your 
Glory makes manifest to us in that, intent on your annual offering, you have rendered the blessed Peter, 
Prince of the apostles, the fruits of his revenues. In paying him what is his faithfully, you have made these 
gifts to him your own. For indeed it becomes the glorious people of this earth who think of eternal glory so to 
act that in virtue of their excelling in temporal power, they may procure for themselves a reward that is not 
temporal. Accordingly, addressing to you the greeting which we owe, we implore Almighty God both to 
replenish your life with present good, and to extend it to the lofty joys of eternity. For we have received 
through our son Hilarus (al Hilarius) of the aforesaid revenues of our Church four hundred Galilean solidi(4). 
We now send you as the benediction of the blessed apostle Peter a small cross, wherein are inserted 
benefits from his chains(5), which for a time bound his neck: but may they loose yours from sins for ever. 
Moreover in its four parts round about are contained benefits from the gridiron of the blessed Laurence, 

whereon he was burnt, that it, whereon his body was consumed by fire for the truth's sal<e, may inflame your 
soul to the love of the Lord. 

EPISTLE XXXV. 

TO PETER, SUBDEACON. 

Gregory to Peter, subdeacon of Campania(6). 

Our brother and fellow-bishop Paul has often requested us to allow him to return to his own church. And, 
having perceived this to be reasonable, we have thought it needful to accede to his petition. Consequently 
let thy Experience convene the clergy of the Neapolitan church, to the end that they may choose two or three 
of their number, and not omit to send them hither for the election of a bishop. But let them also intimate, in 
their communication to us, that those whom they send represent them all in this election, so that their church 
may have its own bishop validly ordained. For we cannot allow it to be any longer without a ruler of its own. 
Should they perchance try in any way to set aside thy admonition, bring to bear on them the vigour of 
ecclesiastical discipline. For he will be giving proof of his own perverseness, whosoever does not of his 
own accord assent to this proceeding. Moreover, cause to be given to the aforesaid Paul, our brother and 
fellow-bishop, one hundred solidi, and one little orphan boy, to be selected by himself, for his labour in 
behalf of the same church. Further, admonish those who are to come hither as representing all for the 
election of a bishop, to remember that they must bring with them all the episcopal vestments, and also as 
much money as they may foresee to be necessary for him who may be elected bishop to have to his own 
use. But lose no time in despatching those of the clergy who are selected as we have said, that, seeing that 
there are present here divers nobles of the city of Naples, we may treat with them concerning the election of 
a bishop, and take counsel together with the help of the Lord. 

EPISTLE XXXVI. 

TO SABINUS, GUARDIAN (Defensorem). 

Gregory to Sabinus, Guardian of Sardinia. 

Certain serious matters having come to our ears which require canonical correction, we therefore charge thy 

Experience not to neglect to cause Januarius, our brother and fellow-bishop, together with John the notary, 

to appear before us with all speed, all excuses being laid aside, that in his presence what has been 

reported to us may be subjected to a thorough investigation. Further, if the religious women Pompeiana and 

Theodosia, according to their request, should wish to come hither, afford them your succour in all ways, that 

they may be able, through your assistance, to accomplish their desires: but especially be careful by all 

means to bring with you the most eloquent Isidore, as he has requested, that, the merits of his case which he 

is known to have against the Church of Caralis having been fully gone into, he may be able to have it legally 

terminated. 

Furthermore, some personal misdemeanours having been reported to us of the presbyter Epiphanius, it is 

necessary for you to investigate everything diligently, and to make haste to bring at the same time with you 

the women with whom he is said to have sinned, or others whom you suppose to know anything about the 

matter; that so the truth may be clearly laid open to the rigour of ecclesiastical discipline. 

Now you will take care to accomplish all these things so efficiently as to lay yourself open to no blame for 

negligence, knowing that it will be entirely at your peril if this our order should in any way be slackly 

executed. 

EPISTLE XXXVIII. 

TO LIBERTINUS, PRAEFECT(7). 

Gregory to Libertinus, Praefect of Sicily. 

From the very beginning of your administration God has willed you to go forth to vindicate His cause, and of 
His mercy has reserved for you this reward, with praise attending it. For it is reported that one Nasas, a most 
wicked Jew, has with a temerity that calls for punishment erected an altar under the name of the blessed 
Ellas, and by sacrilegious seduction has enticed many Christians to worship there; nay, has also, it is said, 
acquired Christian slaves, and devoted them to his own service and profit. Whilst, then, he ought to have 
been most severely punished for such great crimes, the glorious Justinus(8), soothed (as has been written 
to us) by the charm of avarice, put off avenging the injury done to God. But let your Glory institute a strict 
examination into all these things, and, if it should be found manifest that such things have been done, make 

haste to visit tiiem most strictly and corporally on this wicked Jew, in such sort that you may thereby both 
conciliate the favour of God to yourself, and shew yourself by this example, to your own reward, a model to 
posterity. Moreover, set at liberty, without any equivocation, according to the injunctions of the laws(9), 
whatever Christian slaves it shall appear that he has acquired; lest (which God forbid) the Christian religion 
should be polluted by being subjected to Jews. Do you therefore with all speed correct these things most 
strictly, that not only may we give thanks to you for this discipline, but also bear testimony to your goodness 
in case of need. 

EPISTLE XLV. 

TO ANDREW, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Andrew, Bishop of Tarentum [Tarante, in Calabria]. 

A man may look without alarm to the tribunal of the eternal Judge, if only, conscious of his own guilt, he 
strives to pacify Him by befitting penitence. Now that thou hadst a concubine we find to be manifestly true, 
with regard to whom also an adverse suspicion has arisen in the minds of some. But, since in doubtful 
cases judgment ought not to be absolute, we have chosen to leave the matter to thine own conscience. If, 
then, after being constituted in sacred orders thou rememberest having been defiled by carnal intercourse, 
thou must resign the dignity of priesthood, nor presume by any means to approach its ministration, knowing 
that thou wilt administer it to the peril of thy soul, and without doubt have to render an account to our God, if, 
being conscious of this crime, thou shouldest desire to continue in the order wherein thou art, concealing the 
truth. Wherefore we again exhort thee that, if thou knowest thyself to have been deceived by the craft of the 
ancient foe, thou hasten to overcome him, while thou mayest, by adequate penitence, lest, as we hope may 
not be, thou be reckoned as partner with him in the day of judgment. If, however, thou art not conscious of this 
guilt, thou must needs continue in the order wherein thou art. 

Furthermore, since, against due order, thou didst doom a woman on the Church-roll(l) to be cruelly beaten 
with cudgels, although we do not think that she died eight months afterwards, yet. because thou hast had no 
regard to thy order, we therefore sentence thee to abstain for two months from the administration of mass. 
Meanwhile, being suspended from thy office, it will become thee to weep for what thou hast done. For it is 
very right that, now that the examples of praiseworthy priests do not provoke thee to the tranquil rectitude 
befitting thy position, at any rate the medicine of correction should compel thee. 

EPISTLE XLVI. 

TO JOHN, BISHOP. 

Gregory to John, Bishop of Calliopolis [Gallipoli, in Calabria]. 

From the reports sent to us by thy Fraternity it appears that Andrew, our brother and fellow-bishop, 

undoubtedly had a concubine. But, since it is uncertain whether he has touched her while constituted in 

sacred orders, it is necessary that thou shouldest warn him with earnest exhortation that, if he knows himself 

to have had intercourse with her while in sacred orders, he should retire from the office which he holds, and 

minister no longer. And if, though conscious of having done this thing, he should conceal his sin and 

presume to minister, let him know that peril hangs over his soul in the divine judgment. 

As to the woman on the Church-roll, whom he caused to be chastised with cudgels, though we do not 

believe that she died eight months afterwards, yet, since he caused her to be thus punished inconsistently 

with his sacred calling, do thou suspend him for two months from the solemnization of mass, that at any rate 

this disgrace may teach him how to behave himself in future. 

Moreover, the clergy of the aforesaid bishop, in a petition presented to us, which is subjoined below, allege 

that they endure much ill-treatment from him. Wherefore let thy Fraternity take care to ascertain all these 

things accurately, and so to correct and arrange them in a reasonable way that they may be under no 

necessity hereafter of resorting hither on account of this matter. In the month of July, indiction 11. 

EPISTLE XLVII. 

TO THE CLERGY OF THE CHURCH OF SAL0NA(2). 

Gregory to the clergy, &c. 

Having read your letter, beloved, we learn that you have made choice of Honoratus your archdeacon; and 
know ye that it is altogether pleasing to us that you have chosen for the order of episcopacy a man tried of 
old and of grave manner of life. We too join with you in approbation of his personal character, inasmuch as it 

is already known to us; and it lias been our own wisii also that he should be ordained as your priest 
according to your desire. For which cause we exhort you to persist in his election without any ambiguity. Nor 
ought any circumstances to disincline you from his person, since, as this laudable choice is now approved, 
so it will impose both a burden on your souls and a stain of unfaithfulness on your reputation, if any one 
should seduce you (which God forbid) to turn aside your love from him. But as to those who are not at one 
with you in this desired election, we have caused them to be admonished by Antoninus our subdeacon, that 
they may be able to agree with you. To him also we have already given our injunctions as to what ought to 
be done with respect to the person of our brother and fellow-bishop Malchus(3). But, inasmuch as we have 
ourselves also written to him, we believe that he will without delay keep himself quiet from disquieting you. If 
by any chance he should in any way whatever neglect to obey, his contumacy will in every way be mulcted 
with the utmost rigour of canonical punishment. 

EPISTLE XLVIII. 

TO COLUMBUS, BISH0P(4). 

Gregory to Columbus, &c. 

Even before receiving thy Fraternity's letter, I knew thee from the report of thy deserved reputation to be a 
good servant of God. And now that I have received it, I understand more fully that what fame had already 
spread abroad was well founded; and I greatly rejoice in thy deserts, in that thou exhibitest manners and 
deeds that testify to a praiseworthy life. Since, then, I feel that these things are conferred on thee by the 
Supernal Majesty, I congratulate thee; and I bless God our Creditor, who denies not the gifts of His mercy to 
His humble servants. On this account I declare it to be true that thy Fraternity so kindles me with the flame of 
charity to love thee, and my spirit is so united to thee, that I both desire to see thee and am also with thee in 
heart, though absent. Thou perceivest in thine own thoughts that this is so. For in truth unity of minds in charity 
has power to unite more than bodily presence can. Furthermore, that with thy whole mind, thy whole heart, thy 
whole soul, thou cleavest and art devoted to the Apostolic See I am now assured, as, indeed before thy 
letter had borne testimony to the fact, I plainly knew. Wherefore, first addressing thee with the greeting of 
charity which is due, I exhort thee not to cease to be mindful of what thou hast promised to the blessed Peter, 
Prince of the apostles. 

Wherefore be thou urgent with the primate of thy synod(5), that boys be in no wise admitted to sacred 
orders, lest they fall by so much the more dangerously as they hasten more speedily to mount to higher 
places. Let there be no venality in ordination: let not the influence or entreaty of any persons obtain anything 
in contravention of these our prohibitions. For without doubt God is offended if any one is promoted to 
sacred orders, not for merit, but by favour (which God forbid) or venality. 

If, then, thou art aware of these things being done, keep not silence, but oppose them urgently; since, if 
perchance thou shouldest neglect them, or conceal them when known of, the chain of sin will bind not those 
alone who do such things, but no light guilt before God will touch thee also in the matter. If, then, anything of 
the kind is committed, it ought to be restrained by canonical punishment, lest so great a wickedness, with sin 
in others, acquire strength from connivance. 

I have, therefore, the sooner given leave of departure to the bearer of these presents, Victorinus, thy 
Fraternity's deacon, whom I think to be thy imitator, and whom I have received with charity; and by him I have 
transmitted to thee for a blessing keys of the blessed Peter, in which something from his chains is included. 
Lastly, with regard to the unity and peace of the council which, under God, you are taking measures to 
assemble, let thy Charity rejoice my mind by informing me of everything particularly. 

EPISTLE XLIX. 

TO ADEODATUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Adeodatus, Primate bishop of the province of Numidia. 

After what manner the charity of affection has bound your Fraternity to usward the tenour of your letters has 
evidently shewn; and they bare afforded us great matter of rejoicing, in that we have found them to be 
composed in a spirit of loving-kindness, and to glow with affection well-pleasing to God. As, then, we have 
briefly said, the epistle which you have addressed to us has so laid open your mind that its author might be 
supposed not to be absent from us at all. For, indeed, persons are not to be accounted absent whose 
feelings are not at variance with mutual charity. And though, as you say in your letter, neither your strength 
nor your age allow you to come to us, that we might be gratified by the bodily presence of your Fraternity, 
yet, seeing that we are one with you and you with us in feeling, we are entirely present one to the other, while 
we see each other in a mind made one through love. Furthermore, greeting your Fraternity with the suitable 

affection of charity, we exiiort you tiiat you study witii all your heart so to acquit yourself wisely in the office of 
primacy which under God you hold, that it may both profit your soul to have attained to this rank, and that you 
may stand out as a good example for imitation to others in the future. 

Be, then, especially careful with regard to ordination; and by no means admit any to aspire to sacred orders 
but such as are somewhat advanced in age and pure in deeds, lest perchance they cease for ever to be 
what they immaturely haste to be. For you must first examine the life and manners of those who are to be 
placed in any sacred order; and, that you may be able to admit such as are worthy to this office, let not the 
influence or the entreaty of any persons whatever inveigle you. But before all things it behoves you to be 
cautious that no venality may have place in ordination, lest (which God forbid) the greater danger hang over 
both the ordained and the ordainers. If ever, then, there is need for such things to be taken in hand, call 
grave and experienced men into your counsels, and consider the matter in common deliberation with them. 
And before all others it is fit that you should in all cases call in Columbus our brother and fellow-bishop. For 
we believe that, if you shall have done what is to be done with his advice, no one will find anything in any 
way to find fault with in you; and know ye that it will be as acceptable to us as if it had been done with our 
advice; inasmuch as his life and manners have in all respects so approved themselves to us that it is 
clearly apparent to all that what is done with his consent will be darkened by no blot of faultiness. But the 
bearer of these presents, Victorians, deacon of our fellow-bishop above-named, has been such a herald of 
your merits as exceedingly to refresh our spirits With regard to your behaviour. And we pray the Almighty 
Lord to cause the good that has been reported of you to shine forth more fully in operation as well-pleasing 
to Him. When, therefore, the council which you are taking measures to assemble has, with the succor of 
God, been brought to a conclusion, rejoice us by telling of its unity and concord, and give us information on 
all points, 

EPISTLE LI. 

TO MAXIMIANUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Maximinianus, Bishop of Syracuse(6). 

My brethren who live with me familiarly urge me by all means to write something briefly about the miracles of 
the Fathers done in Italy, which we have heard of. With this view I am in great need of the assistance of your 
Charity, to mention to me shortly what comes back to your memory, and what you happen to have known. 
For I remember your telling me something, which I have now forgotten, about the lord(7) Abbot Nonnosus, 
who was with the lord(7) Anastasius of Pentomi(8). And therefore this, or anything else, I beg thee to 
communicate to me by letter without delay, if indeed thou art not intending to come to me thyself shortly. 

EPISTLE Llll. 

TO JOHN, BISHOP. 

Gregory to John, Bishop of Constantinople (9). 

Though consideration of the case moves me, yet charity also impels me to write, since I have written once 
and again to my most holy brother the lord John, but have received no letter from him. For some one else, a 
secular person, addressed me under his name; seeing that, if those were really his letters, I have not been 
vigilant, having believed of him something far different from what I have found. For I had written about the 
case of the most reverend presbyter John, and about the questions of the monks of Isauria, one of whom, 
being in priest's orders, has been beaten with clubs in your church; and thy most holy Fraternity (as appears 
from the signature of the letter) has written back to me professing ignorance of what I wrote about. At this 
reply I was exceedingly astonished, revolving within myself in silence, if he speaks the truth, what can be 
worse than that such things should be done against the servants of God, and even he who was close at 
hand should not know? For what, excuse can a shepherd have if the wolf devours the sheep and the 
shepherd knows it not? But, if your Holiness knew both what I referred to in my letter and what had been 
done, whether against John the presbyter or against Athanasius, monk of Isauria and presbyter, and wrote 
to me, I know not; what can I reply to this, since the Truth says through His Scripture, The mouth that lieth 
slayeth the saul (Wisd. i. 11)? I demand of thee, most holy brother; has that so great abstinence of thine 
come to this, that by denial thou wouldest hide from thy brother what thou knewest to have been done? Had 
it not been better that flesh should go into that mouth for food, than that falsehood should come out of it for 
deceiving a neighbour; especially when the Truth says. Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man; 
but that which cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a man (Matth. xv. 11)? But far be it from me to believe 
anything of the kind of your most holy heart. Those letters were headed with your name, but I do not think 
they were yours. I had written to the most blessed lord John; but I believe that that familiar of yours has 

replied, -that youngster, who as yet has learnt nothing about God; who knows not the bowels of charity; who 
in his wicked doings is accused by all; who daily lays snares against the deaths of divers people by means 
of concealed wills; who neither fears God nor regards men. Believe me, most holy brother, you must first 
correct this man, that from the example of those who are near to you those who are not near may be better 
amended. Do not give ear to his tongue: he ought to be directed after the counsel of your holiness; not your 
holiness swayed by his words. For, if you listen to him, I know that you cannot have peace with your brethren. 
For I, as my conscience bears me witness, wish to quarrel with no man; and with all my power I avoid it. And, 
though I desire exceedingly to be at peace with all mankind, it is especially so with you, whom I exceedingly 
love, if only you are yourself the person whom I knew. For, if you do not observe the canous, and wish to tear 
to pieces the statutes of the Fathers, I know not who you are. So act, then, most holy and most dear brother, 
that we may mutually recognize each other, lest, if the ancient foe should move us two to take offence, he 
slay many through his most atrocious victory. As for me, to shew that I seek to do nothing in a haughty spirit, 
if that youngster of whom I have before spoken did not hold the topmost place of evil doing with thy 
Fraternity, I could meanwhile have passed over in silence what is ready to my hand from the canons, and 
have sent back to thee with confidence the persons who came to me at the first, knowing that your Holiness 
would receive them with charity. But even now I say; Either receive these same persons, restoring them to 
their orders, and leaving them in quiet; or, if perchance thou art unwilling to do this, observe in their case the 
statutes of the Fathers and the definitions of the canons, putting aside all altercation with me. But, if thou 
shouldest do neither, we indeed are unwilling to bring on a quarrel, but still do not shun one if it comes from 
your side. Moreover your Fraternity knows well what the canons say about bishops who desire to inspire 
fear by blows. For we have been made shepherds, not persecutors. And the excellent preacher says. 
Argue, beseech, rebuke, with all longsuffering and doctrine (2 Tim. iv. 2). But new and unheard of is this 
preaching, which exacts faith by blows. But I need not speak at length by letter about these things, since I 
have sent my most beloved son, the deacon Sabinianus, as my representative in ecclesiastical matters, to 
the threshold of our lords; and he will speak with you about everything more particularly. Unless you are 
disposed to wrangle with us, you will find him prepared for all that is just. Him I commend to your 
Blessedness, that he at least may find that lord John whom I knew in the royal city. 

EPISTLE LVI. 

TO JOHN, BISHOP. 

Gregory to John, Bishop of Ravenna(8). 

It is not long since certain things had been told us about thy Fraternity concerning which we remember 
having declared ourselves in full, when Castorius, notary of the holy church over which we preside, went into 
your parts. For it had come to our ears that some things were being done in your church contrary to custom 
and to the way of humility, which alone, as you well know, exalts the priestly office. Now, if your Wisdom had 
received our admonitions kindly or with episcopal seriousness, you ought not to have been incensed by 
them, but have corrected these same things with thanks to us. For it is contrary to ecclesiastical use, if even 
unjust correction (the which be far from us) is not most patiently borne. 

But your Fraternity has been too much moved; and when, in the swelling of thy heart, as if to justify thyself, 
thou wrotest that thou didst not use the pallium except after the sons of the Church had been dismissed from 
the sacristy(2), and at the time of mass, and in solemn litanies, thou madest acknowledgment in words with 
most manifest truth of having usurped something contrary to the usage of the Church in general. For how can 
it be that at a time of ashes and sackcloth, through the streets among the noises of the people thou couldest 
do lawfully what thou hast disclaimed the doing of as being unlawful in the assembly of the poor and nobles, 
and in the sacristy of the Church? Yet this, dearest brother, is not, we think, unknown to thee; that it has hardly 
ever been heard of any metropolitan in any parts of the world that he has claimed to himself the use of the 
pallium except at the time of mass. And that you knew well this custom of the Church in general you have 
shewn most plainly by your epistles, in which you have sent to us appended the precept of our predecessor 
John of blessed memory, to the effect that all the customs conceded in the way of privilege to you and your 
church by our predecessors should be retained. You acknowledge, then, that the custom of the Church in 
general is different, seeing that you claim the right of doing what you do on the score of privilege. Thus, as 
we think, we can have no remaining doubtfulness in this matter. For either the usage of all metropolitans 
should be observed also by thy Fraternity, or, if thou sayest that something has been specially conceded to 
thy church, it is for your side to shew the precept of former pontiffs of the Roman City wherein these things 
have been conceded to the Church of Ravenna. But, if this is not shewn, it remains, seeing that you establish 
your claim to do such things on the score neither of general custom nor of privilege, that you prove yourself 
to have usurped in what you have done. And what shall we say to the future judge, most beloved brother, if 
we defend the use of that heavy yoke and chain on our neck with a view, I do not say to ecclesiastical, but to 

a certain secular dignity; judging ourselves to be lowered if we are without so great a weight even for a short 
space of time? We desire to be adorned with the pallium, being, it may be, unadorned in character; whereas 
nothing shines more splendidly on a bishop's neck than humility. 

It is therefore the duty of thy Fraternity, if thou art firmly determined to defend thy honours with any kind of 
arguments, either to follow the use of the generality without written authority, or to defend thyself under 
privileges shewn in writing. Or, if lastly thou doest neither, we will not have thee set an example of 
presumption of this sort to other metropolitans. But, lest thou shouldest perchance think that we, in thus 
writing to you, have neglected what belongs to fraternal charity, know ye that careful search has been made 
in our archives for the privileges of thy Church. And indeed some things have been found, sufficient to 
obviate entirely the aims of thy Fraternity, but nothing to support the contentions of your Church on the points 
in question. For even concerning the very custom of thy Church which thou allegest against us, which custom 
we wrote before should be proved on your side, we would have you know that we have already taken 
thought sufficiently, having questioned our sons, Peter the deacon and Gaudiosusthe primicerius(3), and 
also Michael the guardian (defensorem) of our see, or others who on various commissions have been sent 
by our predecessors to Ravenna; and they have most positively denied that thou hast done these things in 
their presence. It is therefore apparent that what was done in secret must have been an unlawful usurpation. 
Hence what has been latently introduced can have no firm ground to justify its continuance. What things, 
then, thou or thy predecessors have presumed to do super-fluously do thou, having regard to charity, and 
with brotherly kindness, study to correct. To no degree attempt-l do not say of thine own accord, but after 
the fashion set by others, even thy predecessors,-to deviate from the rule of humility. For, to sum up shortly 
what I have said above, I admonish thee to this effect; that unless thou canst shew that this has been allowed 
thee by my predecessors in the way of privilege, thou presume not any more to use the pallium in the 
streets, lest thou come not to have even for mass what thou audaciously usurpest even in the streets. But as 
to thy sitting in the sacristy, and receiving the sons of the Church with the pallium on (which thing thy Fraternity 
has both done and disclaimed), we now for the present make no complaint; since, following the decision of 
synods, we refuse to punish minor faults, which are denied. Yet we know this to have been done once and 
again, and we prohibit its being done any more. But let thy Fraternity take careful heed, lest presumption 
which in its commencement is pardoned be more severely visited if it proceeds further. 
Furthermore, you have complained that certain of the sacerdotal order in the city of Ravenna are involved in 
serious criminal charges. Their case we desire thee either to examine on the spot, or to send them hither 
(unless, indeed, difficulty of proof owing to the distance of the places stands in the way of this), that the case 
may be examined here But if, relying on the patronage of great people, which we do not believe, they 
should scorn to submit to thy judgment or to come to us, and should refuse contumaciously to answer to the 
charges made against them, we desire that after thy second and third admonition, thou interdict them from 
the ministry of the sacred office, and report to us in writing of their contumacy, that we may deliberate how 
thou oughtest to make a thorough enquiry into their doings, and correct them according to canonical 
definitions. Let, therefore, thy Fraternity know tint we are most fully absolved from responsibility in this case, 
seeing that we have committed to you a thorough investigation of the matter; and that, if all their sins should 
pass unpunished, the whole weight of this enquiry redounds to the peril of thy soul. And know, beloved, that 
thou wilt have no excuse at the future judgment, if thou dost not correct the excesses of thy clergy with the 
utmost severity of canonical strictness, and if thou allowest any against whom such excesses shall have 
been proved to profane sacred orders any longer. 

Further, what you have written in defence of the use of napkins by your clergy is strenuously opposed by our 
own clergy, who say that this has never been granted to any other Church whatever, and that neither have 
the clergy of Ravenna, either there or in the Roman city, presumed, to their knowledge, in any such way, nor, 
if it has been attempted in the way of furtive usurpation, does it form a precedent. But, even though there had 
been such presumption in any church whatever, they assert that it ought to be corrected, not being by grant 
of the Roman pontiff, but merely a surreptitious presumption. But we, to save the honour of thy Fraternity, 
though against the wish of our aforesaid clergy, still allow the use of napkins to your first deacons (whose 
former use of them has been testified to us by some), but only when in attendance upon thee. The use of 
them, at any other time, or by any other persons, we most strictly prohibit. 

EPISTLE LVII. 

From John, Bishop of Ravenna to Pope Gregory(4). 

My most reverend fellow-servant Castorius, notary of your Apostolical See, has delivered to me my lord's 

epistle, compounded of honey and of venom; which has yet so infixed its stings as still to leave place for 

healing appliances. For my lord, while he reproves pride and speaks of divine judgment following it, in a 

certain way professes himself with reason to be mild and placid. 

You have alleged, then, that I, ambitious of novelty, have usurped the use of the pallium beyond what had 

been indulged to my predecessors. This let not the conscience of my own lord, which is governed by the 
divine right hand, in any way allow itself to believe; nor let him open his most sacred ears to the uncertainty 
of common report. First, because I, though a sinner, still know how grave a thing it is to transgress the limits 
assigned to us by the Fathers, and that all elation leads to nothing but a fall. For, if our ancestors did not 
tolerate pride in kings, how much more is it not to be endured in priests! Then, I remember how I was 
nourished in the lap and in the bosom of your most holy Roman Church, and therein by the aid of God 
advanced. And how should I be so daring as to presume to oppose that most holy see, which transmits its 
laws to the universal Church, for maintaining whose authority, as God knows, I have seriously excited the 
ill-will of many enemies against myself? But let not my most blessed lord suppose that I have attempted 
anything contrary to ancient custom, as is attested by many and nearly all the citizens of this city, and as the 
above-written most reverend notary, even though he had taken no part in the proceedings, might have 
testified, inasmuch as it was not till the sons of the Church were descending from the sacristy(5), and the 
deacons were coming in for proceeding immediately [to the altar] that the first deacon has been 
accustomed to invest the bishop of the Church of Ravenna with the pallium, which he has also been 
accustomed in like manner to use in solemn litanies. 

Wherefore let no one endeavour to insinuate anything against me to my lord, since if any one wishes to do 
so, he cannot prove that any novelty has been introduced by me. For in what manner I have obeyed your 
commands and served your interests when cause required, may Almighty God make manifest to your most 
sincere heart: and I attribute it to my sins that after so many labours and difficulties which I endure within and 
without I should deserve to experience such a change. But again this among other things consoles me, that 
most holy fathers sometimes chastise their sons for the purpose only of advancing them the more, and that, 
after this devotion and satisfaction, you will not only conserve to the holy Church of Ravenna her ancient 
privileges, but even confer greater ones in your own times. 

For with respect to the napkins, the use of which by my presbyters and deacons your Apostleship alleges to 
be a presumption, I confess in truth that it irks me to say anything on the subject, since the truth by itself, 
which alone prevails with my lord, is sufficient. For this being allowed to the smaller churches constituted 
around the city, the apostleship of my lord will also be able in all ways to find, if he deigns to enquire of the 
venerable clergy of his own first Apostolical See, that as often as priests or levites of the Church of Ravenna 
have come to Rome for the ordination of bishops or for business, they all have proceeded(6) with napkins 
before the eyes of your most holy predecessors without any blame. Wherefore also at the time when I, 
sinner as I am, was ordained there by your predecessor, all my presbyters and deacons used them while 
proceeding(6) in attendance on the lord pope. And since our God in His providence has placed all things in 
your hand and most pure conscience, I adjure you by the very Apostolical See, which you formerly adorned 
by your character, and now govern with due dignity, that you in no respect diminish on account of my 
deservings the privileges of the Church of Ravenna, which is intimately yours; but, even according to the 
voice of prophecy, let it be laid upon me and upon my father's house, according to its deserving. I have, 
therefore, for your greater satisfaction, subjoined all the privileges which have been indulged by your 
predecessors to the holy Church of Ravenna, though none the less finding assurance in your venerable 
archives in reference to the times of the consecration of my predecessors. But now whatever, after 
ascertaining the truth, you may command to be done, is in God's power and yours; since I, desiring to obey 
the commands of my lord's Apostleship, have taken care, notwithstanding ancient custom, to abstain till I 
receive further orders. 

EPISTLE LIX. 

TO SECUNDINUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Secundinus, Bishop of Tauromenium. [In Sicily.] 

Some time ago we ordered that the baptistery(7) should be removed from the monastery of Saint Andrew, 
which is above Mascalae, because of inconvenience to the monks, and that an altar should be erected in 
the place where the fonts now are. But the carrying out of this order has been put off so far. We therefore 
admonish thy Fraternity that thou interpose no further delay after receiving this our letter, but that the fonts 
themselves be filled up(8), and an altar at once erected there for celebration of the sacred mysteries; to the 
end that the aforesaid monks may be at liberty to celebrate more securely the work of God, and that our 
mind be not provoked against thy Fraternity for negligence. 

EPISTLE LX. 

TO ITALICA, PATRICIAN(9). 

Gregory to Italics, &c. 

We have received your letter, which is full of sweetness, and rejoice to hear that your Excellency is well. 
Such is the sincerity of our own mind with regard to it that paternal affection does not allow us to suspect any 
latent ill-feeling concealed under its calmness. But may Almighty God bring it to pass, that, as we think what 
is good of you, so your mind may respond with good towards us, and that you may exhibit in your deeds the 
sweetness which you express in words. For the most glorious health and beauty on the surface of the body 
profit nothing if there is a hidden sore within. And that discord is the more to be guarded against to which 
exterior peace affords a bodyguard. But as to what your Excellency in your aforesaid epistle takes pains to 
recall to our recollection, remember that you have been told in writing that we would not settle anything with 
you concerning the causes of the poor so as to cause offence, or with public clamour. We remember writing 
to you to this effect, and also know, God helping us how to restrain ourselves with ecclesiastical moderation 
from the wrangling of suits at law, and, according to that apostolical sentence, to endure joyfully the spoiling 
of our goods. But this we suppose you to know; that our silence and patience will not be to the prejudice of 
future pontiffs after me in the affairs of the poor. Wherefore we, in fulfilment of our aforesaid promise, have 
already determined to keep silence on these questions; nor do we desire to mix ourselves personally in 
these transactions, wherein we feel that too little kindness is being shewn. But, lest you should hence 
imagine, glorious daughter, that we still altogether renounce what pertains to concord, we have given 
directions to our son, Cyprianusthe deacon, who is going to Sicily, that, if you arrange about these matters in 
a salutary way, and without sin to your soul, he should settle them with you by our authority, and that we 
should be no further vexed by the business which may thus be brought to a conclusion amicably. Now may 
Almighty God, who well knows how to turn to possibility things altogether impossible, may He inspire you 
both to arrange your affairs with a view to peace, and, for the good of your soul, to consult the benefit of the 
poor of this Church in matters which concern them. 

EPISTLE LXV. 

TO MAURICIUS AUGUSTUS(1). 

Gregory to Mauricius, &c. 

He is guilty before Almighty God who is not pure of offence towards our most serene lords in all he does 
and says. I, however, unworthy servant of your Piety, speak in this my representation neither as a bishop, 
nor as your servant in fight of the republic, but as of private right, since, most serene lord, you have been 
mine since the time when you were not yet lord of all. 

On the arrival here of the most illustrious Longinus, the equerry (stratore), I received the law of my lords, to 
which, being at the time worn out by bodily sickness, I was unable to make any reply. In it the piety of my 
lords has ordained that it shall not be lawful for any one who is engaged in any public administration to enter 
on an ecclesiastical office. And this I greatly commended, knowing by most evident proof that one who is in 
haste to desert a secular condition and enter on an ecclesiastical office is not wishing to relinquish secular 
affairs, but to change them. But, at its being said in the same law that it should not be lawful for him to 
become a monk, I was altogether surprised, seeing that his accounts can be rendered through a 
monastery, and it can be arranged for his debts also to be recovered from the place into which he is 
received. For with whatever devout intention a person may have wished to become a monk, he should first 
restore what he has wrongly gotten, and take thought for his soul all the more truly as he is the more 
disencumbered. It is added in the same law that no one who has been marked on the hand(2) may become 
a monk. This ordinance, I confess to my lords, has alarmed me greatly, since by it the way to heaven is 
dosed against many, and what has been lawful until now is made unlawful. For there are many who are able 
to live a religious life even in a secular condition: but there are very many who cannot in any wise be saved 
with God unless they give up all things. But what am I, in speaking thus to my lords, but dust and a worm? Yet 
still, feeling that this ordinance makes against God, who is the Author of all, I cannot keep silence to my 
lords. For power over all men has been given from heaven to the piety of my lords to this end, that they who 
aspire to what is good may be helped, and that the way to heaven may be more widely open, so that an 
earthly kingdom may wait upon the heavenly kingdom. And lo, it is said in plain words that one who has 
once been marked to serve as an earthly soldier may not, unless he has either completed his service or 
been rejected for weakness of body, serve as the soldier of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
To this, behold, Christ through me the last of His servants and of yours will answer, saying; From a notary I 
made thee a Count of the bodyguard; from Count of the bodyguard I made thee a Caesar; from a Caesar I 
made thee Emperor; and not only so, but also a father of emperors. I have committed my priests into thy 
hand; and dost thou withdraw thy soldiers from my service? Answer thy servant, most pious lord, I beseech 
thee; what wilt thou answer to thy Lord when He comes and thus speaks? 
But peradventure it is believed that no one among them turns monk with a pure motive. I, your unworthy 

servant, know how many soldiers who have become monks in my own days have done miracles, have 
wrought signs and mighty deeds. But by this law it is forbidden that even one of such as these should 
become a monk. 

Let my lord enquire, I beg, what former emperor ever enacted such a law, and consider more thoroughly 
whether it ought to have been enacted. And indeed it is a very serious consideration, that now at this time 
any are forbidden to leave the world; a time when the end of the world is drawing nigh. For lo! there will be no 
delay: the heavens on fire, the earth on fire, the elements blazing, with angels and archangels, thrones and 
dominions, principalities and powers, the tremendous Judge will appear. Should He remit all sins, and say 
only that this law has been promulgate against Himself, what excuse, pray, will there be? Wherefore by the 
same tremendous Judge I beseech you, that all those tears, all those prayers, all those fasts, all those alms 
of my lord, may not on any ground lose their lustre before the eyes of Almighty God: but let your Piety, either 
by interpretation or alteration, modify the force of this law, since the army of my lords against their enemies 
increases the more when the army of God has been increased for prayer. 

I indeed, being subject to your command, have caused this law to be transmitted through various parts of 
the world; and, inasmuch as the law itself is by no means agreeable to Almighty God, lo, I have by this my 
representation declared this to my most serene lords. On both sides, then, I have discharged my duty, 
having both yielded obedience to the Emperor, and not kept silence as to what I feel in behalf of God. 

EPISTLE LXVI. 

TO THEODORUS, PHYSICIAN. 

Gregory to Theodorus, &c. 

What benefits I enjoy from Almighty God and my most serene lord the Emperor my tongue cannot fully 
express. For these benefits what return is it in me to make, but to love their footsteps sincerely? But, on 
account of my sins, by whose suggestion or counsel I know not, in the past year he has promulgate such a 
law in his republic that whoso loves him sincerely must lament exceedingly. I could not reply to this law at the 
time, being sick. But I have just now offered some suggestions to my lord. For he enjoins that it shall be 
lawful for no one to become a monk who has been engaged in any public employment, for no one who is a 
paymaster(3), or who has been marked in the hand, or enrolled among the soldiers, unless perchance his 
military service has been completed. This law, as those say who are acquainted with old laws, Julian was 
the first to promulge, of whom we all know how opposed he was to God. Now if our most serene lord has 
done this thing because perhaps many soldiers were becoming monks, and the army was decreasing, was 
it by the valour of soldiers that Almighty God subjugated to him the empire of the Persians? Was it not only 
that his tears were heard, and that God, by an order which he knew not of, subdued to his empire the empire 
of the Persians? 

Now it seems to me exceedingly hard that he should debar his soldiers from the service of Him who both 
gave him all and granted w him to rule not only over soldiers but even over priests. If his purpose is to save 
propetty from being lost, why might not those same monasteries into which soldiers have been received 
pay their debts, retaining the men only for monastic profession? Since these things grieve me much, I have 
represented the matter to my lord. But let your Glory take a favourable opportunity of offering him my 
representation privately. For I am unwilling that it should be given publicly by my representative 
(responsalis), seeing that you who serve him familiarly can speak more freely and openly of what is for the 
good of his soul, since he is occupied with many things, and it is not easy to find his mind free from greater 
cares. Do thou, then, glorious son, speak for Christ. If thou art heard, it will be to the profit of the soul of thy 
aforesaid lord and of thine own. But if thou art not heard, thou hast profited thine own soul only. 

EPISTLE LXVII. 

TO DOMITIAN, METROPOLITAN (4). 

Gregory to Domitian, &c. 

On receiving the letters of your most sweet Blessedness I greatly rejoiced, since they spoke much to me of 
sacred Scripture. And, finding in them the dainties that I love, I greedily devoured them. Therein also were 
many things intermingled about external and necessary affairs. And you have acted as though preparing a 
banquet for the mind so that the offered dainties might please the more from their diversity. And if indeed 
external affairs, like inferior and ordinary kinds of food, are less savoury, yet they have been treated by you 
so skilfully as to be taken gladly, since even contemptible kinds of food are usually made sweet by the 
sauce of one who cooks well. Now, while the truth of the History is kept to, what I had said some time ago 
about its divine meaning ought not to be rejected. For, although, since you will have it so, its meaning may 

not suit my case, yet, from its very context, wiiat was said as being drawn from it may be iield witiiout 
iiesitation. For iier violator (i.e. Dinaii's) is called the prince of the country (Genes, xxxiv. 2), by whom the 
devil is plainly denoted, seeing that our Redeemer says. Now shall the prince of this world be cast out (John 
xii. 31). And he also seeks her for his wife, because the evil spirit hastens to possess lawfully the soul which 
he has first corrupted by hidden seduction. Wherefore the sons of Jacob, being very wroth, take their 
swords against the whole house of Sichem and his country (Genes, xxxiv. 25), because by all who have zeal 
those also are to be attacked who become abettors of the evil spirit. And they first enjoin on them 
circumcision, and afterwards, while they are sore, slay them. For severe teachers, if they know not how to 
moderate their zeal, though cutting off the bias of corruption by preaching, nevertheless, when delinquents 
already mourn for the evil they had done, are frequently still savage in roughness of discipline, and harder 
than they should be. For those who had already cut off their foreskins ought not to have died, since such as 
lament the sin of lechery, and turn the pleasure of the flesh into sorrow, ought not to experience from their 
teachers roughness of discipline, lest the Redeemer of the human race be Himself loved less, if in His 
behalf the soul is afflicted more than it should be. Hence also to these his sons Jacob says. Ye have 
troubled me, and made me odious to the Canaanites (Ibid. v. 30). For, when teachers still cruelly attack what 
the delinquents already mourn for, the weak mind's very love for its Redeemer grows cold, because it feels 
itself to be afflicted in that wherein of itself it does not spare itself. 

So much therefore I would say in order to shew that the sense which I set forth is not improbable in 
connexion with the context. But what has been inferred from the same passage by your Holiness for my 
comfort I gladly accept, since in the understanding of sacred Scripture whatever is not opposed to a sound 
faith ought not to be rejected. For, even as from the same gold some make necklaces, some rings, and 
some bracelets, for ornament, so from the same knowledge of sacred Scripture different expositors, through 
innumerable ways of understanding it, compose as it were various ornaments, which nevertheless all serve 
for the adornment of the heavenly bride. Further, I rejoice exceedingly that your most sweet Blessedness, 
even though occupied with secular affairs, still brings back its genius vigilantly to the understanding of Holy 
Writ. For so indeed it is needful that, if the former cannot be altogether avoided, the latter should not be 
altogether put aside. But I beseech you by Almighty God, stretch out the hand of prayer to me who am 
labouring in so great billows of tribulation, that by your intercession I may be lifted up to the heights, who am 
pressed down to the depths by the weight of my sins. Moreover, though I grieve that the Emperor of the 
Persians has not been converted, yet I altogether rejoice for that you have preached to him the Christian 
faith; since, though he has not been counted worthy to come to the light, yet your Holiness will have the 
reward of your preaching. For the Ethiopian, too, goes black into the bath, and comes out black; but still the 
keeper of the bath receives his pay. 

Further, of Mauricius you say well, that from the shadow I may know the statue; that is, that in small things I 
may perpend greater things. In this matter, however, we trust him, since oaths and hostages bind his soul to 
us. 

REGISTER OF THE EPISTLES OF SAINT GREGORY 
THE GREAT, BOOK IV 

BOOK IV 

EPISTLE I. 

TO CONSTANTIUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Constantius, Bishop of Mediolanum (Milan). 

On receiving tiie letters of your Fraternity I returned great thanks to Almighty God, that I was counted worthy 
to be refreshed by the celebration of your ordination. Truly that all, by the gift of God, with one accord 
concurred in your election, is a fact which thy Fraternity ought with the utmost consideration to estimate, 
since, after God, you are greatly indebted to those who with so submissive a disposition desired you to be 
preferred before themselves. 

It becomes you, therefore, with priestly benignity to respond to their behaviour, and with kind sympathy to 
attend to their needs. If perchance there are any faults in any of them, rebuke these with well-considered 
reproofs, so that your very priestly indignation be mingled with a savour of sweetness, and that so you may 
be loved by your subjects even when you are greatly feared. Such conduct will also induce great reverence 
for your person in their judgment; since, as hasty and habitual rage is despised, so discriminate indignation 
against faults for the most part becomes the formidable in proportion as it has been slow. 
Further, John our subdeacon, who has returned, has reported many good things of you as to which we 
beseech Almighty God Himself to fulfil what He has begun; to the end that He may shew thee to have 
advanced in good inwardly and outwardly both now among men and hereafter among the angels. 
Moreover, we have sent thee, according to custom, a pallium to be used in the sacred solemnities of mass. 
But I beg you, when you receive it, to vindicate its dignity and its meaning by humility. 

EPISTLE II. 

TO CONSTANTIUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Constantius, Bishop of Mediolanum. 

My most beloved son, the deacon Boniface, has conveyed to me certain private information through thy 
Fraternity's letter; namely that three bishops, having sought out rather than found an occasion, have 
separated themselves from the pious communion of your Fraternity, saying that you have assented to the 
condemnation of the Three Chapters(1), and have given a security(2). And, indeed, whether there has been 
any mention made of the Three Chapters in any word or writing whatever thy Fraternity remembers well; 
although thy Fraternity's predecessor, Laurentius, did send forth a most strict security to the Apostolic See, 
to which most noble men in legitimate number subscribed; among whom I also, at that time holding the 
praetorship of the city, likewise subscribed; since after such a schism had taken place about nothing, it was 
right that the Apostolic See should take heed, with the view of guarding in all respects the unity of the 
Universal Church in the minds of priests. But as to its being said that our daughter. Queen Theodelinda, after 
hearing this news, has withdrawn herself from thy communion, it is for all reasons evident that, though she 
has been seduced to some little extent by the words of bad men, yet, on the arrival of Hippolytus the notary, 
and John the abbot, she will seek in all ways the communion of your Fraternity (3). To her also I have 
addressed a letter(4), which I beg your Fraternity to transmit to her without delay. Further, with regard to the 
bishops who appear to have separated themselves, I have written another letter, which when you have 
caused to be shewn to them, I doubt not that they will repent of the superstition of their pride before thy 
Fraternity. 

Furthermore, you have accurately and briefly informed me of what has been done, whether by King Ago(5) 
or by the Kings of the Franks. I beg your Fraternity to make known to me in all ways what you have so far 
ascertained. But, if you should see that Ago, King of the Lombards, is doing nothing with the Patrician(6), 
promise him on our part that I am prepared to give attenflon to his case, if he should be willing to arrange 
anything with the republic advantageously. 

EPISTLE III. 

TO CONSTANTIUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Constantius, Bishop of Mediolanum. 

It has come to my knowledge that certain bishops of your diocese, seeking out rather than finding an 
occasion, have attempted to sever themselves from the unity of your Fraternity, saying that thou hadst given 
a security(7) at the Roman city for thy condemnation of the three Chapters. And the fact is that they say this 
because they do not know how I am accustomed to trust thy Fraternity even without security. For if there had 
been need for anything of the kind, your mere word of mouth could have been trusted. I, however, do not 
recollect any mention between us of the three Chapters either in word or in writing. But as for them, if they 
soon return from their error, they should be spared, because, according to the saying of the Apostle Paul, 
They understand neither what they say nor where of they affirm (1 Tim. i. 7). For we, truth guiding us and our 
conscience bearing witness, declare that we keep the faith of the holy synod of Chalcedon in all respects 
inviolate, and venture not to add anything to, or to subtract anything from, its definition(8). But, if any one 
would fain take upon himself to think anything, either more or less, contrary to it, and to the faith of this same 
synod, we anathematize him without any hesitation, and decree him to be alien from the bosom of Mother 
Church. Any one, therefore, whom this my confession does not bring to a right mind, no longer loves the 
synod of Chalcedon, but hates the bosom of Mother Church. If then those who appear to have been thus 
dating have presumed thus to speak in zeal of soul, it remains for them, having received this satisfaction, to 
return to the unity of thy Fraternity, and not divide themselves from the body of Christ, which is the holy 
universal Church. 

EPISTLE IV. 

TO QUEEN THEODELINDA. 

Gregory to Theodelinda, Queen of the Lombards(9). 

It has come to our knowledge by the report of certain persons that your Glory has been led on by some 
bishops even to such an offence against holy Church as to withdraw yourself from the communion of 
Catholic unanimity. Now the more we sincerely love you, the more seriously are we distressed about you, 
that you believe unskilled and foolish men, who not only do not know what they talk about, but can hardly 
understand what they have heard. 

For they say that in the times of Justinian of pious memory, some things were ordained contrary to the 
council of Chalcedon; and, while they neither read themselves nor believe those who do, they remain in the 
same error which they themselves reigned to themselves concerning us. For we, our conscience bearing 
witness, declare that nothing was altered, nothing violated, with respect to the faith of this same holy council 
of Chalcedon; but that whatever was done in the times of the aforesaid Justinian was so done that the faith of 
the council of Chalcedon should in no respect be disturbed. Further, if any one presumes to speak or think 
anything contrary to the faith of the said synod, we detest his opinion, with interposition of anathema. Since 
then you know the integrity of our faith under the attestation of our conscience, it remains that you should 
never separate yourself from the communion of the Catholic Church, lest all those tears of yours, and all 
those good works should come to nothing, if they are found alien from the true faith. It therefore becomes 
your Glory to send a communication with all speed to my most reverend brother and fellow-bishop 
Constantius, of whose faith, as well as his life, I have long been well assured, and to signify by your letters 
addressed to him how kindly you have accepted his ordination, and that you are in no way separated from 
the communion of his Church; although I think that what I say on this subject is superfluous: for, though there 
has been some degree of doubtfulness in your mind, I think that it has been removed from your heart on the 
arrival of my son John the abbot, and Hippolytus the notary. 

EPISTLE V. 

TO BONIFACE, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Boniface, Bishop of Regium (Reii). 

It is a shame for priests to be admonished about matters of divine worship. For they are then to their 
disgrace required to do what they ought themselves to require to be done. Yet lest, as I do not suppose, thy 
Fraternity should neglect in any respect the things that pertain to the work of God, we have thought fit to 
exhort thee specially on this very head. We therefore admonish thee that the clergy of the city of Regium be 
to no extent released by the indulgence of thy Fraternity in duties demanded by their office. But in the things 

that pertain to God let them be most instantly and most eamestly compelled. We desire thee also to study 
the reputation of the aforesaid clergy, that nothing bad, nothing that at all contravenes ecclesiastical 
discipline, be heard of them; seeing that it is to its adornment, not to foulness of deeds, that their office 
appertains. Further, we decree that what we determined in the case of the Sicilians be observed by thy 
subdeacons(l); nor mayest thou suffer this our decision to be infringed by the contumacy or temerity of any 
one whatever; that so, as we believe will be the case, all that has been said above being most strictly kept 
in force by thee, thou mayest neither prove a transgressor of our admonition, nor be accused as guilty of 
remissness in the order of pastoral rule which has been committed to thee. 

EPISTLE VI. 

TO CYPRIAN, DEACON. 

Gregory to Cyprian, Deacon and Rector of Sicily. 

It has been reported to us that a native of the province of Lucania, Petronilla by name, was converted 
through the exhortation of the bishop Agnellus, and that all her property, though she had it in her own power, 
she nevertheless bestowed on the monastery which she entered even by a special deed of gift: also that 
the aforesaid bishop died leaving half of his substance to one Agnellus, his son, who is said to be a notary 
of our Church, and half to the said monastery. But, when they had fled for refuge to Sicily because of the 
calamity impending on Italy, the above-named Agnellus is said to have corrupted her morals and defiled 
her, and, finding her with child, to have seduced her from the monastery, and to have taken away with her all 
her be longings, both those that had been her own and such as she might have had given her by his own 
father, and that, after perpetrating such and so great a crime, he claims these things as his own. We 
therefore exhort thy Love to cause the aforesaid man, and the above-named woman, to be summarily 
brought before thee, and to institute a most thorough enquiry into the case. And, if thou shouldest find it to be 
as reported to us, determine an affair defiled by so many iniquities with the utmost severity of expurgation; to 
the end that both strict retribution may overtake the above-named man, who has regarded neither his own 
nor her condition, and that, she having been first punished and consigned to a monastery under penance, 
all the property that had been taken away from the oft above-named place, with all its fruits and accessions, 
may be restored. 

EPISTLE VII. 

TO GENNADIUS, PATRICIAN. 

Gregory to Gennadius, Patrician and Exarch of Africa. 

We are well assured that the mind of your religious Excellency is inflamed with zeal of divine love against 
those things especially which are done in unseemly wise in the churches. We therefore the more gladly 
impose on you the correction of faults in ecclesiastical cases as we have confldence in the bent of your 
pious disposition. Be it known, then, to your Excellence that it has been reported to us by some who have 
come to us from the African parts that many things are being committed in the council of Numidia contrary to 
the way of the Fathers and the ordinances of the canons. And, being unable to bear any longer the frequent 
complaints that have reached us about such things, we committed them to be enquired into to our brother 
and fellow-bishop Columbus(3), of whose gravity his very reputation, which is spread abroad, now allows us 
not to doubt. Wherefore, greeflng you with fatherly affection, we exhort your Excellence that in all things 
pertaining to ecclesiasflcal discipline you should lend him the support of your assistance, lest, if what is 
done amiss should not be enquired into anfl visited, it should grow with greater license into future excesses 
through precedent of long continuance. Know moreover, most excellent son, that if you seek victories, and 
are dealing for the security of the province committed to you, nothing will avail you more for this end than 
being zealous in restraining as far as possible the lives of priests and the intestine wars of Churches. 

EPISTLE VIM. 

TO JANUARIUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Januarius, Bishop of Caralis (Cagliari). 

We think indeed that thy position may in itself be enough to compel thee to be instant in the fulfilment of 
pious duties. But, lest remissness of any kind should intervene to abate thy zeal, we have thought it right to 
exhort thee especially with regard to them. Now it has come to our knowledge that your Stephen, when 
departing this life, by his last will and testament directed a monastery to be founded. But it is said that his 

desire is so far un-accomplislied owing to tiie delay of tiie iionourable lady Theodosia, his heiress. 
Wherefore we exhort thy Fraternity to pay the utmost attention to this matter, and admonish the 
above-named lady, to the end that within a year's space she may establish a monastery as has been 
directed, and construct everything without dispute according to the will of the departed. But if she should put 
off the completion of the design out of negligence or artfulness (as, for instance, if she is unable to found it in 
the place that had been appointed, and it is thought fit that it be placed elsewhere, and the matter is 
neglected through the intervening delay), then we desire that it be built by the diligence of thy Fraternity, and 
that, all things being set in order, the effects and revenues that have been left be appropriated by thee to this 
venerable place. For so thou wilt both escape condemnation for remissness before the awful Judge, and, in 
accordance with our most religious laws, wilt be accomplishing with episcopal zeal the pious wishes of the 
departed, which had been disregarded(4). 

EPISTLE IX. 

TO JANUARIUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Januarius, Bishop of Caralis (Cagliari). 

Pastoral zeal ought indeed in itself to have sufficiently instigated thee, even without oar aid, to protect 
profitably and providently the flock of which thou hast taken charge, and to preserve it with diligent 
circumspection from the cunning devices of enemies. But, since we have found that thy Charity needs also 
the written word of our authority for the aug mentation of thy firmness, it is necessary for us, by the exhortation 
of brotherly love, to strengthen thy faltering disposition towards the earnestness of religious activity. 
Now it has come to our knowledge that thou art remiss in thy guardianship of the monasteries of the 
handmaidens of God situated in Sardinia; and, though it had been prudently arranged by thy predecessors 
that certain approved men of the clergy should have the charge of attending to their needs, this has now 
been so entirely neglected that women specially dedicated to God are compelled to go in person among 
public functionaries about tributes and other liabilities, and are under the necessity of running to and fro 
through villages and farms for making up their taxes, and of mixing themselves unsuitably in business which 
belongs to men. This evil let thy Fraternity remove by an easy correction; that is, by carefully deputing one 
man of approved life and manners, and o such age and position as to give rise to no evil suspicion of him, 
who may, with the fear of God, so assist the inmates of these monasteries that they may no longer be 
allowed to wander, against rule, for any cause whatever, private or public, beyond their venerable precincts; 
but that whatever has to be done in their behalf may be transacted reasonably by him whom you shall 
depute. But let the nuns themselves, rendering praises to God and confining themselves to their 
monasteries, no longer suggest any evil suspicion to the minds of the faithful. But if any one of them, either 
through former license, or through an evil custom of impunity, has been seduced, or should in future be led, 
into the gulph of adulterous lapse, we will that, after enduring the severity of adequate punishment, she be 
consigned for penance to some other stricter monastery of virgins, that she may there give herself to 
prayers and fastings, and profit herself by penitence, and afford an example of the more rigorous kind of 
discipline, such as may inspire fear in others. Further, let any one who may be detected in any iniquity with 
women of this class be deprived of communion, if he be a layman; but, if he be a cleric, let him also be 
removed from his office, and thrust into a monastery for his ever to be deplored excesses. 
We also desire thee to hold councils of bishops twice in the year, as is said to have been the custom of thy 
province, as well as being ordered by the authority of the sacred canons; that, if any among them be of 
moral character inconsistent with his profession, he may be convicted by the friendly rebuke of his brethren, 
and also that measures may be taken with paternal circumspection for the security of the flock committed to 
him, and for the well-being of souls. It has come to our knowledge also that male and female slaves of Jews, 
who have fled for refuge to the Church on account of their faith, are either restored to their unbelieving 
masters, or paid for according to their value in lieu of being restored. We exhort therefore that thou by no 
means allow so bad a custom to continue; but that whosoever being a slave to Jews, shall have fled for 
refuge to venerable places, thou suffer him not in any degree to sustain prejudice. But, whether he had been 
a Christian before, or been bapflzed now, let him be supported in his claim for freedom, without any loss to 
the poor, by the patronage of ecclesiasflcal compassion. 

Let not bishops presume to sign baptized infants a second time on the forehead with chrism; but let the 
presbyters anoint those who are to be bapflzed on the breast, that the bishops may afterwards anoint them 
on the forehead(5). 

With regard also to founding monasteries, which divers persons have ordered to be built, if thou perceivest 
that any persons to whom the charge has been assigned put it off on unjust pretexts, we desire thee to insist 
sagaciously according to what the laws enjoin, lest (as God forbid should be the case) the pious retenflons 
of the departed should be frustrated through thy neglect. Further, as to the monastery which Peter is said to 

have formerly ordered to be constructed in his house, we have seen fit that thy Fraternity should make 
accurate enquiry into the amount of the revenues there. And in case of there being a suitable provision, 
when all diminutions of the property and what is said to have been dispersed have been recovered, let the 
monastery with all diligence and without any delay be founded. But, if the means are insufficient or 
detrimental(6), we desire thee, after closely investigating everything as has been commanded, to send a 
report to us, that we may know how to deliberate with the Lord's help with regard to its construction. Let, then, 
thy Fraternity give wise attention to all the points above referred to, so as neither to be found to have 
transgressed the tenour of our admonitions nor to stand liable to divine judgment for too little zeal in thy 
pastoral office. 

EPISTLE X. 

TO ALL THE BISHOPS OF DALMATIA. 

Gregory to all the bishops through Dalmatia(7). 

It behoved your Fraternity, having the eyes of the flesh closed out of regard to Divine judgment, to have 
omitted nothing that appertains to God and to a right inclination of mind, nor to have preferred the 
countenance of any man whatever to the uprightness of justice. But now that your manners have been so 
perverted by secular concerns, that, forgetting the whole path of the sacerdotal dignity that is yours, and all 
sense of heavenly fear, you study to accomplish what may please yourselves and not God, we have held it 
necessary to send you these specially strict written orders, whereby, with the authority of the blessed Peter, 
Prince of the apostles, we enjoin that you presume not to lay hands on any one whatever in the city of 
Salona, so far as regards ordination to episcopacy, without our consent and permission; nor to ordain any 
one in the same city otherwise than as we have said. 

But if, either of your own accord, or under compulsion from any one whatever, you should presume or 
attempt to do anything contrary to this injunction, we shall decree you to be deprived of participation of the 
Lord's body and blood, that so your very handling of the business, or your very inclination to transgress our 
order, may cut you off from the sacred mysteries, and no one may be accounted a bishop whom you may 
ordain. For we wish no one to be rashly ordained whose life can be found fault with. And so, if the deacon 
Honoratus is shewn to be unworthy, we desire that a report may be sent us of the life and manners of him 
who may be elected, that whatever is to be done in this matter we may allow to be carried out salubriously 
with our consent. 

For we trust in Almighty God that, as far as in us lies, we may never suffer to be done what may damage our 
soul; never what may damage your Church. But, if the voluntary consent of all should so fix on one person 
that by the favour of God he may be proved worthy, and there should be no one to dissent from his being 
ordained, we wish him to be consecrated by you in this same church of Salona under the license granted in 
this present epistle; excepting notwithstanding the person of Maximus, about whom many evil reports have 
reached us: and, unless he desists from coveting the higher order, it remains, as I think, that after full enquiry, 
he should be deprived also of the very office which he now holds. 

EPISTLE XI. 

TO MAXIMIANUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Maximianus, Bishop of Syracuse. 

It had indeed been committed to thy Fraternity long ago by our authority to correct in our stead any 
excesses or unseemly proceedings that there might be in the Church and other venerable places of 
Sicily(8). But, seeing that a complaint has reached us of some things having been so far neglected, we have 
thought it fit that thy Fraternity should again be specially stirred up to correct them. 
For we learn that in the case of revenues of Churches that have been newly acquired the canonical 
disposition of their fourth parts does not prevail(9), but that the bishops of the several places distribute a 
fourth part of the ancient revenues only, retaining for their own use those that have been recently acquired. 
Wherefore let thy Fraternity make haste actively to correct this evil custom that has crept in, so that, whether 
in the case of former revenues or of such as have accrued now or may accrue, the fourth parts may be 
dispensed according to the canonical distribution of them. For it is unseemly that one and the same 
substance of the Church should be rated, as it were, under two different laws, namely, that of usurpation and 
that of the canons. 

Permit not presbyters, deacons, and other clerks of whatever order, who serve churches, to be abbots of 
monasteries; but let them either, giving up clerical duties, be advanced to the monastic order, or, if they 
should decide to remain in the position of abbot, let them by no means be allowed to have clerical 

employment. For it is very unsuitable that, if one cannot fulfil the duties of either of these positions with 
diligence proportional to its importance, any one should be judged fit for both, and that so the ecclesiastical 
order should impede the monastic life, and in torn the rule of monasticism impede ecclesiastical utility. Of 
this thing also we have taken thought to warn thy Charity; that, if any one of the bishops should depart this life, 
or (which God forbid) should be removed for his transgressions, the hierarchs and all the chief of the clergy 
being assembled, and in thy presence making an inventory of the property of the Church, all that is found 
should be accurately described, and nothing should be taken away in kind, or in any other way whatever, 
from the property of the Church, as is said to have been done formerly, as though in return for the trouble of 
making the inventories. For we desire all that pertains to the protection of what belongs to the poor to be so 
executed that in their affairs no opportunity may be left for the venality of self-interested men. 
Let visitors of churches, and their clerks who with them are at trouble in parishes that are not of their own city, 
receive according to thy appointment some subsidy for their labour. For it is just that they should get 
payment in the places where they are found to lend their services. 

We most strongly forbid young women to be made abbesses. Let thy Fraternity, there fore, permit no bishop 
to veil any but a sexagenarian virgin, whose age and character may demand this being done; that so, this 
as well as the above-named points being set right with the Lord's help by the urgency of thy strict 
requirement, thou mayest hasten to bind up again with canonical ties the long loosened state of venerable 
things, and also that divine affairs may be arranged, not by the incongruous wills of men, but with adequate 
strictness. The month of October, lndiction(12). 

EPISTLE XV. 

TO JANUARIUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Januarius, Bishop of Caralis (Cagliari). 

Theodosia, a religious lady, being desirous of carrying out the intention of her late husband Stephen by the 
building of a monastery(l), has begged us to transmit our letters to your Fraternity, whereby, through our 
commendation, she may the more tea lily be counted worthy of your aid. She asserts that her husband had 
given directions for the monastery to be constructed on the farm called Piscenas, which has come into the 
possession of the guest-house (Xenodachii) of the late bishop Thomas. Now, though the possessor of the 
property would allow her to found it on land that is not her own, yet seeing that the lord with reason objects(2), 
we have thought it right to agree to her petition; which is that she should, with the Lord's help, construct a 
monastery for handmaidens of God in a house belonging to herself, which she asserts that she has at 
Caralis. But, since she says that the aforesaid house is burdened by guests and visitors, we exhort thy 
Fraternity to take pains to assist her in all ways, and lend the aid of thy protection to her devotion, so that thy 
assistance and assiduity may make thee partaker of the reward of her departed husband's earnestness 
and her own. As to the relics which she requests may be placed there, we desire that they be deposited with 
due reverence by thy Fraternity. 

EPISTLE XVIII. 

TO MAURUS, ABBOT. 

Gregory to Maurus, &c. 

The care of churches which is evidently inherent in the priestly office compels us to be so solicitous that no 
fault of neglect may appear with regard to them. Since, however, we have learnt that the church of Saint 
Pancratius, which had been committed to presbyters, has been frequently neglected, so that people 
coming there on the Lord's day to celebrate the solemnities of mass have returned murmuring on finding no 
presbyter, we therefore, after mature deliberation, have determined to remove those presbyters, and with 
the favour of God constitute for the same church a congregation of monks in a monastery, to the end that the 
abbot who shall preside there may give care and attention in all respects to the aforesaid church. And we 
have also thought fit to put thee, Maurus, over this monastery as abbot, ordaining that the lands of the 
aforesaid church, and whatever may have come into its possession, or accrued from its revenues, be 
applied to this thy monastery, and belong to it without any diminution; but on condition whatever needs to be 
effected or repaired in the church above written may be so effected and repaired by thee without fail. 
But lest, after the removal of the presbyters to whom this church had previously been committed, it should 
seem to be without provision for divine service, we therefore enjoin thee by the tenour of this authority to 
supply it with a peregrine(3) presbyter to celebrate the sacred solemnities of mass, who, nevertheless, must 
needs both live in thy monastery, and have from it provision for his maintenance. 
But let this also above all be thy care, that there over the most sacred body of the blessed Pancratius the 

work of God be executed daily without fail. These things, then, which by the tenour of this precept we depute 
thee to do, we will that not only thou perform, but that they be also so observed and fulfilled for ever by those 
who shall succeed thee in thy office and place, that there may be no possibility henceforth of neglect being 
found in the aforesaid church. 

EPISTLE XX. 

TO MAXIMUS, PRETENDER (Proesumptorem)(4). 

Gregory to Maximus, Pretender in Salona. 

Though the merits of any one's life were in other respects such as to offer no impediment to his ordination to 
priestly offices, yet the crime of canvassing in itself is condemned by the severest strictness of the canons. 
Now we have been informed that thou, having either obtained surreptitiously, or pretended, an order from 
the most pious princes, hast forced thy way to the order of priesthoods, which is of all men to be venerated, 
while being in thy life unworthy. And this without any hesitation we believed, inasmuch as thy life and age are 
not unknown to us, and further, because we are not ignorant of the mind of our most serene lord the Emperor, 
in that he is not accustomed to mix himself up in the causes of priests, lest he should in any way be 
burdened by our sins. An unheard-of wickedness is also spoken of; that, even after our interdiction, which 
was pronounced under pain of excommunication of thee and those who should ordain thee, it is said that 
thou wast brought forward by a military force, and that presbyters, deacons, and other clergy were beaten. 
Which proceeding we can in no wise call a consecration, since it was celebrated by excommunicated men. 
Since, therefore, without any precedent, thou hast violated such and so great a dignity, namely that of the 
priesthood, we enjoin that, until I shall have ascertained from the letters of our lords or of our responsalis, 
that thou wast ordained under a true and not a surreptitious order, thou and thy ordainers by no means 
presume to handle anything connected with the priestly office, and that you approach not the service of the 
holy altar till you have heard from us again. But, if you should presume to act in contravention of this order, 
be ye anathema from God and from the blessed Peter, Prince of the apostles, that your punishment may 
afford an example to other catholic churches also, through their contemplation of the judgment upon you. 
The month of May, Indiction 12. 

EPISTLE XXI. 

TO VENANTIUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Venantius, Bishop of Luna (in Etruria). 

It has reached us by the report of many that Christian slaves are detained in servitude by Jews living in the 
city of Luna(6); which thing has seemed to us by so much the more offensive as the sufferance of it by thy 
Fraternity annoys us. For it was thy duty, in respect of thy place, and in thy regard for the Christian religion, to 
leave no occasion for simple souls to serve Jewish superstition not through persuasion, but, in a manner, by 
right of authority. Wherefore we exhort thy Fraternity that, according to the course laid down by the most 
pious laws, no Jew be allowed to retain a Christian slave in his possession. But, if any are found in their 
power, let liberty be secured to them by protection under the sanction of law. But as to any that are on the 
property of Jews, though they be themselves free from legal obligation, yet, since they have long been 
attached to the cultivation of their lands as bound by the condition of their tenure, let them continue to 
cultivate the farms they have been accustomed to do, rendering their payments to the aforesaid persons, 
and performing all things that the laws require of husbandmen or natives, except that no farther burden be 
imposed on them. But, whether any one of these should wish to remain in his servitude, or any to migrate to 
another place, let the latter consider with himself that he will have lost his rights as a husbandman by his own 
rashness, though he has got rid of his servitude by force of law. In all these things, then, we desire thee to 
exert thyself so wisely that neither mayest thou be a guilty pastor of a dismembered flock, nor may thy too 
little zeal render thee reprehensible before us. 

EPISTLE XXIII. 

TO HOSPITO, DUKE OF THE BARBARICINI(7). 

Gregory to Hospito, &c. 

Since no one of thy race is a Christian, I hereby know that thou art better than all thy race, in that thou in it art 
found to be a Christian. For, while all the Barbaricini live as senseless animals, know not the true God, but 
adore stocks and stones, in the very fact that thou worshippest the true God thou shewest how much thou 

excellest them all. But carry thou out the faith which thou hast received in good deeds and words, and offer 
what is in thy power to Christ in whom thou believest, so as to bring to Him as many as thou canst, and cause 
them to be baptized, and admonish them to set their affection on eternal life. And if perchance thou canst not 
do this thyself, being otherwise occupied, I beg thee, with my greeting, to succour in all ways our men whom 
we have sent to your parts, to wit my fellow-bishop Felix, and my son, the servant of God, Cyriacus(8), so that 
in aiding their labours thou mayest shew thy devotion to Almighty God, and that He whose servants thou 
succourest in their good work may be a helper to thee in all good deeds. We have sent you through them a 
blessing(9) of St. Peter the apostle, which I beg you to receive, as you ought to do, kindly. The month of 
June, Indiction 12. 

EPISTLE XXIV. 

TO ZABARDAS, DUKE OF SARDINIA. 

Gregory to Zabardas, &c. 

From the letters of my brother and fellow-bishop Felix, and of the servant of God, Cyriacus, we have learnt 
your Glory's good qualities. And we give great thanks to mighty God, that Sardinia has got such a duke; one 
who so knows how to do his duty to the republic in earthly matters as to know also how to exhibit to Almighty 
God dutiful regard for the heavenly country. For they have written to me that you are arranging terms of 
peace with the Barbaricini on such conditions as to bring these same Barbaricini to the service of Christ. On 
this account I rejoice exceedingly, and, should it please Almighty God, will speedily notify your gifts to our 
most serene princes. Do you, therefore, accomplish what you have begun, shew the devotion of your heart 
to Almighty God, and help to the utmost of your power those whom we have sent to your parts for the 
conversion of the Barbaricini 1); knowing that such works may avail much to aid you both before our earthly 
princes and in the eyes of the heavenly king. 

EPISTLE XXV. 

TO THE NOBLES AND PROPRIETORS IN SARDINIA. 

Gregory to the Nobles, &c. 

I have learnt from the report of my brother and fellow-bishop Felix, and my son the servant of God, 
Cyriacus(2), that nearly all of you have peasants (rusticos(3)) on your estates given to idolatry. And this has 
made me very sorry, since I know that the guilt of subjects weighs down the life of their superiors, and that, 
when sin in a subject is not corrected, sentence is flung back on those who are over them. Wherefore, 
magnificent sons, I exhort that with all care and all solicitude ye be zealous for your souls, and see what 
account you will render to Almighty God for your subjects. For indeed they have been committed to you for 
this end, that both they may serve for your advantage in earthly things, and you, through your care for them, 
may provide for their souls in the things that are eternal. If, then, they pay what they owe you, why pay you not 
them what you owe them? That is to say, your Greatness should assiduously admonish them, and restrain 
them from the error of idolatry, to the end that by their being drawn to the faith you may make Almighty God 
propitious to yourselves. For, lo, you observe how the end of this world is close at hand; you see that now a 
human, now a divine, sword rages against us: and yet you, the worshippers of the true God, behold stones 
adored by those who are committed to you, and are silent(4). What, I pray you, will you say in the 
tremendous judgment, when you have received God's enemies into your power, and yet disdain to subdue 
them to God and recall them to Him? Wherefore, addressing you with due greeting, I beg that your 
Greatness would be earnestly on the watch to give yourselves to zeal for God, and hasten to inform me in 
your letters which of you has brought how many to Christ. If, then, haply from any cause you are unable to do 
this, enjoin it on our aforesaid brother and fellow-bishop Felix, or my son Cyriacus, and afford them succour 
for the work of God, that so in the retribution to come you may be in a state to partake of life by so much the 
more as you now afford succour to a good work. 

EPISTLE XXVI, 

TO JANUARIUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Januarius, Bishop of Caralis (Cagliari). 

We have ascertained from the report of our fellow-bishop Felix and the abbot Cyriacus that in the island of 
Sardinia priests are oppressed by lay judges, and that thy ministers despise thy Fraternity; and that, so far 
as appears, while you aim only at simplicity, discipline is neglected. Wherefore I exhort thee that, putting 

aside all excuses, thou take pains to rule the Church of which thou hast received the charge, to keep up 
discipline among the clergy, and fear no one's words. But, as I hear, thou hast forbidden thy Archdeacon to 
live with women, and up to this time art set at naught with regard to this thy prohibition. Unless he obey thy 
command, our will is that he be deprived of his sacred order. 

There is another tiling also which is much to be deplored; namely, that the negligence of your Fraternity has 
allowed the peasants (rusticos) belonging to lily Church to remain up to the present time in infidelity. And 
what is the use of my admonishing you to bring such as do not belong to you to God, if you neglect to 
recover your own from infidelity? Hence you must needs be in all ways vigilant for their conversion. For, 
should I succeed in finding a pagan peasant belonging to any bishop whatever in the island of Sardinia, I 
will visit it severely on that bishop. 

But now, if any peasant should be found so perfidious and obstinate as to refuse to come to the Lord God, 
he must be weighted with so great a burden of payment as to be compelled by the very pain of the exaction 
to hasten to the right way(5). 

It has also come to our knowledge that some in sacred orders who have lapsed, either after doing penance 
or before, are recalled to the office of their ministry; which is a thing that we have altogether forbidden; and 
the most sacred canons also declare against it. Whoso, then, after having received any sacred order, shall 
have lapsed into sin of the flesh, let him so forfeit his sacred order as not to approach any more the ministry 
of the altar. But, lest those who have been ordained should ever perish, previous care should be taken as to 
what kind of people are ordained, so that it be first seen to whether they have been continent in life for many 
years, and whether they have had a care for reading and a love of almsgiving. It should be enquired also 
whether a man has perchance been twice married. It should also be seen to that he be not illiterate, or under 
liability to the state, so as to be compelled after assuming a sacred order to return to public employment. All 
these things therefore let your Fraternity diligently enquire into, that, every one having been ordained after 
diligent examination, none may be easily liable to be deposed after ordination. These things which We 
have written to your Fraternity do you make known to all the bishops under you, since I myself have been 
unwilling to write to them, lest I might seem to lessen your dignity. 

It has also come to our ears that some have been offended by our having forbidden presbyters to touch with 
chrism those who are to be baptized. And we indeed acted according to the ancient use of our Church: but, if 
any are in fact hereby distressed, we allow that, where there is a lack of bishops, presbyters may touch with 
chrism, even on their foreheads, those who are to be baptized(6). 

EPISTLE XXVII. 

TO JANUARIUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Januarius, Bishop of Caralis (Cagliari). 

Thy Fraternity ought indeed to have been so attentive to pious duties as to be in no need at all of our 
admonitions to induce thee to fulfil them: yet, as certain particulars that require correction have come to our 
knowledge, there is nothing incongruous in your having besides a letter addressed to you bearing our 
authority. 

Wherefore we apprize you that we have been given to understand that it has been the custom for the 
Guest-houses (Xenodochia) constituted in the parts about Caralis to submit their accounts in detail from time 
to time to the bishop of the city; that is, so as to be governed under his guardianship and care. Now, as thy 
Charity is said to have so far neglected this, we exhort, as has been said, that the inmates who are or have 
been established in these Guest-houses submit their accounts in detail from time to time. And let such 
persons be ordained to preside over them as may be found most worthy in life, manners and industry, and 
at any rate religiosi (7), whom judges may have no power of annoying, lest, if they should be such as could 
be summoned to the courts, occasion might be given for wasting the feeble resources which they have: 
concerning which resources we wish thee to take the greatest care, so that they be given away to no one 
without thy knowledge, lest the carelessness of thy Fraternity should go so far as to let them be plundered. 
Moreover, thou knowest that the bearer of these presents, Epiphanius the presbyter, was criminally 
accused in the letters of certain Sardinians. We, then, having investigated his case as it was our will to do, 
and finding no proof of what was charged against him, have absolved him, so that he might be restored to 
his place. We therefore desire thee to search out the authors of the charge against him: and, unless he who 
sent those same letters be prepared to support his charges by canonical and most strict proofs, let him on 
no account approach the mystery of holy communion. 

Further, as to Paul the cleric, who is said to have been often detected in malpractices, and who had fled into 
Africa, having returned to a lay state of life in despite of his cloth, if it is so, we have seen to his being given 
up to penance after previous corporal punishment, to the end that, according to the apostolic sentence, by 
means of affliction of the flesh the spirit may be saved, and also that he may be able to wash away with 

continual tears the earthly filth of sin, which he is said to have contracted By wicked works. 

Moreover, in accordance with the injunctions of the canons, let no religious person (religiosus) associate 

with those who have been suspended from ecclesiastical communion. 

Further, for ordinations or marriages of clerics, or from virgins who are veiled, let no one presume to receive 

any fee, unless they should prefer to offer something of their own accord. 

As to what should be done in the case of women who have left monasteries for a lay life, and have taken 

husbands, we have conversed at length with thy Fraternity's aforesaid presbyter, from whose report your 

Holiness may be more fully informed. 

Further, let religious clerics (religiosi clerici)(7) avoid resort to or the patronage of laymen; but let them be in 

all respects subject to thy jurisdiction according to the canons, lest through the remissness of thy Fraternity 

the discipline of the Church over which thou presidest should be dissolved. 

Lastly, as to the men who have sinned with the aforesaid women who had left their monasteries, and are 

said to be now suspended from communion, if thy Fraternity should observe them to have repented worthily 

for such a wickedness, we will that thou restore them to holy communion. 

EPISTLE XXIX. 

TO JANUARIUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Januarius, Bishop of Caralis (Cagliari). 

It has come to our knowledge that in the place within the province of Sardinia called Phausiana it is said to 
have been once the custom to ordain a bishop; but that, through stress of circumstances, the custom has for 
long fallen into disuse. But, as we are aware that now, owing to scarcity of priests, certain pagans remain 
there, living like wild beasts, and entirely ignorant of the worship of God, we exhort thy Fraternity to make 
haste to ordain a bishop there according to the ancient way; such a one, that is, as may be suitable for this 
work, and may take pains to bring wanderers into the Lord's flock with pastoral zeal; that so, while he 
devotes himself there to the saving of souls, neither may you be found to have required what was 
superfluous, nor may we repent of having re-established in vain what had been once discontinued. 

EPISTLE XXX. 

TO CONSTANTINA AUGUSTA. 

Gregory to Constantina, &c. 

The Serenity of your Piety, conspicuous for religious zeal and love of holiness, has charged me with your 
commands to send to you the head of Saint Paul, or some other part of his body, for the church which is 
being built in honour of the same Saint Paul in the palace. And, being desirous of receiving commands from 
you, by exhibiting the most ready obedience to which I might the more provoke your favour towards me, I 
am all the more distressed that I neither can nor dare do what you enjoin. For the bodies of the apostles 
Saint Peter and Saint Paul glitter with so great miracles and terrors in their churches that one cannot even go 
to pray there without great fear. In short, when my predecessor, of blessed memory, was desirous of 
changing the silver which was over the most sacred body of the blessed apostle Peter, though at a distance 
of almost fifteen feet from the same body, a sign of no small dreadfulness appeared to him. Nay, I too 
wished in like manner to amend something not far from the most sacred body of Saint Paul the apostle; and, 
it being necessary to dig to some depth near his sepulchre, the superintendent of that place found some 
bones, which were not indeed connected with the same sepulchre; but, inasmuch as he presumed to lift 
them and transfer them to another place, certain awful signs appeared, and be died suddenly. 
Besides all this, when my predecessor, of holy memory, was desiring in like manner to make some 
improvements not far from the body of Saint Laurence the martyr, it not being known where the venerable 
body was laid, diggings were made in the course of search, and suddenly his sepulchre was unawares 
disclosed; and those who were present and working, monks and mansionarii(8), who saw the body of the 
same martyr, which they did not indeed presume to touch, all died within ten days, so that none might 
survive who had seen the holy body of that righteous man. 

Moreover, let my most tranquil lady know that it is not the custom of the Romans, when they give relics of 
saints, to presume to touch any part of the body; but only a cloth (brandeum) is put into a box (pyxide), and 
placed near the most sacred bodies of the saints: and when it is taken up it is deposited with due reverence 
in the Church that is to be dedicated, and such powerful effects are thereby produced there as might have 
been if their bodies had been brought to that special place. Whence it came to pass in the[ times of Pope 
Leo, of blessed memory, as has been handed down from our forefathers, that, certain Greeks being in 
doubt about such relics, the aforesaid pontiff took scissors and cut this same cloth (brandeum), and from the 

very incision blood flowed. For in the Roman and all the Western parts it is unendurable and sacrilegious for 
any one by any chance to desire to touch the bodies of saints: and, if one should presume to do this, it is 
certain that this temerity will by no means remain unpunished. For this reason we greatly wonder at the 
custom of the Greeks, who say that they take up the bones of saints; and we scarcely believe it. For certain 
Greek monks who came here more than two years ago dug up in the silence of night near the church of 
Saint Paul, bodies of dental men lying in the open field, and laid up their bones to be kept in their own 
possession till their departure. And, when they were taken and diligently examined as to why they did this, 
they confessed that they were going to carry those bones to Greece to pass for relics of saints. From this 
instance, as has been already said, the greater doubt has been engendered in us whether it be true that 
they really take up the bones of saints, as they are said to do. 

But what shall I say of the bodies of the blessed apostles, when it is well known that, at the time when they 
suffered, believers came from the East to recover their bodies as being those of their own countrymen? 
And, having been taken as far as the second milestone from the city, they were deposited in the place which 
is called Catacumbas. But, when the whole multitude came together and endeavoured to remove them 
thence, such violence of thunder and lightning terrified and dispersed them that they on no account 
presumed to attempt such a thing again. And then the Romans, who of the Lord's loving-kindness were 
counted worthy to do this, went out and took up their bodies, and laid them in the places where they are now 
deposited. 

Who then, most serene lady, can there be so venturesome as, knowing these things, to presume, I do not 
say to touch their bodies, but even at all to look at them? Such orders therefore having been given the by 
you, which I could by no means have obeyed, it has not, so far as I find, been of your own motion; but certain 
men have wished to stir up your Piety against me, so as to withdraw from me (which God forbid) the favour of 
your good will, and have therefore sought out a point in which I might be found as if disobedient to you. But I 
trust in Almighty God that your most kind good will is in no way being stolen away from me, and that you will 
always have with you the power of the holy apostles, whom with all your heart and mind you love, not from 
their bodily presence, but from their protection. 

Moreover, the napkin, which you have likewise ordered to be sent you, is with his body, and so cannot be 
touched, as his body cannot be approached. But since so religious a desire of my most serene lady ought 
not to be wholly unsatisfied, I will make haste to transmit to you some portion of the chains which Saint Peter 
the apostle himself bore on his neck and his hands, from which many miracles are displayed among the 
people; if at least I should succeed in removing it by filing. For, while many come frequently to seek a 
blessing from these same chains, in the hope of receiving a little part of the filings, a priest attends with a file, 
and in the case of some seekers a portion comes off so quickly from these chains that there is no delay: but 
in the case of other seekers the file is drawn for long over the chains, and yet nothing can be got from them. 
In the month of June, lndiction(12). 

EPISTLE XXXI. 

TO THEODORUS, PHYSICIAN. 

Gregory to Theodorus, Physician to the Emperor. 

I myself give thanks to Almighty God, that distance does not separate the hearts of those who truly love 
each other mutually. For lo, most sweet and glorious son, we are far apart in body, and yet are present with 
each other in charity. This your works, this your letters testify, this I experienced in you when present, this I 
recognize in your Glory when absent May this make you both beloved of men and worthy for ever before 
Almighty God. For, charity being the mother of virtues, you bring forth the fruits of good works for this reason 
that you keep in your soul the very root of those fruits. Now what you have sent me God inspiring you, for the 
redemption of captives, I confess that I have received both with joy and with sorrow. With joy, that is, for you, 
whom I thus perceive to be preparing a mansion in the heavenly country; but with exceeding sorrow for 
myself, who, over and above my care of the property of the holy apostle Peter, must now also give an 
account of the property of my most sweet son, the lord Theodorus, and be held responsible for having 
spent it carefully or negligently. But may Almighty God, who has poured into your mind the bowels of His 
own mercy, who has granted to you to take anxious thought for what is said of our Saviour by the excellent 
preacher-That, though he was rich, yet far us he became poor (2 Cor. viii.(9))-may He, at the coming of the 
same Saviour, shew you to be rich in virtues, cause you to stand free from all fault, and giant to you 
heavenly for earthly joys; abiding joys for transitory. 

As to what you say you desire to be done for you near the most sacred body of the holy apostle Peter, be 
assured that, though your tongue were silent, your charity bids the doing of it. Would indeed that we were 
worthy to pray for you: but that I am not worthy I have no doubt. Still, however, there are here many worthy 
folk, who are being redeemed from the enemy by your offering, and serve our Creator faithfully, with regard 

to whom you have done what is written; Lay up alms in the bosom of the poor, and it shall pray for thee 
(Ecclus. xxix. 15). 

But, since he loves the more who presumes the more, I have some complaint against the most sweet 
disposition of my most glorious son the lord Theodorus; namely that he has received from the holy Trinity 
the gift of genius, the gift of wealth, the gift of mercy and charity, and yet is unceasingly bound up in secular 
causes, is occupied in continual processions, and neglects to read daily the words of his Redeemer. For 
what is sacred Scripture but a kind of epistle of Almighty God to His creature? And surely, if your Glory were 
resident in any other place, and were to receive letters from an earthly emperor, you would not loiter, you 
would not rest, you would not give sleep to your eyes, till you had learnt what the earthly emperor had 
written. 

The Emperor of Heaven, the Lord of men and angels, has sent thee his epistles for thy life's behoof; and 
yet, glorious son, thou neglectest to read these epistles ardently. Study then, I beseech thee, and daily 
meditate on the words of thy Creator. Learn the heart of God in the words of God, that thou mayestsigh more 
ardently for the things that are eternal, that your soul may be kindled with greater longings for heavenly joys. 
For a man will have the greater rest here in proportion as he has now no rest in the love of his Maker. But, 
that you may act thus, may Almighty God pour into you the Spirit the Comforter: may He fill your soul with His 
presence, and in filling it, compose it. 

As to me, know ye that I suffer here many and innumerable bitternesses. But I give thanks to Almighty God 
that I suffer far less than I deserve. 

I commend to your Glory my son, your patient, the lord Narses. I know indeed that you hold him as in all 
respects commended to you; but I beg you to do what you are doing, that, in asking for what I see is being 
done, I may by my asking have a share in your reward. Furthermore, I have received the blessing(9) of your 
Excellency with the charity wherewith it was sent to me. And I have presumed to send you, in 
acknowledgment of your love, a duck with two small ducklings, that, as often as your eye is led to look at it, 
the memory also of me may be recalled to you among the occupations and tumults of business. 

EPISTLE XXXII. 

TO NARSES THE PATRICIAN. 

Gregory to Narses, &c. 

Your most sweet Charity has said much to me in your letters in praise of my good deeds, to all which I briefly 
reply. Call me not Noemi, that is beautiful; but call me Mara, that is bitter; far I am full of bitterness (Ruth (i. 20). 
But as to the cause of the presbyters(l), which is pending with my brother and fellow-bishop, the most 
reverend Patriarch John, we have, as I think, for our adversary the very man whom you assert to be 
desirous of observing the canons. Further, I declare to thy Charity that I am prepared, with the help of 
Almighty God, to prosecute this same cause with all my power and influence. And, should I see that in it the 
canons of the Apostolic See are not observed. Almighty God will give unto me what I may do against the 
contemners of the same. 

As to what your Charity has written to me, asking me to give thanks for you to my son the chief physician and 
ex-praefect Theodorus, I have done so, and have by no means ceased to commend you as much as I 
could. Further, I beg you to pardon me for replying to your letters with brevity; for I am pressed by such great 
tribulations that it is not allowed me either to read or to speak much by letter. This only I say to thee. For the 
voice of groaning I have forgotten to eat my bread (Ps. ci. 5(2)). All that are with you I beg you to salute in my 
name. Give my salutations to the lady Dominica, whose letter I have not answered, because, though she is 
Latin, she wrote to me in Greek. 

EPISTLE XXXIII. 

TO ANTHEMIUS, SUBDEACON. 

Gregory to Anthemius, &c. 

Those whom our Redeemer vouchsafes to convert to himself from Judaical perdition we ought, with 
reasonable moderaflon, to assist; lest (as God forbid should be the case) they should suffer from lack of 
food. Accordingly we charge thee, under the authority of this order, not to neglect to give money every year 
to the children of Justa, who is of the Hebrews; that is to Julianus, Redemptus, and Fortuna, beginning from 
the coming thirteenth Indicflon; and know that the payment is by all means to be charged in thy accounts. 

EPISTLE XXXIV. 

TO PANTALEO, PRAEFECT 

Gregory to Pantaleo, Praefect of Africa. 

How the law urgently prosecutes the most abominable pravity of heretics is not unknown to your 
Excellency(3). It is therefore no light sin if these, whom both the integrity of our faith and the strictness of the 
laws condemn, should find licence to creep up again in your times. Now in those parts, so far as we have 
learnt, the audacity of the Donatists has so increased that not only do they with pestiferous assumption of 
authority cast out of their churches priests of the catholic faith, but fear not even to rebaptize those whom the 
water of regeneration had cleansed on a true confession. And we are much surprised, if indeed it is so, that, 
while you are placed in those parts, bad men should be allowed thus to exceed. Consider only in the first 
place what kind of judgment you will leave to be passed upon you by men, if these, who in the times of 
others were with just reason put down, find under your administration a way for their excesses. In the next 
place know that our God will require at your hand the souls of the lost, if you neglect to amend, so far as 
possibility requires it of you, so great an abomination. Let not your Excellency take amiss my thus speaking. 
For it is because we love you as our own children that we point out to you what we doubt not will be to your 
advantage. But send to us with all speed our brother and fellow-bishop Paul(4), lest opportunity should be 
given to any one under any excuse for hindering his coming; in order that, on ascertaining the truth more 
fully, we may be able, with God's help, to settle by a reasonable treatment of the case how the punishment 
of so great a crime ought to be proceeded with. 

EPISTLE XXXV. 

TO VICTOR AND COLUMBUS, BISH0PS(5). 

Gregory to Victor and Columbus, Bishops of Africa. 

After what manner a disease, if neglected in its beginning, acquires strength we have proved from our own 
necessities, whosoever of us have had our lot in this life. If, then, it were met by the foresight of skilful 
physicians at its birth, we know that it would cease before doing very much harm from being attended to too 
late. On this consideration, then, reason ought to impel us, when diseases of souls are beginning, to make 
haste to resist them by all the means in our power, lest, while we neglect applying wholesome medicines, 
they steal away from us the lives of many whom we are striving to win for our God. Wherefore it behoves us 
so with watchful carefulness to guard the folds of sheep which we see ourselves to be put over as keepers 
that the p?o?ling wolf may find everywhere shepherds to resist him, and may have no way of entrance 
thereinto. 

For indeed we find that the stings of the Donatists have in your parts so disturbed the Lord's flock, as though 
it were guided by no shepherd's control. And there has been reported to us what we cannot speak of without 
heavy sorrow, seeing that very many have already been torn by their poisoned teeth. Lastly, in order with 
most wicked audacity to drive catholic priests from their churches, they are said, in their most atrocious 
wickedness, even to have slain many besides, on whom the water of regeneration had conferred salvation, 
by rebaptizing them. All this saddens our mind exceedingly, for that, while you are placed there, it has been 
allowed to damned presumption to perpetrate such wickedness. 

In this matter we exhort your Fraternity by this present writing, that, after discussion held and a council 
assembled, you should eagerly and with all your power so oppose this still nascent disease that neither 
may it acquire strength from neglect nor scatter the woes of pestilence in the flock committed to your charge. 
For, if in any way whatever (as we do not believe will be the case) you neglect to resist iniquity in its 
beginning, they will wound very many with the sword of their error. And it is in truth a most serious thing to 
allow to be ensnared in the noose of diabolical fraud those whom we are able to rescue beforehand from 
being entangled. Moreover it is better to prevent any one from being wounded than to search out how one 
that is wounded may be healed. Considering this, therefore, hasten ye by sedulous prayer and all the 
means in your power, to quell sacrilegious wickedness, so that subsequent news, through the aid of the 
grace of Christ, may cause us more joy for the punishment of those men than sadness for their excesses. 
Furthermore, take all possible pains to send to us with all speed our brother and fellow-bishop Paul(6), to 
the end that, on learning more particularly from him the causes of so great a crime, we may be able by the 
succour of our Creator to apply the medicine of fitting rebuke to this most atrocious wickedness. 

EPISTLE XXXVI. 

TO LEO, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Leo, Bishop of Catana(7). 

We have found from the report of many that a custom has of old obtained among you, for subdeacons to be 
allowed to have intercourse with their wives. That any one should any more presume to do this was 
prohibited by the servant of God, the deacon of our see, under the authority of our predecessor(8), in this 
way; that those who at that time had been coupled to wives should choose one of two things, that is, either to 
abstain from their wives, or on no account whatever presume to exercise their ministry. And, according to 
report, Speciosus, then a subdeacon, did for this reason suspend himself from the office of administration, 
and up to the time of his death bore indeed the office of a notary, but ceased from the ministry which a 
subdeacon should have exercised. After his death we have learnt that his widow, Honorata, has been 
relegated to a monastery by thy Fraternity for having associated herself with a husband. And so if, as is 
said, her husband suspended himself from ministration, it ought not to be to the prejudice of the aforesaid 
woman that she has contracted a second marriage, especially if she had not been joined to the subdeacon 
with the intention of abstaining from the pleasures of the flesh. 

If, then, you find the truth to be as we have been informed, it is right for you to release altogether the 
aforesaid woman from the monastery, that she may be at liberty to return without any fear to her husband. 
But for the future let thy Fraternity be exceedingly careful, in the case of any who may be promoted to this 
office, to look to this with the utmost diligence, that, if they have wives, they shall enjoy no licence to have 
intercourse with them: but you must still strictly order them to observe all things after the pattern of the 
Apostolic See. 

EPISTLE XXXVIII. 

TO QUEEN THEODELINDA. 

Gregory to Theodelina, Queen of the Lombards(9). 

It has come to our knowledge from the report of certain persons that your Glory has been led on by some 
bishops even to the offence against holy Church of suspending yourself from the communion of Catholic 
unanimity. Now the more we sincerely love you, the more seriously are we distressed about you, that you 
believe unskilled and foolish men, who not only do not know what they talk about, but can hardly understand 
what they have heard; who, while they neither read themselves, nor believe those who do, remain in the 
same error which they have themselves feigned to themselves concerning us For we venerate the four holy 
synods; the Nicene, in which Arius, the Constantinopolitan, in which Macedonius, the first Ephesine, in which 
Nestorius, and the Chalcedonians, in which Eutyches and Dioscorus, were condemned; declaring that 
whosoever thinks otherwise than these four synods did is alien from the true faith. We also condemn 
whomsoever they condemn, and absolve whomsoever they absolve, smiting, with interposition of 
anathema, any one who presumes to add to or take away from the faith of the same four synods, and 
especially that of Chalcedon, with respect to which doubt and occasion of superstition has arisen in the 
minds of certain unskilled men. 

Seeing, then, that you know the integrity of our faith from my plain utterance and profession, it is right that you 
should have no further scruple of doubt with respect to the Church of the blessed Peter, Prince of the 
apostles: but persist ye in the true faith, and make your life firm on the rock of the Church; that is on the 
confession of the blessed Peter, Prince of the apostles, lest all those tears of yours and all those good 
works should come to nothing, if they are found alien from the true faith. For as branches dry up without the 
virtue of the root, so works, to whatsoever degree they may seem good, are nothing, if they are disjoined 
from the solidity of the faith. 

It therefore becomes your Glory to send a communication with all speed to our most reverend brother and 
fellow-bishop Constantius, of whose faith and life I have long been well assured, and to signify by your 
letters addressed to him how kindly you accept his ordination, and that you are in no wise separated from 
the communion of his Church, so that we may truly rejoice with a common exultation, as for a good and 
faithful daughter. Know also that you and your works will please God, if, before his assize comes, they be 
approved by the judgment of his priests. 

EPISTLE XXXIX. 

TQ CQNSTANTIUS, BISHQP. 

Gregory to Constantius, Bishop of Mediolanum (Milan). 

Having read the letter of your Holiness, we find that you are in a state of serious distress, principally on 
account of the bishops and citizens of Briscia (Brescia) who bid you send them a letter in which you are 
asked to swear that you have not condemned the Three Chapters(1). Now, if your Fraternity's predecessor 
Laurentius did not do this, it ought not to be required of you. But, if he did it, he was not with the universal 

Church, and contradicted what he had sworn to in his security(2). But, inasmuch as we believe him to have 
l<ept his oath, and to have continued in the unity of the Catholic Church, there is no doubt that he did not 
swear to any of his bishops that he had not condemned the Three Chapters. Hence your Holiness may 
conclude that you ought not to be forced to do what was in no wise done by your predecessor. But, lest 
those who have thus written to you should be offended, send them a letter declaring under interposition of 
anathema that you neither take away anything from the faith of the synod of Chalcedon nor received those 
who do, and that you condemn whomsoever it condemned, and absolve whomsoever it absolved. And thus 
I believe that they may be very soon satisfied(3) 

Further, as to what you write about many of them being offended because you name our brother and 
fellow-bishop John of the Church of Ravenna during the solemnities of mass, you should enquire into the 
ancient custom; and, if it has been the custom, it ought not now to be found fault with by foolish men. But, if it 
has not been the custom, a tiring ought not to be done at which some may possibly take offence. Yet I have 
been at pains to make careful enquiry whether the same John our brother and fellow-bishop names you at 
the altar; and they say that this is not done. And, if he does not make mention of your name, I know not what 
necessity obliges you to make mention of his. If indeed it can be done without any one taking offence, your 
doing anything of this kind is very laudable, since you shew the charity you have towards your brethren. 
Further, as to what you write of your having been unwilling to transmit my letter to Queen Theodelinda on the 
ground that the fifth synod was named in it, if you believed that she might thereby be offended, you did right 
in not transmitting it. We are therefore doing now as you recommend, namely, that we should only express 
approval of the four synods. Yet, as to the synod which was afterwards held in Constantinople, called by 
many the fifth, I would have you know that it neither ordained nor held anything in opposition to the four most 
holy synods, seeing that nothing was done in it with respect to the faith, but only with respect to persons; and 
persons, too, about whom nothing is contained in the acts of the Council of Chalcedon(4) but, after the 
canons had been promulged, discussion arose, and final action was ventilated concerning persons. Yet 
still we have done as you desired, making no mention of this synod. But we have also written to our 
daughter the queen what you wrote to us about the bishops. Ursicinus, who wrote something to you against 
our brother and fellow-bishop John, you ought by your letters addressed to him, with sweetness and reason, 
to restrain from his intention. Further, concerning Fortunatus(5), we desire your Fraternity to be careful, lest 
you be in any way surreptitiously influenced by bad men. For I hear that he ate at the table of the Church with 
your predecessor Laurentius for many years until now, that he sat among the nobles, and subscribed, and 
that with our brother's knowledge he served in the army. And now, after so many years, your Fraternity thinks 
that he should be driven from the position which he now occupies. This seems to me altogether 
incongruous. And so I have given you this order through him, but privately. Still, if there is anything 
reasonable that can be alleged against him, it ought to be submitted to our judgment. But, if it please 
Almighty God, we will send letters through your man to our son the lord Dynamius. 

EPISTLE XLVI. 

TO RUSTICIANA, PATRICIAN. 

Gregory to Rusticiana, &c. 

On receiving your Excellency's letters I was glad to hear that you had reached Mount Sinai. But believe me, 
I too should have liked to go with you, but by no means to return with you. And yet I find it very difficult to 
believe that you have been at the holy places and seen many Fathers. For I believe that, if you had seen 
them, you would by no means have been able to return so speedily to the city of Constantinople. But now 
that the love of such a city has in no wise departed from your heart, I suspect that your Excellency did not 
from the heart devote yourself to the holy things which you saw with the bodily eye. But may Almighty God 
illuminate your mind by the grace of His lovingkindness and give unto you to be wise, and to consider how 
fugitive are all temporal things, since, while we are thus speaking, both time runs on and the Judge 
approaches, and lo the moment is even now near when against our will we must give up the world which of 
our own accord we will not. I beg that the lord Apio and the lady Eusebia, and their daughters, be greeted in 
my behalf. As to that lady my nurse, whom you commend to me by letter, I have the greatest regard for her, 
and desire that she should be in no way incommoded. But we are pressed by such great straits that we 
cannot excuse even ourselves from exactions (angariis)(6) and burdens at this present time. 

EPISTLE XLVII. 

TO SABINIANUS, DEAC0N(7). 

Gregory to Sabinianus, &c. 

Thou knowest what has been done in the case of the prevaricator l\/laximus(8). For after the most serene 
lord the Emperor had Sent orders that he should not be ordained(9), then he broke out into a higher pitch of 
pride. For the men of the glorious patrician Romanus(1) received bribes from him, and caused him to be 
ordained in such a manner that they would have killed Antoninus, the sub-deacon and rector of the 
patrimony, if he had not fled. But I despatched letters to him, after I had learnt that he had been ordained 
against reason and custom, telling him not to presume to celebrate the solemnities of mass unless I should 
first ascertain from our most serene lords what they had ordered with regard to him. And these my letters, 
having been publicly promulged or posted in the city, he caused to be publicly torn, and thus bounced forth 
more openly into contempt of the Apostolic See. How I was likely to endure this thou knowest, seeing that I 
was before prepared rather to die than that the Church of the blessed apostle Peter should degenerate in 
my days. Moreover thou art well acquainted with my ways, that I bear long; but if once I have determined not 
to bear, I go gladly in the face of all dangers. Whence it is necessary with the help of God to meet danger, 
lest he be driven to sin to excess. Look to what I say, and consider what great grief inspires it. 
But it has come to my ears that he has sent [to Constantinople] a cleric, I know not whom, to say that the 
bishop Malchus(2) was put to death in prison for money. Now as to this there is one thing that thou mayest 
shortly suggest to our most serene lords;-that, if I their servant had been willing to have anything to do with 
the death of Lombards, the nation of the Lombards at this day would have had neither king nor dukes nor 
counts, and would have been divided in the utmost confusion. But, since I fear God, I shrink from having 
anything to do with the death of any one. Now the bishop Malchus was neither in prison nor in any distress; 
but on the day when he pleaded his cause and was sentenced he was taken without my knowledge by 
Boniface the notary to his house, where a dinner was prepared for him, and there he dined, and was treated 
with honour by the said Boniface, and in the night suddenly died, as I think you have already been informed. 
Moreover I had intended to send our Exhilaratus to you in connection with that business; but, as I considered 
that the case was now done with, I consequently abstained from doing so. 

REGISTER OF THE EPISTLES OF SAINT GREGORY 
THE GREAT, BOOK V 

BOOKV 

EPISTLE II. 

TO FELIX, BISHOP, AND CYRIACUS, ABB0T(1) 

Gregory to Felix, &c. 

The tenor of the report submitted to you sufficiently explains the complaint of the religious lady Theodosia, 
in which we have found on reading it many heads of accusation, not befitting priestly gentleness, against our 
brother and fellow-bishop Januarius; so much so that, after the foundation by her of a monastery for servants 
of God, all that pertains to avarice, turbulence, and wrong is said to have been exhibited at the time of the 
very dedication of the oratory. Wherefore, if the case is as we find in her aforesaid representation, and if you 
are aware that anything at all unbecoming has been committed besides, we exhort you that, all wrongs 
having first been redressed, you press upon Musicus, the abbot of the monastery of Agilitanus(2), that he 
lose no time in giving the greatest attention to his monks whom he had began to settle there, to the end that, 
this venerable place being with the Lord's help set in order by you in a decent and regular manner, neither 
may we be disturbed by the frequent complaints of the aforesaid religious lady that her good desires are 
not fulfilled, nor may it be to the detriment of your soul that so pious a design should languish, as we do not 
believe it will, through any neglect of yours. 

EPISTLE IV. 

TO CONSTANTIUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Constantius, Bishop of Mediolanum (Milan). 

If licence to be restored to their rank be granted to the lapsed, the force of ecclesiastical discipline is 
undoubtedly broken, while in the hope of restoration each person fears not to give way to his evil 
inclinations. Your Fraternity, for instance, has consulted us as to whether Amandinus, ex-presbyter and 
ex -abbot, who was deposed by your predecessor for fault requiring it, should be called back to his rank; 
which thing is not allowable; and we decree that it cannot on any account be done. Yet, if it should be the 
case that his manner of life deserves it, seeing that he has been deprived altogether of his sacred office, 
assign him a place in a monastery, as you may see fit, before other monks. Above all things, then, take care 
that no one's supplication persuade you in any way to restore the lapsed to their sacred orders, lest such 
punishment should be supposed not to be definitely ordained for them, but only a temporary expedient. 
As to Vitalianus the ex-presbyter, about whom you write that he should be strictly guarded, we will cause him 
to be sent into Sicily, that, being deprived of all hope of departure thence, he may then at least constrain 
himself to penitential bewailing. Jobinus also, of Portus Veneris, once deacon and abbot, we have decreed 
to be deprived of his office, and written that another should be ordained in his place In like manner also we 
decree that the three subdeacons, whom your Fraternity has notified to us as having lapsed, shall ever 
cease from and stand deprived of their office, and that nothing beyond lay communion be allowed them. 
Further, we have adjudged the ex-presbyter Saturninus to give security that he will not ever presume to 
approach the ministry of his sacred order. And we desire him to remain, with deprivation of his sacred order, 
in the same island in which he was, permitting him to have and exercise care and solicitude with respect to 
monasteries; for we believe that, his lapse having made him more wary, he will now the more carefully keep 
guard over those who are committed to him. 

Further, concerning John, notary of your church, the charity wherewith we love you and have long loved you 
warns us to write, lest you should order anything with regard to him while you are still provoked by his fault. 
Guarding, then, against this, enquire fully by all means in your power into the possessions of your church; by 
which melons neither may you offend God, nor may lie be able to find a ground for accusing you before 
men. For we write, not as defending John or commending him personally without reason, but lest your soul 
should be in any way burdened with sin under the incitement of anger. Whence it is needful, as we have, 
before said, that you should by no means neglect to enquire, in the fear of God, with a full investigation into 

the possessions of your church. 

Furthermore, the epistle of your most dear Fraternity has caused us to wonder much with respect to the 
person of Fortunatus(3). But either that letter was not dictated by you, or certainly, if it is yours, we by no 
means recognize in it our brother the lord Constantius. For you ought to have paid, and still ought to pay, 
attention to the fact that it is in behalf of your reputation that we write. For, when he asserts that he suffers 
wrong among you, and has been unable to procure the guardian's (defensoris) aid, what else does he 
intimate but ill-will on your part? Wherefore, that neither this affair may dim your reputation in some quarters 
nor damage possibly ensue in any way with good cause to your church, you ought to send hither a person 
instructed by you, that the nature of the case may be examined, and the matter terminated, without ill-will on 
your part. And for this reason especially, that if, after his complaint, sentence should be pronounced among 
yourselves in your favour, he will be believed to have been defeated, not reasonably, but by power alone. 
But we, out of the charity wherewith we are bored to you, desist not from admonishing you to do what will be 
for your good repute, knowing that, though this exhortation saddens you for the time, it will afterwards cause 
you joy, when the animosity of contention has passed away. In the month of September, Indiction 13. (In 
Vatic. The month of December, Indict. 13.) 

EPISTLE V. 

TO DOMINICUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Dominicus, Bishop of Carthage. 

Prosper your delegate (responsalis), the bearer of these presents, has been with us, and after other 
expressions of your charity handed us your second letters with an allegation of the imperial commands, and 
a paper giving an account of the synod that has been held among you(4). Having read all, we rejoiced for 
your pastoral zeal, and that our most pious lords had given no ear to the calumnies of venal persons 
brought against you on the plea of religion; but especially that your Fraternity has so taken pains to 
preserve the African province as in no wise to neglect to restrain with priestly fervour the devious sects of 
heretics; concerning the quieting of whom we remember having laid down the law so fully, even before 
consulting the letters of your Charity, that we do not believe that anything needs to be said again in reply to 
you about them. Although, however, this is so, and though we desire all heretics to be repressed always with 
vigour and reason by catholic priests, yet, on looking thoroughly into what has been done among you, we 
are in fact apprehensive lest offence should thereby be caused (which thing may the Lord avert) to the 
primates of other councils. For at the conclusion of your acts you have promulged a sentence, in which, 
while ordering the searching out of those heretics, you have brought in that those who neglect the duty are to 
be punished by forfeiture of their possessions and dignities. It is therefore best, most dear brother, that, in 
dealing with matters outside ourselves that require correction, charity among ourselves should first be 
preserved, and that we should be subject in mind (as I judge to be peculiarly proper to your Gravity) even to 
persons below us in dignity. For you will then more advantageously meet the errors of heretics with your 
whole united powers when, as befits your priesthood, you study to keep ecclesiastical concord among 
yourselves. 

EPISTLE VIM. 

TO CYPRIAN, DEACON. 

Gregory to Cyprian, deacon and rector of the patrimony of Sicily. 

Concerning the Manicheans who are on our possessions I have frequently admonished thy Love to press 
them with the utmost diligence, and recall them to the Catholic faith. If, then, the time requires it, make 
enquiries in person, or, if other business does not allow this, through others. Further, it has come to my ears 
that there are Hebrews on our possessions who will not by any means be converted to God. But it seems to 
me that thou shouldest send letters through all our possessions on which these Hebrews are known to be, 
promising them particularly from me that whosoever of them shall have been converted to our true Lord God 
Jesus Christ shall have the burdens of his holding lightened. And this I wish to have done in such sort that, if 
one has a payment to make of one solidus, a third should be remitted him; if of three or four, that one solidus 
should be remitted; if of any more, the remission should still be made in the same proportion, or at any rate 
according as thy Love sees fit, so that one who is converted may have some relief of Iris burden, and the 
Church may not be put to heavy expense. Nor shall we do this unprofitably, if by lightening the burdens of 
their payments we bring them to the grace of Christ, since, though they themselves came with little faith, yet 
those who may be born of them will now be baptized with more faith: thus we gain either them or their 
children. And whatever amount of payment we let them off for the sake of Christ is nothing serious. 

Furthermore, some time ago, when John the deacon came, thy Love wrote something to me, the whole of 
which I read at the time, but let many days intervene before replying; and then, after such delay, replied to all 
particulars as I recollected them. But now I think that one point escaped my memory, and suspect that I gave 
no reply about it. For thou hadst written that loans were being advanced to peasants (rusticis) through 
certain undertakers for their debt(5), lest in borrowing from others they should be burdened either by 
exactions or by the prices of things(6). This particular was to me most acceptable; and, if indeed I have 
already written about it, observe what I wrote. But if, as I suspect, I gave in my reply no definite direction on 
the subject, thou must not hesitate to advance money for the advantage of the peasants, since the 
ecclesiastical property will not thus be wasted, and out of it the peasants will derive advantage. And, if there 
are other things which thou considerest to be advantageous, thou must carry them out without any 
hesitation. 

EPISTLE XI. 

TO JOHN, BISHOP. 

Gregory to John, Bishop of Ravenna. 

I find that your Fraternity is greatly distressed on account of being forbidden by the censure of reason to 
wear the pallium in litanies. But through the most excellent Patrician, and through the most eminent Prefect, 
and through other noble men of your city, you have urgently requested to have this allowed you. Now we, 
having made careful enquiry of Adeodatus, some time thy Fraternity's deacon, have ascertained that it was 
never the custom of thy predecessors to use the pallium during litanies, except at the solemnities of the 
blessed John the Baptist, the blessed Apostle Peter, and the blessed martyr Apollinaris. But we were by no 
means bound to believe him, since many of our delegates have often been at your Fraternity's city, who 
declare that they never saw anything of the kind. And in this matter credence is rather to be given to many 
than to one, who is attesting something in behalf of his own Church. But, since we do not wish your Fraternity 
to be distressed, or the petition of our sons to be of no avail with us, we concede the use of the pallium, until 
we shall gain some more accurate knowledge, on the days of the Nativity of the Blessed John the Baptist, of 
the blessed Apostle Peter, anti the blessed martyr Apollinaris, and on the day of the celebration of your 
ordination. But in the sacristy, according to former custom, after the sons of the Church have been received 
and dismissed, your Fraternity may put on the pallium, and so proceed to the solemnization of mass, 
arrogating to yourself nothing more in the daring of rash presumption; lest, while something is snatched at 
out of order in exterior habiliment, what might have been done in due order be neglected. Given in the month 
of October; Indiction 13. 

EPISTLE XV. 

TO JOHN, BISHOP. 

Gregory to John, Bishop of Ravenna. 

In the first place this makes me sad; that thy Fraternity writes to me with a double heart, exhibiting one sort of 
blandishment in letters, but another sort with the tongue in secular intercourse. In the next place, it grieves me 
that my brother John even to this day retains on his tongue those gibes which notaries while still boys are 
wont to indulge in. He speaks bitingly, and seems to delight in such pleasantry. He flatters his friends in their 
presence, and maligns them in their absence. Thirdly, it is to me grievous and altogether execrable, that he 
imputes shameful crimes to his servants(7), whatever the hour may be, calling them "effeminate;" and, what 
is still more grievous, this is done openly. Then there is this in addition that there is no discipline for keeping 
guard over the life of the clergy, but that he exhibits himself only as their lord. The last thing, but first in 
importance as evidence of elation, is about his use of the pallium outside the church, which is a thing he 
never presumed to do in the times of my predecessors, and what none of his predecessors ever presumed 
to do, as our delegates testify (except it might be when relics were deposited, though with regard to relics 
one person only could be found to say that it was so); yet this in my days, in contempt of me, with extreme 
audacity, he not only did, but even made a habit of doing. 

From all these things I find that the dignity of the Episcopacy is with him all in outside show, not in his mind. 
And indeed I return thanks to Almighty God that at the time when this came to my knowledge, which had 
never; reached the ears of my predecessors, the Lombards were posted between me and the city of 
Ravenna. For perchance I had it in my mind to shew to men hour severe I can be(8). 
Lest, however, thou shouldest suppose that I wish thy church to be depressed or lessened in dignity, 
remember where the deacon of Ravenna used to stand in solemnization of mass at Rome, and enquire 
where he stands now; and thou wilt recognize the fact that I desire to honour the church of Ravenna. But that 

any one whatever should snatch at anything out of pride, this I cannot tolerate. 

Nevertheless I have already written on this matter to our deacon at Constantinople, that he should enquire of 
all who have under them even thirty or forty bishops. And if there is anywhere this custom of their walking in 
litanies wearing the pallium, God forbid that through me the dignity of the church of Ravenna should seem to 
be in any way lessened. 

Reflect, therefore, dearest brother, on all that I have said above: think of the day of thy call: consider what 
account thou wilt render of the burden of epi copacy . Amend those manners of a notary. See what becomes 
a bishop in tongue and in deed. Be entirely sincere to thy brethren. Do not speak one thing, and have 
another in thy heart. Do not desire to seem more than thou art, that so thou mayest be able to be more than 
thou seemest. Believe me, when I came to my present position, I had such consideration and charity 
towards thee that, if thou hadst wished to keep hold of this my charity, thou still wouldest not have ever found 
such a brother as myself, or one so sincerely loving thee, or so concurring with thee in all devotion: but when 
I came to know of thy words and thy manners, I confess I started back. I beseech thee, then, by Almighty 
God, amend all that I have spoken of, and especially the vice of duplicity. Allow me to love thee; and for the 
present and the future life it may be of advantage to thee to be loved of thy brethren. Reply, however, to all 
this, not by words, but by behaviour. 

EPISTLE XVII. 

TO CYPRIAN, DEAC0N(1). 

Gregory to Cyprian, &c. 

I received your letters of most bitter import about the death of the lord Maximianus(2) in the month of 
November. And he indeed has reached the rewards he longed for, but the unhappy people of the city of 
Syracuse is to be commiserated as not having been counted worthy to have such a pastor long. 
Accordingly let thy Love take anxious heed that such a one may be chosen for ordination in the same 
church as may not seem to obtain undeservedly the same place of rule after the lord Maximianus. And 
indeed I believe that the majority would choose the presbyter Trajan, who, as is said, is of a good 
disposition, but, as I suspect, not fit for ruling in that place. Yet, if a better cannot be found, and if there are no 
charges against him, he may be condescended to under stress of very great necessity. But, if my wishes 
are asked with regard to this election, I inform thee privately of what I do wish: for no one in this same church 
appears to me so worthy after the lord Maximianus as John the archdeacon of the church of Guiana. And, if 
his election can be brought about, I believe that he will be found an exceedingly fit person. But he too must 
first be enquired about by thee privately as to any charges against him that may stand in the way. If he 
should be found free from any, he may be rightly chosen. Should this be done, our brother and fellow-bishop 
Leo(3) will also have to give him leave to go, that he may be found free to be ordained. These things, then, I 
have taken care to intimate to thy Love; and it will now be thy concern to look round thee on all sides 
carefully, and arrange what is pleasing to God. 

EPISTLE XVIII. 

TO JOHN, BISHOP. 

Gregory to John, Bishop of Constantinople(4). 

At the time when your Fraternity was advanced to Sacerdotal dignity, you remember what peace and 
concord of the churches you found. But, with what daring or with what swelling of pride I know not, you have 
attempted to seize upon a new name, whereby the hearts of all your brethren might have come to take 
offence. I wonder exceedingly at this, since I remember how thou wouldest fain have fled from the episcopal 
office rather than attain it. And yet, now that thou hast got it, thou desirest so to exercise it as if thou hadst run 
to it with ambitious intent. For, having confessed thyself unworthy to be called a bishop, thou hast at length 
been brought to such a pass as, despising thy brethren, to covet to be named the only bishop. And indeed 
with regard to this matter, weighty letters were addressed to your Holiness by my predecessor Pelagius of 
holy memory; in which he annulled the acts of the synod, which had been assembled among you in the 
case of our once brother and fellow-bishop Gregory, because of that execrable title of pride, and forbade 
the archdeacon whom he had sent according to custom to the threshold of our lord, to celebrate the 
solemnities of mass with you. But after his death, when I, unworthy, succeeded to the government of the 
Church, both through my other representatives and also through our common son the deacon Sabinianus, I 
have taken care to address your Fraternity, not indeed in writing, but by word of mouth, desiring you to 
restrain yourself from such presumption. And, in case of your refusing to amend, I forbade his celebrating 
the solemnities of mass with you; that so I might first appeal to your Holiness through a certain sense of 

shame, to the end that, if the execrable and profane assumption could not be corrected through shame, 
strict canonical measures might be then resorted to. And, since sores that are to be cut away should first be 
stroked with a gentle hand, I beg you, I beseech you, and with all the sweetness in my power demand of 
you, that your Fraternity gainsay all who flatter you and offer you this name of error, nor foolishly consent to 
be called by the proud title. For truly I say it weeping, and out of inmost sorrow of heart attribute it to my sins, 
that this my brother, who has been constituted in the grade of episcopacy for the very end of bringing hack 
the souls of others to humility, has up to the present time been incapable of being brought back to humility; 
that he who teaches truth to others has not consented to teach himself, even when I implore him. 
Consider, I pray thee, that in this rash presumption the peace of the whole Church is disturbed, and that it is in 
contradiction to the grace that is poured out on all in common; in which grace doubtless thou thyself wilt have 
power to grow so far as thou determinest with thyself to do so. And thou wilt become by so much the greater 
as thou restrainest thyself from the usurpation of a proud and foolish title: and thou wilt make advance in 
proportion as thou art not bent on arrogation by derogation of thy brethren. Wherefore, dearest brother, with 
all thy heart love humility, through which the concord of all the brethren and the unity of the holy universal 
Church may be preserved. Certainly the apostle Paul, when he heard some say, I am of Paul, I of Apollos, 
but I of Christ (1 Cor. i. 13), regarded with the utmost horror such dilaceration of the Lord's body, whereby they 
were joining themselves, as it were, to other heads, and exclaimed, saying. Was Paul crucified for you? or 
were ye baptized in the name of Paul (ib.)? If then he shunned the subjecting of the members of Christ 
partially to certain heads, as if beside Christ, though this were to the apostles themselves, what wilt thou say 
to Christ, who is the Head of the universal Church, in the scrutiny of the last judgment, having attempted to put 
all his members under thyself by the appellation of Universal? Who, I ask, is proposed for imitation in this 
wrongful title but he who, despising the legions of angels constituted socially with himself, attempted to start 
up to an eminence of singularity, that he might seem to be under none and to be alone above all? Who 
even said, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the starts of heaven: I will sit upon the mount 
of the testament, in the sides of the North: I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most 
High (Isai.xiv. 13). 

For what are all thy brethren, the bishops of the universal Church, but stars of heaven, whose life and 
discourse shine together amid the sins and errors of men, as if amid the shades of night? And when thou 
desirest to put thyself above them by this proud title, and to tread down their name in comparison with thine, 
what else dost thou say but I will ascend into heaven; I will exalt my throne above the stars of heaven? Are 
not all the bishops together clouds, who both rain in the words of preaching, and glitter in the light of good 
works? And when your Fraternity despises them, and you would fain press them down under yourself, what 
else say you but what is said by the ancient foe, I will ascend above the heights of the clouds? All these 
things when I behold with tears, and tremble at the hidden judgments of God, my fears are increased, and 
my heart cannot contain its groans, for that this most holy man the lord John, of so great abstinence and 
humility, has, through the seduction of familiar tongues, broken out into such a pitch of pride as to attempt, in 
his coveting of that wrongful name, to be like him who, while proudly wishing to be like God, lost even the 
grace of the likeness granted him, and because he sought false glory, thereby forfeited true blessedness. 
Certainly Peter, the first of the apostles, himself a member of the holy and universal Church, Paul, Andrew, 
John,-what were they but heads of particular communities? And yet all were members under one Head. 
And (to bind all together in a short girth of speech) the saints before the law, the saints under the law, the 
saints under grace, all these making up the Lord's Body, were constituted as members of the Church, and 
not one of them has wished himself to be called universal. Now let your Holiness acknowledge to what 
extent you swell within yourself in desiring to be called by that name by which no one presumed to be called 
who was truly holy. 

Was it not the case, as your Fraternity! knows, that the prelates of this Apostolic See which by the 
providence of God I serve, had the honour offered them of being called universal by the venerable Council 
of Chalcedon(5). But yet not one of them has ever wished to be called by such a title, or seized upon this 
ill-advised name, lest if, in virtue of the rank of the pontificate, he took to himself the glory of singularity, he 
might seem to have denied it to all his brethren. 

But I know that all arises from those who serve your Holiness on terms of deceitful familiarity; against whom I 
beseech your Fraternity to be prudently on your guard, and not to lay yourself open to be deceived by their 
words. For they are to be accounted the greater enemies the more they flatter you with praises. Forsake 
such; and, if they must needs deceive, let them at any rate deceive the hearts of worldly men, and not of 
priests. Let the dead bury their dead (Luke ix. 60). But say ye with the prophet. Let them be turned back and 
put to shame that say unto me. Aha, Aha (Ps. Ixix. 4). And again. But let not the oil of the sinner lard my head 
(Ps. cxI. 5). 

Whence also the wise man admonishes well. Be in peace with many: but have but one counsellor of a 
thousand (Ecclus. vi. 6). For Evil communications corrupt good manners (1 Cor. xv. 33). For the ancient foe, 
when unable to break into strong hearts, looks out for weak persons who are associated with them, and, as 

it were, scales lofty walls by ladders set against them. So he deceived Adam through the woman who was 
associated with him. So, when he slew the sons of the blessed Job, he left the weak woman, that, being 
unable of himself to penetrate his heart, he might at any rate be able to do so through the woman's words. 
Whatever weak and secular persons, then, are near you, let them be shattered in their own persuasive 
words and flattery, since they procure to themselves the eternal enmity of God from their very frowardness in 
being seeming lovers. 

Of a truth it was proclaimed of old through the Apostle John, Little children, it is the last hour (1 John ii. 1 8), 
according as the Truth foretold. And now pestilence and sword rage through the world, nations rise against 
nations, the globe of the earth is shaken, the gaping earth with its inhabitants is dissolved. For all that was 
foretold is come to pass. The king of pride is near, and (awful to be said I) there is an army of priests in 
course of preparation for him, inasmuch as they who bad been appointed to be leaders in humility enlist 
themselves under the neck of pride. But in this matter, even though our tongue protested not at all, the power 
of Him who in His own person peculiarly opposes the vice of pride is lifted up for vengeance against 
elation. For hence it is written, God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace unto the humble (Jam. iv. 6). Hence, 
again, it is said. Whoso exalteth his heart is unclean before God (Prov. xvi. 5). Hence, against the man that is 
proud it is written. Why is earth and ashes proud (Ecclus. x. 9)? Hence the Truth in person says. Whosoever 
exalteth himself shall be abased (Lukexiv. 11). And, that he might bring us backto the way of life through 
humility. He deigned to exhibit in Himself what He teaches us, saying. Learn of me; for I am meek and lowly 
in heart (Matth. xi. 29). For to this end the only begotten Son of God took upon Himself the form of our 
weakness; to this end the Invisible appeared not only as visible but even as despised; to this end He 
endured the mocks of contumely, the reproaches of derision, the torments of suffering; that God in His 
humility might teach man not to be proud. How great, then, is the virtue of humility for the sake of teaching 
which alone He who is great beyond compare became little even unto the suffering of death! For, since the 
pride of the devil was the origin of our perdition, the humility of God has been found the means of our 
redemption. That is to say, our enemy, having been created among all things, desired to appear exalted 
above all things; but our Redeemer remaining great above all things, deigned to become little among all 
things. 

What, then, can we bishops say for ourselves, who have received a place of honour from the humility of our 
Redeemer, and yet imitate the pride of the enemy himself? Lo, we know our Creator to have descended 
from the summit of His loftiness that He might give glory to the human race, and we, created of the lowest, 
glory in the lessening of our brethren. God humbled Himself even to our dust; and human dust sets his face 
as high as heaven, and with his tongue passes above the earth, and blushes not, neither is afraid to be lifted 
up: even man who is rottenness, and the son of man that is a worm. 

Let us recall to mind, most dear brother, this which is said by the most wise Solomon. Before thunder shall 
go lightning, and before ruin shall the heart be exalted (Ecclus. xxxii. 10); where, on the other hand it is 
subjoined. Before glory it shall be humbled. Let us then be humbled in mind, if we are striving to attain to real 
loftiness. By no means let the eyes of our heart be darkened by the smoke of elation, which the more it rises 
the more rapidly vanishes away. Let us consider how we are admonished by the precepts of our 
Redeemer, who says. Blessed are the poor in spirit; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven (Matth. v. 3). Hence, 
also, he says by the prophet. On whom shall my Spirit rest, but on him that is humble, and quiet, and that 
trembleth at my words (Isai. Ixvi. 2)? Of a truth, when the Lord would bring back the hearts of His disciples, 
still beset with infirmity, to the way of humility. He said. Whosoever will be chief among you shall be least of 
all (Matth. xx.27). Whereby it is plainly seen how he is truly exalted on high who in his thoughts is humbled. 
Let us, therefore, fear to be numbered among those who seek the first seats in the synagogues, and 
greetings in the market, and to be called of men Rabbi. For, contrariwise, the Lord says to His disciples. But 
be not ye called Rabbi: for one is your master; and all ye are brethren. And call no man your Father upon 
the earth, far one is your Father (Matth. xxiii. 7, 8). 

What then, dearest brother, wilt thou say in that terrible scrutiny of the coming judgment, if thou covetest to be 
called in the world not only father, but even general father? Let, then, the bad suggestion of evil men be 
guarded against; let all instigation to offence be fled from. It must needs be (indeed) that offences come; 
nevertheless, woe to that man by whom the offence cometh (Matth. xviii. 7). Lo, by reason of this execrable 
title of pride the Church is rent asunder, the hearts of all the brethren are provoked to offence. What! Has it 
escaped your memory how the Truth says. Whoso shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, 
it were better for him that a mill stone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of 
the sea (lb. v. 6)? But it is written. Charity seeketh not her own (1 Cor. xiii. 4). Lo, your Fraternity arrogates to 
itself even what is not its own. Again it is written. In honour preferring one another (Row. xii. 10). And thou 
attemptest to take the honour away from all which thou desirest unlawfully to usurp to thyself singularly. 
Where, dearest brother, is that which is written. Have peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man 
shall see the Lord (Heb. xii. 14)? Where is that which is written. Blessed are the peacemakers; for they shall 
be called the children of God (Matth. v. 9)? 

It becomes you to consider, lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby many be 
defiled. But still, though we neglect to consider, supernal judgment will be on the watch against the swelling 
of so great elation. And we indeed, against whom such and so great a fault is committed by this nefarious 
attempt,-we, I say, are observing what the Truth enjoins when it says. If thy brother shall sin against thee, go 
and tell him his fault between thee and him alone. If he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother. But if he 
will not hear thee, take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of one or two witnesses every word may 
be established. But if he will not hear them, tell it unto the Church. But if he will not hear the Church, let hint be 
to thee as an heathen man and a publican (Matth. xviii. 15). I therefore have once and again through my 
representatives taken care to reprove in humble words this sin against the whole Church; and now I write 
myself. Whatever it was my duty to do in the way of humility I have not omitted. But, if I am despised in my 
reproof, it remains that I must have recourse to the Church. 

Wherefore may Almighty God show your Fraternity how great love for you constrains me when I thus speak, 
and how much I grieve in this case, not against you, but for you. But the case is such that in it I must prefer the 
precepts of the Gospel, the ordinances of the Canons, and the welfare of the brethren to the person even of 
him whom I greatly love. 

I have received the most sweet and pleasant letter of your Holiness with respect to the case of the 
presbyters John and Athanasius about which, the Lord helping me, I will reply to you in another letter; for, 
being surrounded by the swords of barbarians, I am now oppressed by such great tribulations that it is not 
allowed me, I will not say to treat of many things, but hardly even to breathe. Given in the Kalends of January; 
Indiction 

EPISTLE XIX. 

TO SABINIANUS, DEACON (7) 

Gregory to Sabinianus, &c. 

In the cause of our brother the most reverend John, bishop of Constantinople, I have been unwilling to write 
two letter. But one I have drawn up briefly, which may seem to combine both requisites; that is to say, both 
honesty and kindness. 

Let therefore thy Love take care to give him this letter which I have now addressed to him in compliance with 
the wish of the Emperor. For in the sequel another will be sent him such as his pride will not rejoice in. For he 
has come even to this; that, taking occasion of the case of John the presbyter, he transmitted hither the acts, 
wherein almost in every line he called himself <greek>oikoumenikon</greek> (aecumenical) patriarch. But I 
hope in Almighty God that the Supernal Majesty will confound his hypocrisy. But I wonder how he could so 
deceive thy Love as that thou shouldest allow the Lord Emperor to be persuaded to write to me himself 
concerning this matter, admonishing me to have peace with him. For, if the Lord Emperor wishes to observe 
justice, he ought to have admonished him to refrain from the proud title, and then at once there would be 
peace between us. I suspect, however, that thou hast not all considered with what cunningness this has 
been done by our aforesaid brother John. For it is for this purpose that he has done it; that the Lord Emperor 
might be obeyed, and so he himself might seem to be confirmed in his vanity, or that I might not obey him, 
and so his mind might be irritated against me. But we will keep to the right way, fearing nothing in this cause 
except the Almighty Lord. Wherefore let thy Love be in nothing afraid. All things that you see to be lofty in this 
world against the truth in behalf of the truth despise; trust in the grace of Almighty God, and the help of the 
blessed Apostle Peter. Remember the voice of the Truth, which says. Greater is he that is in you than he that 
is in the world (1 John iv. 4); and in this cause whatever has to be done, do it with the utmost authority. For 
now that we can in no wise be protected from the swords of our enemies, now that for love of the republic we 
have lost silver, gold, slaves and clothing, it is too ignominious that through those men we should lose even 
the faith. For to assent to that atrocious title is nothing else than to lose the faith. Wherefore, as I have written 
to thee already in former letters, never do thou presume to proceed with him (8). 

EPISTLE XX. 

TO MAURICIUS AUGUSTUS. 

Gregory to Mauricius, &c. 

Our most pious and God-appointed lord, among his other august cares and burdens, watches also in the 
uprightness of spiritual zeal over the preservation of peace among the priesthood, inasmuch as he piously 
and truly considers that no one can govern earthly things aright unless he knows how to deal with divine 
things, and that the peace of the republic hangs on the peace of the universal Church. For, most serene lord, 
what human power, and what strength of fleshly arm would presume to lift irreligious hands against the lofty 

height of your most Christian Empire, if the concordant hearts of priests were studious to implore their 
Redeemer for you with the tongue, and also, as they ought to do, by their deservings? Or what sword of a 
most savage race would advance with so great cruelty to the slaughter of the faithful, unless the life of us, 
who are called priests but are not, were weighed down by works most wicked. But while we neglect the 
things that concern us, and think of those that concern us not, we associate our sins with the barbaric forces 
and our fault, which weighs down the forces of the republic, sharpens the swords of the enemy. But what 
shall we say for ourselves, who press down the people of God which we are unworthily set over with the 
loads of our sins; who destroy by example what we preach with the tongue; who by our works teach 
unrighteous things, and with our voice only set forth the things that are righteous? Our bones are worn down 
by fasts, and in our mind we swell. Our body is covered with vile raiment, and ill elation of heart we surpass 
the purple. We lie in ashes, and look down upon loftiness. Teachers of humility, we are chiefs of pride; 
behind the faces of sheep we hide the teeth of wolves (9). But what is the end of these things except that we 
persuade men, but are manifest to God? Wherefore most providently for restraining warlike movements 
does the most pious Lord seek the peace of the Church, and, for compacting it, deigns to bring back the 
hearts of its priests to concord. And this indeed is what I wish; and, as far as I am concerned, I render 
obedience to his most serene commands. But since it is not my cause, but God's, since the pious laws, 
since the venerable synods, since the very commands of our Lord Jesus Christ are disturbed by the 
invention of a certain proud and pompous phrase, let the most pious Lord cut the place of the sore, and bind 
the resisting patient in the chains of august authority. For in binding up these things tightly you relieve the 
republic; and while you cut off such things, you provide for the lengthening of your reign. 
For to all who know the Gospel it is apparent that by the Lord's voice the care of the whole Church was 
committed to the holy Apostle and Prince of all the Apostles, Peter. For to him it is said, Peter, lovest thou 
Me? Feed My sheep (John xxi. 17). To him it is said. Behold Satan hath desired to sift you as wheat; and I 
have prayed for thee, Peter, that they faith fail not. And thou, when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren 
(Luke xxii. 31). To him it is said. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build My Church, and the gates of hell 
shall not prevail against it. And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven and whatsoever thou 
Shalt bind an earth shall be bound also in heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be 
loosed also in heaven (Matth. xvi. 18). 

Lo, he received the keys of the heavenly kingdom, and power to bind and loose is given him, the care and 
principality of the whole Church is committed to him, and yet he is not called the universal apostle; while the 
most holy man, my fellow-priest John, attempts to be called universal bishop. I am compelled to cry out and 
say, O tempora, O mores! 

Lo, all things in the regions of Europe are given up into the power of barbarians, cities are destroyed, camps 
overthrown, provinces depopulated, no cultivator inhabits the land, worshippers of idols rage and dominate 
daily for the slaughter of the faithful, and yet priests, who ought to lie weeping on the ground and in ashes, 
seek for themselves names of vanity, and glory in new and profane titles. 

Do I in this matter, most pious Lord, defend my own cause? Do I resent my own special wrong? Nay, the 
cause of Almighty God, the cause of the Universal Church. 

Who is this that, against the evangelical ordinances, against the decrees of canons, presumes to usurp to 
himself a new name? Would indeed that one by himself he were, if he could be without any lessening of 
others, -he that covets to be universal. 

And certainly we know that many priests of the Constantinopolitan Church have fallen into the whirlpool of 
heresy, and have become not only heretics, but even heresiarchs. For thence came Nestorius, who, 
thinking Jesus Christ, the Mediator of God and men, to be two persons, because he did not believe that God 
could be made man, broke out even into Jewish perfidy. Thence came Macedonius, who denied that God 
the Holy Spirit was consubstantial with the Father and the Son. If then any one in that Church takes to himself 
that name, whereby he makes himself the head of all the good, it follows that the Universal Church falls from 
its standing (which God forbid), when he who is called Universal falls. But far from Christian hearts be that 
name of blasphemy, in which the honour of all priests is taken away, while it is madly arrogated to himself by 
one. 

Certainly, in honour of Peter, Prince of the apostles, it was offered by the venerable synod of Chalcedon to 
the Roman pontiff (1). But none of them has ever consented to use this name of singularity, lest, by 
something being given peculiarly to one, priests in general should be deprived of the honour due to them. 
How is it then that we do not seek the glory of this title even when offered, and another presumes to seize it 
for himself though not offered? 

He, then, is rather to be bent by the mandate of our most pious Lords, who scorns to render obedience to 
canonical injunctions. He is to be coerced, who does wrong to the holy Universal Church, who swells in 
heart, who covets rejoicing in a name of singularity, who also puts himself above the dignity of your Empire 
through a title peculiar to himself. 
Behold, we all suffer offence for this thing. Let then the author of the offence be brought back to a right way of 

life; and all quarrels of priests will cease. For I for my part am the servant of all priests, so long as they live 
as becomes priests. For whosoever, through the swelling of vain glory, lifts up his neck against Almighty 
Gold and against the statutes of the Fathers, I trust in Almighty God that he will not bend my neck to himself, 
not even with swords. 

Moreover what has been done in this city on our hearing of this title, I have indicated in full to my deacon and 
responsalis Sabinianus. Let then the piety of my Lords think of me as their own, whom they have always 
cherished and countenanced beyond others, and who desire to render obedience to you and yet fear to be 
found guilty in the heavenly and tremendous judgment, and, according to the petition of the aforesaid 
deacon Sabinianus, let my most pious Lord either deign to judge this business, or to move the often before 
mentioned man to desist at length from this attempt. If then through the most just judgment of your Piety he 
should comply with your orders, even though they be mild ones, we shall return thanks to Almighty God, and 
rejoice for the peace granted through you to all the Church. But should he persist any longer in his present 
contention, we hold this sentence of the Truth to be already made good; Every one that exalteth himself 
shall be humbled (Luke xiv. 1 1 ; xviii. 14). And again it is written. Before a fall the heart is lifted up (Prov. xvi. 
18). I however, rendering obedience to the commands of my Lords, have both Written sweetly to my 
aforesaid fellow-priest, and humbly admonished him to amend himself of this coveting of empty glory. If 
therefore he be willing to hear me, he has a devoted brother. But, if he persists in pride, I already see what 
will follow:-that he will find Him as his adversary of whom it is written, God resisteth the proud, but giveth 
grace unto the humble (Jam. iv. 6). 

EPISTLE XXI. 

TO CONSTANTINA AUGUSTA (2). 

Gregory to Constantina, &c. 

Almighty God, who holds in His right hand the heart of your Piety, both protects us through you and prepares 
for you rewards of eternal remuneration for temporal deeds. For I have learnt from the letters of the deacon 
Sabinianus my responsalis with what justice your Serenity is interested in the cause of the blessed Prince of 
the apostles Peter against certain persons who are proudly humble and feignedly kind. And I trust in the 
bounty of our Redeemer that for these your good offices with the most serene Lord and his most pious sons 
you will receive retribution also in the heavenly country. Nor is there any doubt that you will receive eternal 
benefits, being loosed from the chains of your sins, if in the cause of his Church you have made him your 
debtor to whom the power of binding and of loosing has been given. Wherefore I still beg you to allow no 
man's hypocrisy to prevail against the truth, since there are some who, according to the saying of the 
excellent preacher, by sweet words and fair speeches seduce the hearts of the innocent,-men who are vile 
in raiment, but puffed up in heart. And they affect to despise all things in this world, and yet seek to acquire 
for themselves all the things that are of this world. They confess themselves unworthy before all men, but 
cannot be content with private titles, since they covet that whereby they may seem to be more worthy than 
all. Let therefore your Piety, whom Almighty God has appointed with our most serene Lord to be over the 
whole world, through your favouring of justice render service to Him from whom you have received your right 
to so great a dominion, that you may rule over the world that is committed to you so much the more securely 
as you more truly serve the Author of all things in the execution of truth. 

Furthermore, I inform you that I have received a letter from the most pious Lord desiring me to be pacific 
towards my brother and fellow-priest John. And indeed so it became the religious Lord to give injunctions to 
priests. But, when this my brother with new presumption and pride calls himself universal bishop, having 
caused himself in the time of our predecessor of holy memory to be designated in synod by this so proud a 
title, though all the acts of that synod were abrogated, being disallowed by the Apostolic See, -the most 
serene Lord gives me a somewhat distressing intimation, in that he has not rebuked him who is acting 
proudly, but endeavours to bend me from my purpose, who in this cause of defending the truth of the 
Gospels and Canons, of humility and rectitude; whereas my aforesaid brother and fellow-priest is acting 
against evangelical principles and also against the blessed Apostle Peter, and against all the churches, 
and against the ordinances of the Canons. But the Lord, in whose hands are all things, is almighty; of Him it 
is written. There is no wisdom nor prudence nor counsel against the Lord (Prov. xxi. 30). And indeed my 
often before mentioned most holy brother endeavours to persuade my most serene Lord of many things: 
but well I know that all those prayers of his and all those tears will not allow my Lord to be in any thing 
cajoled by any one against reason or his own soul. 

Still it is very distressing, and hard to be borne with patience, that my aforesaid brother and fellow-bishop, 
despising all others, should attempt to be called sole bishop. But in this pride of his what else is denoted 
than that the times of Antichrist are already near at hand? For in truth he is imitating him who, scorning social 
joy with the legions of angels, attempted to start up to a summit of singular eminence, saying, I will exalt my 

throne above the stars of heaven, I will sit upon the mount of the testament, in the sides of the North, and will 
ascend above the heights of the clouds, and I will be like the most High (Isai. xiv. 13). Wherefore I beseech 
you by Almighty God not to allow the times of your Piety to be polluted by the elation of one man, nor in any 
way to give any assent to so perverse a title, and that in this case your Piety may by no means despise me; 
since, though the sins of Gregory are so great that he ought to suffer such things, yet there are no sins of the 
Apostle Peter that he should deserve in your times to suffer thus. Wherefore again and again I beseech you 
by Almighty God that, as the princes your ancestors have sought the favour of the holy Apostle Peter, so 
you also take heed both to seek it for yourselves and to keep it, and that his honour among you be in no 
degree lessened on account of our sins who unworthily serve him, seeing that he is able both to be your 
helper now in all things and hereafter to remit your sins. 

Moreover, it is now even seven years that we have been living in this city among the swords of the 
Lombards. How much is expended on them daily by this Church, that we may be able to live among them, is 
not to be t told. But I briefly indicate that, as in the regions of Ravenna the Piety of my Lords has for the first 
army of Italy a treasurer (sacellarium) to defray the daily expenses for recurring needs, so I also in this city 
am their treasurer for such purposes And yet this Church, which at one and the same time unceasingly 
expends so much on clergy, monasteries, the poor, the people, and in addition on the Lombards, lo it is still 
pressed down by the affliction of all the Churches, which groan much for this pride of one man, though they 
do not presume to say anything. 

Further, a bishop of the city of Salona has been ordained without the knowledge of me and my responsalis, 
and a thing has been done which never happened under any former princes. When I heard of this, I at once 
sent word to that prevaricator, who had been irregularly ordained, that he must not presume by any means 
to celebrate the solemnities of mass, unless we should have first ascertained from our most serene Lords 
that they had ordered this to be done; and this I commanded him under pain of excommunication. And yet, 
scorning and despising me, supported by the audacity of certain secular persons, to whom he is said to 
give many bribes so as to impoverish his Church, he presumes up to this time to celebrate mass, and has 
refused to come to me according to the order of my Lords. Now I, obeying the injunction of their Piety, have 
from my heart forgiven this same Maximus, who had been ordained without my knowledge, his presumption 
in passing over me and my responsalis in his ordination, even as though he had been ordained with my 
authority. But his other wrong doings-to wit his bodily transgressions, which I have heard of, and his having 
been elected through bribery, and his having presumed to celebrate mass while excommunicated-these 
things, for the sake of God, I cannot pass over without enquiry. But I hope, and implore the Lord, that no fault 
may be found in him with respect to these things that are reported, and that his case may be term hated 
without peril to my soul. Nevertheless, before this has been ascertained, my most serene Lord, in the order 
that has been despatched, has enjoined me to receive him with honour when he comes. And it is a very 
serious thing that a man of whom so many things of such a nature are reported should be honoured before 
such things have been enquired into and sifted, as they ought in the first place to be. And, if the causes of the 
bishops who are committed to me are settled before my most pious Lords under the patronage of others, 
what shall I do, unhappy hat I am, in this Church? But that my bishops despise me, and have recourse to 
secular Judges against me, I give thanks to Almighty God that I attribute it to my sins. This however I briefly 
intimate, because I am waiting for a little while; and, if he should long delay coming to me, I shall in no wise 
hesitate to exercise strict canonical discipline in his case. But I trust in Almighty God, that He will give long 
life to our most pious Lords, and order things for us under your hand, not according to our sins, but according 
to the gifts of His grace. These things, then, I suggest to my most tranquil lady, since I am not ignorant with 
how great zeal for rectitude the most pure conscience of her Serenity is moved. 

EPISTLE XXIII. 

TO CASTORIUS, NOTARY. 

Gregory to Castorius, &c. 

Our hearing of the death of our brother and fellow-bishop John (3) has greatly saddened us especially as 
that city at this time has lost the solace of pastoral care. Wherefore, since very many advantages to the 
Church itself demand that, under the guidance of Christ, a priest should be ordained without delay, we 
accordingly charge thy Experience to exhort the clergy and people with all urgency that they delay not to 
elect for themselves a priest to be consecrated. This however, and before all things, we desire thee to 
press upon them, that in the general cause they regard not their own private interests. Let there be no 
venality, then, in this election, lest, while they covet rewards, they lose their discrimination of choice and think 
that man worthy for this office who may have pleased them, not by his merits, but by his gifts. For let them 
especially and absolutely know this, that he is not only unworthy of the priesthood, but will also certainly 
become further culpable, whosoever may presume to make merchandise of the gift of God by thinking to 

purchase it for a price. Wiierefore let not iiim tiiat is liberal in bribes, but him that is worthy for his merits, be 
chosen. For the penalty will affect both the elected and the electors, if they attempt with sacrilegious mind to 
violate the purity of the priesthood. Moreover, whether one or two may have been elected, by all means 
warn five of the senior presbyters and five of the leading people (4) to come to us together. But with respect 
to the clergy, if, besides those who determine to come, you are of opinion that the presence of any others is 
necessary, send them to us without delay, that there may be no plea of excuse, nor any delay ensue, in 
setting the Church in order. 

EPISTLE XXV. 

TO SEVERUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Severus, Bishop of Ficulum. 

The report that has been sent to us has informed us of the death of the bishop John (5). Wherefore we 
solemnly delegate to thy Fraternity the work of the visitation of the bereaved Church: which work it becomes 
thee so to execute that no one may presume to interfere with respect to the promotions of the clergy, the 
revenues, ornaments, ministrations, or whatever else belongs to the patrimony of the same Church. 
According to custom. 

EPISTLE XXVI. 

TO THE PEOPLE OF RAVENNA. 

Gregory to the clergy, gentry, and common people of Ravenna (6). 

Having been informed of the death of your bishop, we have taken care to delegate to our brother and 
fellow-bishop Severus of Ficulum the visitation of the bereaved Church, to whom we have given in charge to 
allow nothing with respect to the promotions of the clergy, the revenues, ornaments, and ministrations, to be 
usurped by any one. It is for you to render obedience to his assiduous exhortations.According to custom. 

EPISTLE XXIX. 

TO VINCOMALUS, GUARDIAN (Defensorem) (7). 

Gregory to Vincomalus, &c. 

With a view to the advantage of the Church it is our will and pleasure, that, if thou art held bound by no 
condition of, or liability to, bodily service, and hast not been a cleric of any other city, and if there is no 
canonical objection to thee, thou take the office of guardian of the Church, that thou mayest execute 
incorruptly and with alacrity whatever may be enjoined thee by us for the benefit of the poor, using this 
privilege which after deliberation we have conferred upon thee, so as to do thy diligence faithfully in 
accomplishing all that may be enjoined on thee by us, as having to render an account of thy doings under 
the judgment of our God. This epistle we have dictated, to be committed to writing, to Paterius, notary of our 
Church; In the month of March, Indiction 13. 

EPISTLE XXX. 

TO MAURICIUS AUGUSTUS. 

Gregory to Mauricius, &c. 

The Piety of my Lords, which has been wont mercifully to sustain your servants, has shone forth here in so 
kind a supply that the need of all the feeble has been relieved by the succour of your bounty. On this 
account we all with prayers and tears beseech Almighty God, who has moved the heart of your Clemency to 
do this thing, that He would preserve the empire of our Lords safe in His unfailing love, and by the aid of His 
own majesty extend their victories in all nations. The thirty pounds of gold which my fellow-servant Busa 
brought, Scribo (8) has distributed faithfully to priests, persons in need, and others. And, since certain 
females devoted to a religious life (sanctimoniales foeminae) have come to this city from divers provinces, 
having fled hither after captivity, of whom some, so far as there was room for them, have been placed in 
monasteries, but others, who could not be taken in, lead a life of singular destitution, it has been thought 
good that what Could be spared from the relief of the blind maimed and feeble should be distributed to 
them, so that not only needy natives, but also strangers who arrive here, might receive of the compassion of 
our Lords. Hence it has been brought about that all alike with one accord pray for the life of our lords, that so 

Almighty God may give you a long and quiet life, and grant to the most happy offspring of your Piety to 
flourish long in the Roman republic. The pay also of the soldiers has been so distributed by my aforesaid 
fellow-servant Scribo (8), in the presence also of the glorious Castus, magister militum, that all received with 
thanks the gifts of our lords under due discipline, and abstained from all murmuring such as was formerly 
wont to prevail among them. 

EPISTLE XXXVI. 

TO SEVERUS, Scholasticus. 

Gregory to Severus, Scholasticus to the Exarch (9). 

Those who assist judges and are bound to them by sincere attachment ought to-advise them and suggest 
to them what may both save their souls and not derogate from their reputation. This being so, since we know 
with what sincere loyalty you love the most excellent Exarch, we have been careful to inform your Greatness 
of the things that have been done, that, being aware of them, you may move him to assent to them 
reasonably. 

Know then that Agilulph, King of the Lombards, is not unwilling to conclude a general peace, if only the lord 
Patricius will consent to an arbitration. For he complains that many acts of violence were committed in his 
regions during the time of peace. And since, if reasonable grounds for arbitration should be found, he 
desires to have satisfaction made to himself, he also himself promises to make satisfaction in all ways, if it 
should appear that any wrong was committed on his side during the peace. Since then it is no doubt 
reasonable to agree to what he asks, there ought to be an arbitration, that, if any wrongs have been done on 
either side, they may be adjusted; so that it may i be possible, with the protection of Cool, to establish a 
general peace; for how necessary for us all this is you well know. Act therefore wisely as you have been 
wont to do, that the most excellent Exarch may consent to this without delay, lest peace should appear to be 
refused by him, as should not be. For, should he be unwilling to consent, he indeed [Agilulph] again 
promises to conclude a special peace with us; but we know that divers islands and other places would 
undoubtedly in that case be ruined. However, let him [the Exarch] consider these things, and hasten to 
make peace, to the end that at any rate during this cessation of hostilities we may have some degree of 
quiet, and the forces of the republic may with the help of God be the better repaired for resistance. 

EPISTLE XXXIX. 

TO ANASTASIUS, BISHOP (1). 

Gregory to Anastasius, Bishop of Antioch. 

Glory to God in the highest and on earth peace to men of good will (Luke ii. 14), because that great river 
which once had left the rocks of Antioch dry has returned at length to its proper channel, and waters the 
subject valleys that are near, so as also to bring forth fruit, some thirty-fold, some sixty-fold, and some an 
hundred-fold. For now there is no doubt that many flowers of souls are growing up in its valleys, and that they 
will come even to ripe fruit through the streams of your tongue. Wherefore with voice of heart and mouth from 
our inmost soul we render due praise to Almighty God, and rejoice in your Blessedness, not with you only, 
but with all who are subject to you. I have received the letters of your Holiness, to me most sweet and 
pleasant, while we ourselves, if I may so speak, are sweating under the same toil with you. And indeed I 
know how heavy must be to thee the burden of external cares after those heights of rest, wherein with the 
hand of the heart thou wert touching heavenly secrets. But remember that thou rules an Apostolic See, and 
assuagest sorrow the more readily from being, made all things to all men. In the Books of Kings, as your 
accomplished Holiness knows, a certain man is described who used either hand for the right hand (1 Chron. 
xii. 2). And, with regard to this, I am not doubtful about tile lord Anastasius, of old my most sweet and most 
holy patron, that, while he draws earthly works to heavenly profit, he turns the left band to the right hand's 
use; so that his heavenly intentness may accomplish its work, so to speak, with the right hand, and also, 
when he is led in his care of temporal things towards the interests of justice, the left hand may acquire the 
strength of the right. 

And indeed these things cannot be without heavy labour and trouble. But let us remember the labours of 
those who went before us; and what we endure will not be hard. For We must through many tribulations enter 
into the kingdom of God (Acts xiv. 22). And, We were pressed out of measure, yea and above strength, 
insomuch that we were weary even of life. But we ourselves, too had the answer of death in ourselves, that 
we should not trust in ourselves (2 Cor. i. 8, 9). And yet The sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be 
compared with the supervening glory which shall be revealed in us (Rom. viii. 1 8). How then can we that are 
weak sheep pass without labour through the heat of this world wherein we know that even rams have 

suffered under heavy toil? 

Further, what tribulations I suffer in this land from the swords of the Lombards, from the iniquities of judges, 
from the press of business, from the care of subjects, and also from bodily affliction, I am unable to express 
either by pen or tongue. Concerning which things even though I might say something briefly, I hesitate, lest to 
your most holy Charity, while afflicted by your own tribulations, I should add mine also. But may Almighty 
God both in the abundance of His loving-kindness fill the mind of your most holy Blessedness with all 
comfort, and grant at sortie time, on account of your intercession, to unworthy me to rest from these evils 
which I suffer. Amen. Grace. These words, as you see, taken from what you had written, I insert in my 
epistles, that your Blessedness may perceive with regard to Saint Ignatius that he is not only yours, but also 
ours(2). For, as we have his master, the Prince of the apostles in common, so also no one of us ought to 
have to himself alone the disciple of this same Prince(3). Moreover, we have received your blessing(4), 
which is of sweet smell and of a good savour, with the feelings that were due to it. And we give thanks to 
Almighty God that what you do, what you say, and what you give, is fragrant and savoury. For your life 
therefore let us say together, let us say all. Glory to God in the highest, and an earth peace to men of good 
will. 

EPISTLE XL. 

TO MAURICIUS AUGUSTUS. 

Gregory to Mauricius, &c. 

The Piety of my Lords in their most serene commands, while set on refuting me on certain matters, in 
sparing me has by no means spared me. For by the use therein of the term simplicity they politely call me 
silly. It is true indeed that in Holy Scripture, when simplicity is spoken of in a good sense, it is often carefully 
associated with prudence and uprightness. Hence it is written of the blessed Job, The man was simple and 
upright (Job i. 1). And the blessed Apostle Paul admonishes saying Be ye simple in evil and prudent in 
good Rom. xvi. 19). And the Truth in person) admonishes saying. Be ye prudent as serpents, and simple as 
doves (Matth. x. 16); thus shewing it to be very unprofitable if either prudence should be wanting to simplicity, 
or simplicity to prudence. In order, then, to make His servants instructed for all things He desired them to be 
both simple as doves, and prudent as serpents, that so both the cunning of the serpent might sharpen in 
them the simplicity of the dove, and the simplicity of the dove temper the cunning of the serpent. 
I therefore, who am denounced in the most serene commands of my Lords as simple without tile addition of 
prudence, as having been deceived by the cunning of Ariulph, am plainly and undoubtedly called silly; 
which I also myself acknowledge to be the case. For, though your Piety were silent, the facts cry out. For, if I 
had not been silly, I should by no means have come to endure what I suffer in this place among the swords 
of the Lombards. Moreover, in what I stated about Ariulph, that he was prepared with all his heart to come to 
terms with the republic, seeing that I am not believed, I am reproved also as having lied. But, although I am 
not a priest(3), I know it to be a grave injury to a priest that, being a servant of the truth, he should be 
believed to be deceitful. And I have been for some time aware that Nordulph is believed before me, and 
Leo before me, and that now easy credence is given to those who seem to be in your confidence more than 
to my assertions. 

And indeed if the captivity of my land were not increasing day by day, I would gladly pass over in silence 
contempt and ridicule of myself. But this does afflict me exceedingly, that from my bearing the charge of 
falsehood it ensues also that Italy is daily led captive under the yoke of the Lombards. And, while my 
representations are in no wise believed, the strength of the enemy is increasing hugely. This however I 
suggest to my most pious Lord, that he would think anything that is bad of me, but, with regard to the 
advantage of the republic and the cause of the rescue of Italy, not easily lend his pious ears to any one, but 
believe facts rather than words. Moreover, let not our Lord, in virtue of his earthly power, too hastily disdain 
priests, but with excellent consideration, on account of Him whose servants they are, so rule over them as 
also to pay the reverence that is due to them. For in Holy Writ priests are sometimes called gods, and 
sometimes angels. For even through Moses it is said of him who is to be put upon his oath. Bring him unto 
the gods (Exod. xxii. 8); that is unto the priests. And again it is written. Than shall not revile the gods (lb. 28), to 
wit, the priests. And the prophet says. The priest's lips shall keep knowledge, and they skull seek the law at 
his mouth; for he is the angel of the Lord of hosts (Malach. ii. 7), Why, then, should it be strange if your Piety 
were to condescend to honour those to whom even God Himself in His word gives honour, calling them 
angels or gods? 

Ecclesiastical history also testifies that, when accusations in writing against bishops had been offered to the 
Prince Constantino of pious: memory, he received indeed the bills of accusation, but, calling together the 
bishops who had been accused, he burnt before their eyes the bills which he had received, saying. Ye are 
gods, constituted by the true God. Go, and settle your causes among you,for it is not fit that we should judge 

gods. Yet in this sentence, my pious Lord, lie conferred more on iiimself by iiis iiumility tiian on tiiem by tiie 
reverence paid to tiiem. For before liim tliere were pagan princes in tlie republic, wlio l<new not tlie true God, 
but worsliipped gods of wood and stone; and yet tliey paid tlie greatest lionour to tlieir priests. Wliat wonder 
tlien if a Cliristian emperor sliould condescend to lionour tlie priests of the true God, when pagan princes, 
as we have already said, knew how to bestow honour on priests who served gods of wood and stone? 
These things, then, I suggest to the piety of my Lords, not in my own behalf, but in behalf of all priests. For I 
am a man that is a sinner. And, since I offend against Almighty God incessantly every day, I surmise that it 
will be some amends for this at the tremendous judgment, that I am smitten incessantly every day by blows. 
And I believe that you appease the same Almighty God all the more as you more severely afflict me who 
serve Him badly. For I had already received many blows, and when the commands of my Lords came in 
addition, I found consolations that I was not hoping for. For, if I can, I will briefly enumerate these blows. 
First, that the peace which without any cost to the republic I had made with the Lore bards who were in 
Tuscany was withdrawn from me. Then, the peace having been broken, the soldiers were removed from the 
Roman city. And some indeed were slain by the enemy, but others were placed at Narnii and Perusium 
(Perugia); and Rome was left, that Perusium might be held. After this a still heavier blow was the arrival of 
Agilulph, so that I saw with my own eyes Romans tied by the neck with ropes like dogs, to be taken to 
France for sale. And, because we who were within the city under the protection of God escaped his hands, a 
ground was thence sought for making us appear culpable; to wit, because corn ran short, which cannot by 
any means be kept in large quantities for long in this city; as I have shewn more fully in another 
representation. On my own account indeed I was in no wise disturbed, since I declare, my conscience 
bearing me witness, that I was prepared to suffer any adversity whatever, so long as I came out of all these 
things with the safety of my soul. But for the glorious men, Gregory the praefect, and Castorius the military 
commander, (magistro militum), I have been distressed in no small degree, seeing that they n no way 
neglected to do all that could be done, and endured most severe toil in watching and guarding the city 
during the siege, and, after all this, were smitten by the heavy indignation of my Lords. As to them, I clearly 
understand that it is not their conduct, but my person, that goes against them. For, having with me alike 
laboured in trouble, they are alike troubled after labour. 

Now as to the Piety of my Lords holding out over me the formidable and terrible judgment of Almighty God, I 
beseech you by the same Almighty God to do this no more. For as yet we know not how any of us will stand 
there. And Paul, the excellent preacher, says. Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both 
will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts (1 Cor. iv. 
5). Yet this I briefly say, that, unworthy sinner as I am, I rely more on the mercy of Jesus when He comes than 
on the justice of your Piety. And there are many things that men are ignorant of with regard to this judgment; 
for perhaps He will blame what you praise, and praise what you blame. Wherefore among all these 
uncertainties I return to tears only, praying that the same Almighty God may both direct our most pious Lord 
with His hand and in that terrible judgment find him free from all defaults. And may He make me so to please 
men, if need be, as not to offend against His eternal grace(6). 

EPISTLE XL!. 

TO CONSTANTINA AUGUSTA. 

Gregory to Constantina, &c. 

Knowing how my most serene Lady thinks about the heavenly country and the life of her soul, I consider that 
I should be greatly in fault were I to keep silence on matters that ought to be represented to her for the fear of 
God. 

Having ascertained that there are many of the natives in the island of Sardinia who still, after the evil custom 
of their race, practise sacrifices to idols, and that the priests of the same island are sluggish in preaching our 
Redeemer, I sent thither one of the bishops of Italy, who with the co-operation of the Lord has brought many 
of the natives to the faith. But he has reported to me a sacrilegious proceeding, namely, that those in the 
island who sacrifice to idols pay a bribe to the judge for license to do this. And, when some of them had 
been baptized and had ceased sacrificing to idols, the same payment had been exacted by this same 
judge of the island, even after their baptism, which they had been previously accustomed to make for leave 
to sacrifice to idols. And, when the aforesaid bishop found fault with him, he replied that he had promised so 
large a suffragium(7) that he could not make it up except by aid from cases of this kind. But the island of 
Corsica is oppressed by such an excessive number of exactors and such a burden of exactions, that those 
who are in it are hardly able to make up what is exacted except by selling their children. Hence it ensues 
that the proprietors of this island, deserting the pious republic, are forced to take refuge with that most 
wicked nation of the Lombards. For what can they suffer from barbarians harder or more cruel than being so 
straitened and squeezed as to be compelled to sell their children? Moreover, in the island of Sicily one 

Stephen, chartularius of the maritime parts, is said to practise such illegalities and such oppressions, 
invading places that belong to various persons, and without any legal process putting up titles(8) on 
properties and houses, that, if I wished to tell every one of his doings that have come to my ears, I could not 
accomplish the task in a large volume. 

Let my most serene Lady look to all these things wisely, and assuage the groans of the oppressed. For I 
suspect that these things have not come to your most pious ears. For if they could have reached them, they 
would by no means have continued until now. But they should be represented now at a suitable time to our 
most pious Lord, that he may remove such and so great a burden of sin from his own soul, from the empire, 
and from his sons. I know he will say that whatever is collected from the aforesaid islands is transmitted to us 
for the expenses of Italy. But in reply to this I suggest that, even though less expenditure were bestowed on 
Italy, he should still rid his empire of the tears of the oppressed. For perhaps, too, such great expenditure in 
this land profits less than it might do because the money for it is collected with some admixture of sin. Let 
therefore our most serene Lords give orders that nothing be collected with sin. And I know that, though less 
is given for the advantage of the republic, the republic is thereby much aided. And though perhaps it may be 
less aided by a less expenditure, yet it is better that we should not live temporally, than that you should find 
any hindrance in the way of eternal life. For consider what must be the feelings, what the state of heart of 
parents, when they part with their children lest they should be tormented. But how one ought to feel for the 
children of others is well known to those who have children of their own. Let it then suffice for me to have 
briefly represented these things, lest, if your Piety were not to know what is being done in these parts, I 
should suffer for the guilt of my silence before the strict judge. 

EPISTLE XL!!. 

TO SEBASTIAN, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Sebastian, Bishop of Sirmium. 

I have received the most sweet and pleasant letter of thy Fraternity, which, though you are never absent from 
my heart, has nevertheless made your Holiness as it were present with me bodily. But I beseech Almighty 
God to protect you with His right hand, and to grant you a tranquil life here, and, when it shall please Him, 
eternal rewards. But I beg you, if you love me with that love wherewith you always loved me when we were 
together, to pray for me more earnestly, that so Almighty God may loose me from the bands of my sins, and 
make me to stand free in His sight, released from the burden of this corruption. For, however inestimable be 
the sweetness of the heavenly country for drawing one towards it, yet there are many sorrows in this life to 
impel us daily to the love of heavenly things. And these only please me exceedingly from the very fact that 
they do not allow anything to please me in this world. 

For we can by no means describe, most holy brother, what we suffer in this land at the hands of your friend, 
the lord Romanus(9). Yet I may briefly say that his malice towards us has surpassed the swords of the 
Lombards; so that the enemies who kill us seem kinder than the judges of the republic, who by their malice, 
rapines, and deceits wear us out with anxiety. And to bear at the same time the charge of bishops and 
clergy, and also of monasteries and people, and to watch anxiously against the plots of the enemy, and to 
be ever suspicious of the deceitfulness and malice of the dukes; what labours and what Sorrows all this 
involves, your Fraternity may the more truly estimate as you more purely love me who suffer these things 
Furthermore, while addressing you with the greeting that I owe you, I inform you that it has come to my 
knowledge from the report Boniface the defensor, that our brother the most holy lord Anastasius the 
patriarch(l) has wished to commit to you the government of the Church in one of his cities, and that you have 
refused your assent. This your feeling and your wisdom I most gladly approve of, and strongly commend; 
and I account you happy, and myself unhappy in having consented at such a time as this to undertake the 
government of the Church. If, however, by any chance, in condescension to your brethren, and as being 
intent on works of mercy, you should ever decide to consent to such a proposal, I beg you by no means to 
prefer any one else's love to mine. For there are in the island of Sicily Churches without bishops, and, if by 
the guidance of God you are pleased to take the government of a Church, you will be able to do this better 
near the threshold of the blessed apostle Peter, with his aid. But if you are not so pleased, remain happily 
as you are, that this resolution may continue in you; and pray for us unhappy ones. Now may Almighty God 
keep you under His protection, in whatever place it be His will that you should be, and bring you to heavenly 
rewards. 

EPISTLE XLIII. 

TO EULOGIUS AND ANASTASIUS, BISHOPS. 

Gregory to Eulogius, Bishop of Alexandria, and Anastasius, Bisiiop of Antiocii. 
Wiien tiie excellent preacher says, As long as I am the apostle of the Gentiles I will honour my ministry 
(Rom. xi. 13); saying again in another place. We became as babes among you (1 Thess. ii. 7), he 
undoubtedly shews an example to us who come after him, that we should retain humility in our minds, and 
yet keep in honour the dignity of our order, so that neither should our humility be timid nor our elevation 
proud. Now eight years ago, in the time of my predecessor of holy memory Pelagius, our brother and 
fellow-bishop John in the city of Constantinople, seeking occasion from another cause, held a synod in 
which he attempted to call himself Universal Bishop. Which as soon as my said predecessor knew, he 
despatched letters annulling by the authority of the holy apostle Peter the acts of the said synod; of which 
letters I have taken care to send copies to your Holiness. Moreover he forbade the deacon who attended 
us the most pious Lords for the business of the Church to celebrate the solemnities of mass with our 
aforesaid fellow-priest. I also, being of the same mind with him, have sent similar letters to our aforesaid 
fellow-priest, copies of which I have thought it right to send to your Blessedness, with this especial purpose, 
hat we may first assail with moderate force he mind of our before-named brother concerning this matter, 
wherein by a new act of pride, all the bowels of the Universal Church are disturbed. But, if he should 
altogether refuse to be bent from the stiffness of his elation, then, with the succour of Almighty God, we may 
consider more particularly what ought to be done. 

For, as your venerable Holiness knows, this name of Universality was offered by the holy synod of 
Chalcedon to the pontiff of the Apostolic See which by the providence of God I serve(2). But no one of my 
predecessors has ever consented to use this so profane a title; since, forsooth, if one Patriarch is called 
Universal, the name of Patriarch in the case of the rest is derogated. But far be this, far be it from the mind of 
a Christian, that any one should wish to seize for himself that whereby he might seem in the least degree to 
lessen the honour of his brethren. While, then, we are unwilling to receive this honour when offered to us, 
think how disgraceful it is for any one to have wished to usurp it to himself perforce. 
Wherefore let not your Holiness in your epistles ever call any one Universal, lest you detract from the 
honour due to yourself in offering to another what is not due. Nor let any sinister suspicion make your mind 
uneasy with regard to our most serene lords, inasmuch as he fears Almighty God, and will in no way consent 
to do anything against the evangelical ordinances, against the most sacred canons. As for me, though 
separated from you by long spaces of land and sea, I am nevertheless entirely conjoined with you in heart. 
And I trust that it is so in all respects with your Blessedness towards me; since, when you love me in return, 
you are not far from me. Hence we give thanks the more to that grain of mustard seed (Matth. xiii. 31 , 32), for 
that from what appeared a small and despicable seed it has been so spread abroad everywhere by 
branches rising and extending themselves from the same root that all the birds of heaven may make their 
nests in them. And thanks be to that leaven which, in three measures of meal, has leavened in unity the 
mass of the whole human race (Matth. xiii. 33); and to the little stone, which, cut out of the mountain without 
hands, has occupied the whole face of the earth (Dan. ii. 35), and which to this end everywhere distends 
itself, that from the human race reduced to unity the body of the whole Church might be perfected, and so this 
distinction between the several members might serve for the benefit of the compacted whole. 
Hence also we are not far from you, since in Him who is everywhere we are one. Let us then give thanks to 
Him who, having abolished enmities, has caused that in His flesh there should be in the whole world one 
flock, and one sheepfold under Himself the one shepherd; and let us be ever mindful how the preacher of 
truth admonishes us, saying. Be careful to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace (Ephes. iv. 3), and. 
Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see God (Hebr. xii. 14). And he says 
also to other disciples. If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, having peace with all men (Rom. xii. 1 8) For 
he sees that the good cannot have peace with the bad; and therefore, as ye know, he premised. If it be 
possible. 

But, because peace cannot be established except on two sides, when the bad fly from it, the good ought to 
keep it in their inmost hearts. Whence also it is admirably said. As much as lieth in you; meaning that it 
should remain in us even when it is repelled from the hearts of evil men. And such peace we truly keep, 
when we treat the faults of the proud at once with charity and with persistent jusflce, when we love them and 
hate their vices. For man is the work of God; but vice is the work of man. Let us then disflnguish between what 
God and what man has made, and neither hate the man on account of his error nor love the error on account 
of the man. 

Let us then with united mind attack the evil of pride in the man, that from his enemy, that is to say his error, the 
man himself may flrst be freed. Our Almighty Redeemer will supply strength to charity and jusflce; He will 
supply to us, though placed far from each other, the unity of His Spirit; even He by whose workmanship the 
Church, having been constructed as it were after the manner of the ark with the four sides of the world, and 
bound together with the compacture of incorrupflble planks and the pitch of charity, is disturbed by no 
opposing winds, by the swelling of no billow coming from without. 
But inasmuch as, with His grace steering us, we ought to seek that no wave coming upon us from without 

may throw us into confusion, so ougiit we to pray witii all our hearts, dearest brethren, that the right hand of 
His providence may draw out the accumulation of internal bilgewater within us. For indeed our adversary the 
devil, who, in his rage against the humble, as a roaring lion walketh about seeking whom he may devour (1 
Pet. V. 8), no longer, as we perceive, walks about the folds but so resolutely fixes his teeth in certain 
necessary members of the Church that, unless with the favour of the Lord, the heedful crowd of shepherds 
unanimously run to the rescue, no one can doubt that he will soon tear all the sheepfold; which God forbid. 
Consider, dearest brethren, who it is that follows close at hand, of whose approach such perverse 
beginnings are breaking out even in priests. For it is because he is near of whom it is written. He is king over 
all the sons of pride (Job xli. 25)-not without sore grief I am compelled to say it-that our brother and 
fellow-bishop John, despising the Lord's commands, apostolical precepts, and rules of Fathers, attempts 
through elation to be his forerunner in name. 

But may Almighty God make known to your Blessedness with what sore groaning I am tormented by this 
consideration; that he, the once to me most modest man, he who was beloved of all, he who seemed to be 
occupied in alms, deeds, prayers, and fastings, out of the ashes he sat in, out of the humility he preached, 
has grown so boastful as to attempt to claim all to himself, and through the elation of a pompous expression 
to aim at subjugating to himself all the members of Christ, which cohere to one Head only, that is to Christ. 
Nor is it surprising that the same tempter who knows pride to be the beginning of all sin, who used it formerly 
before all else in the case of the first man, should now also put it before some men at the end of virtues, so 
as to lay it as a snare for those who to some extent seemed to be escaping his most cruel hands by the 
good aims of their life, at the very goal of good work, and as it were in the very conclusion of perfection. 
Wherefore we ought to pray earnestly, and implore Almighty God with continual supplications, that He would 
avert this error from that man's soul, anti remove this mischief of pride and confusion from the unity and 
humility of the Church. And with the favour of the Lord we ought to concur, and make provision with all our 
powers, lest in the poison of one expression the living members in the body of Christ should die. For, if this 
expression is suffered to be allowably used, the honour of all patriarchs is denied: and while he that is 
called Universal perishes per chance in his error, no bishop will be found to have remained in a state of 
truth. 

It is for you then, firmly and without prejudice, to keep the Churches as you have received them, and not to let 
this attempt at a diabolical usurpation have any countenance from you. Stand firm; stand secure; presume 
not ever to issue or to receive writings with the falsity of the name Universal in them. Bid all the bishops 
subject to your care abstain from the defilement of this elation, that the Universal Church may acknowledge 
you as Patriarchs not only in good works but also in the authority of truth. But, if perchance adversity is the 
consequence, we ought to persist unanimously, and show even by dying that in case of harm to the 
generality we do not love anything of our own especially. Let us say with Paul, To me to live is Christ, and to 
die is gain (Philip, i. 21). Let us hear what the first of all pastors says; If ye suffer anything for righteousness' 
sake, happy are ye (1 Pet. ill. 14). For believe me that the dignity which we have received for the preaching 
of the truth we shall more safely relinquish than retain in behalf of the same truth, should case of necessity 
require it. Finally, pray for me, as becomes your most dear Blessedness, that I may shew forth in works what 
I am thus bold to say to you. 

EPISTLE XLVIII. 

TO ANDREW, SCH0LASTICUS(3). 

Gregory to Andrew, &c. 

We have been desirous of carrying out the wish of the most excellent the lord Patrician as to the person of 
Donatus, the archdeacon; but, seeing that it is very dangerous to the soul to lay hands on any one rashly, 
we took care to examine by a thorough investigation into his life and deeds. And, since many things have 
been discovered, as we have written to the said lord Patrician, which remove him far from the episcopate, 
we, fearing the judgment of God, have not thought fit to consent to his ordination. But neither have we 
presumed to ordain John, the presbyter, who is ignorant of the psalms, since this circumstance certainly 
shewed him to be too little in earnest about himself. These, then, being excluded, when we had urged the 
parties to choose some one from among their own people(4), and they declared that they had no one fit for 
this office, and when we together with them were the more distressed, they at length, with one common voice 
and consent, repeatedly solicited our venerable brother the presbyter Marinianus, who they learns had 
been associated with me for a long time in a monastery. He, shrinking from the office, was at last, by various 
means, with difficulty persuaded to give assent to their petition. And, since we were well acquainted with his 
life, and knew him to be solicitous in winning souls, we did not delay his ordination. Let, therefore, your Glory 
receive him as is becoming, and extend to his newness the aid of your succour. For to all, as you know, 
newness in any office whatever is very trying. But I have great confidence that Almighty God, who has 

vouchsafed to put him over His flocl<, will both stimulate him to give heed to what is inward, and comfort him 
with the loving-kindness of His grace for administering what is outward. But, inasmuch as, after his long 
enjoyment of quiet, his newness, as we have before said, will without doubt expose him to perturbation, I 
beg that, when he shall come to you flying from the whirlwinds of secular storms, he may always find in your 
heart a haven of rest, and be cheered by the boon of your charity. But you will soon learn how much you will 
find yourselves able to agree; for he comes unwillingly to the episcopate(5). 

EPISTLE XLIX. 

TO LEANDER, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Leander, Bishop of Hispalis (Seville). 

With what ardour I am athirst to see thee thou readest in the tables of thine own heart, since thou lovest me 
exceedingly. But since I cannot see thee, separated as thou art from me by long tracts of country, I have 
done what charity towards thee dictated, namely to transmit to thy Holiness, on the arrival here of our 
common son Probinus the presbyter, the book of Pastoral Rule, which I wrote at the commencement of my 
episcopate, and the books which thou knewest I had already composed on the exposition of the blessed 
Job. Some sheets indeed of the third and fourth parts of that work I have not sent to thy Charity, having 
already given those sheets only of the said parts to monasteries. These, then, which I send let thy Holiness 
earnestly peruse, and more earnestly deplore my sins, lest it be to my more serious blame that I am seen 
as it were to know what I omit to do. But with how great tumults of business I am oppressed in this Church the 
very brevity of my epistle will signify to thy Charity, seeing that I say so little to him whom more than all I love. 

EPISTLE Lll. 

TO JOHN, ARCHBISHOP. 

Gregory to John, Archbishop of the Corinthians. 

The equity and solicitude of Secundinus our brother and fellow-bishop, which had been well known to us of 
old, is shewn also by the tenor of your letters. In this matter he has greatly pleased us, and made us glad, in 
that in the cause of Anastasius(6), once bishop, which we charged him to enquire into, he has both 
exercised his vigilance diligently and judged the crimes that were discovered as justice required, and as 
was fight. But in all these things we return thanks to Almighty God for that, when certain accusers held back. 
He brought the truth to his knowledge, lest the originator of such great crimes should escape detection. But 
seeing that, in the sentence wherein it is evident that the above-named Anastasius has been justly 
condemned and deposed, our above-named brother and fellow-bishop has visited the offence of certain 
persons in such a manner as to reserve them for our judgment, we therefore have seen fit to signify by this 
present epistle what is to be held to and observed concerning them. 

As to Paul the deacon then, the bearer of these presents, although his fault is exceedingly to his shame and 
discredit-namely, that deluded by promises, he held back from accusation of his late bishop who has been 
lately deposed, and that, in the eagerness of cupidity, he consented, against his own soul, to keep silence 
rather than declare the truth-yet, since it befits us to be more kind than strict, we pardon him this fault, and 
decide that he is to be received again into his rank and position. For we believe that the affliction which he 
has endured since the time of the sentence being pronounced may suffice for the punishment of this fault. 
But as to Euphemius and Thomas, who received sacred orders for relinquishing their accusation, it is our 
will that they be deprived of these sacred orders, and, having been deposed from them, so continue; and 
we decree that they shall never, under any pretext or excuse, be restored to sacred orders. For it is in the 
highest degree improper, and contrary to the rule of ecclesiastical discipline, that they should enjoy the 
dignity which they have received, not for their merits, but as the reward of wickedness. Yet, inasmuch as it is 
fit for us to incline to mercy more than to strict justice, it is our will that the same Euphemius and Thomas be 
restored to the rank and position, but to that only, from which they had been promoted to sacred orders, and 
receive during all the days of their life the stipends of these positions, as they had been before accustomed. 
Further, as to Clematius the reader, I appoint, from a like motive of benignity, that he is to be restored to his 
rank and position. To all these also that is, to Paul the deacon, to Euphemius, Thomas, and Clematius, let 
your Fraternity take care to supply their emoluments, according to the rank and position in which each of 
them is, as each has been accustomed to receive them, from this present thirteenth indiction without any 
diminution. Inasmuch, therefore, as the above-named Paul the deacon asserts that he expended much for 
the advantage of your Church, and desires to be aided by the succour of your Fraternity for recovery of the 
same, we exhort that, if this is so, you should concur with him in all possible ways, and support him with your 
aid, for recovering what he has given, since no reason allows that he should unjustly suffer loss in what he 

has expended for the advantage of the generality. Furthermore, let your Fraternity restore without delay the 
three pounds of gold which, at the instance of our above-named brother and fellow-bishop Secundinus, it 
appears that the said Paul the deacon gave for the benefit of your Church, lest (which God forbid) you 
should seem to burden him, not reasonably, but out of mere caprice. 

EPISTLE Llll. 

TO VIRGILIUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Virgilius, Bishop of Arelate (Aries). 

O how good is charity, which through an image in the mind exhibits what is absent as present to ourselves, 
through love unites what is divided, settles what is confused, associates things that are unequal, completes 
things that are imperfect! Rightly does the excellent preacher call it the bond of perfectness; since, though 
the other virtues indeed produce perfectness, yet still charity binds them together so that they can no longer 
be loosened from the heart of one who loves. Of this virtue, then, most dear brother, i find thee to be full, as 
both those who came from the Galilean parts and the words also of thy letter addressed to me testify to me 
of thee. 

Now as to thy having asked therein, according to ancient custom, for the use of the pallium and the vicariate 
of the Apostolic See, far be it from me to suspect that thou hast sought eminence of transitory power, or the 
adornment of external worship, in our vicariate and in the pallium. But, since it is well known to all whence the 
holy faith proceeded in the regions of Gaul, when your Fraternity asks for a repetition of the old custom of the 
Apostolic See, what is it but that a good offspring reverts to the bosom of its mother?(7) With willing mind 
therefore we grant what has been asked for, lest we should seem either to withdraw from you anything of the 
honour due to you, or to have despised the petition of our most excellent son king Childebert. But the 
present state of things requires the greater earnestness, that with increase of dignity solicitude also may 
advance, and watchfulness in the custody of others may grow, and the merits of your life may serve as an 
example to your subjects, and that your Fraternity may never seek your own through the dignity accorded 
you, but the gains of the heavenly country. For you know what the blessed apostle says, groaning. For all 
seek their own, notthe things which are Jesus Christ's (Philip, ii. 21). 

For I have learnt from information given me by certain persons that in the parts of Gaul and Germany no one 
attains to holy orders except for a consideration given. If this is so, I say it with tears, I declare it with groans, 
that, when the priestly order has fallen inwardly, neither will it be able to stand outwardly for long. For we 
know from the Gospel what our Redeemer in person did; how He went into the temple, and overthrew the 
seats of them that sold doves (Matth. xxi. 12). For to sell doves is to receive a temporal consideration for the 
Holy Spirit, whom, being consubstantial with Himself, God Almighty gives to men through the imposition of 
hands. From which evil what follows is already intimated. For of those who presumed to sell doves in the 
temple of God the seats fell by God's judgment. 

And in truth this transgression is propagated with increase among subordinates. For he who is promoted to 
any sacred order for a price, being already corrupted in the very root of his advancement, is the more ready 
to sell to others what he has bought. And where is that which is written. Freely ye have received, freely give 
(Matth. X. 8)? 

And, seeing that the simoniacal heresy was the first to arise against the holy Church, why is it not 
considered, why is it not seen, that whoso ordains any one for money, causes him in advancing him, to 
become a heretic? 

Another very detestable thing has also been reported to us; that some persons, being laymen, through 
desire of temporal glory, are tonsured on the death of bishops, and all at once are made priests. In such 
cases it is already known what manner of man he is who attains to priesthood, passing suddenly from a lay 
estate to sacred leadership. And one who has never served as a soldier fears not to become a leader of 
the religious(8). How is that man to preach who has perhaps never heard any one else preach? Or bow 
shall he correct the ills of others who has never yet bewailed his own? And, where Paul the apostle prohibits 
a neophyte from coming to sacred orders, we are to understand that, as one was then called a neophyte 
who had been newly planted in the faith, so we now reckon among neophytes one who is still new in holy 
conversation. 

Moreover, we know that walls after being built, are not made to carry a weight of timber till they are dried of 
the moisture of their newness, lest, if a weight be put on them before they are settled, it bear down the whole 
fabric together to the ground. And, when we cut trees for a building, we wait for the moisture of their 
greenness to be first dried out, lest, if the weight of the fabric is imposed on them while still fresh, they be 
bent from their very newness, and be the sooner broken and fall down from having been elevated 
prematurely. Why, then, is not this scrupulously seen to among men, which is so carefully considered even 
in the case of timber and stones? 

On this account your Fraternity must needs tal<e care to admonisii our most excellent son king Childebert 
that he remove entirely the stain of this sin from his kingdom, to the end that Almighty God may give him the 
greater recompense with Himself as He sees him both love what He loves and shun what He hates. 
And so we commit to your Fraternity, according to ancient custom, under God, our vicariate in the Churches 
which are under the dominion of our most excellent son Childebert(9), with the understanding that their 
proper dignity, according to primitive usage, be preserved to the several metropolitans. We have also sent 
a pallium for thy Fraternity to use within the Church for the solemnization of mass only. Further, if any one of 
the bishops should by any chance wish to travel to any considerable distance, let it not be lawful for him to 
remove to other places without the authority of thy Holiness. If any question of faith, or it may be relating to 
other matters, should have arisen among the bishops, which cannot easily be settled, let it be ventilated and 
decided in an assembly of twelve bishops. But, if it cannot be decided after the truth has been investigated, 
let it be referred to our judgment. 

Now may Almighty God keep you under His protection, and grant unto you to preserve by your behaviour 
the dignity that you have received. Given the 12th day of August, Indiction 13. 

EPISTLE LIV. 

TO ALLTHE BISHOPS OF THE KINGDOM OF CHILDEBERT. 

Gregory to all the Bishops of Gaul who are under the kingdom of Childebert(l). 

To this end has the provision of the divine dispensation appointed that there should be diverse degrees 
and distinct orders, that, while the inferiors shew reverence to the more powerful and the more powerful 
bestow love on the inferiors, one contexture of concord may ensue of diversity, and the administration of all 
several offices may be properly borne. Nor indeed could the whole otherwise subsist; unless, that is, a 
great order of differences of this kind kept it together. Further, that creation cannot be governed, or live, in a 
state of absolute equality we are taught by the example of the heavenly hosts, since, there being angels 
and also archangels, it is manifest that they are not equal; but in power and rank, as you know, one differs 
from another. If then among these who are without sin there is evidently this distinction, who of men can 
refuse to submit himself willingly to this order of things which he knows that even angels obey? For hence 
peace and charity embrace each other mutually, and the sincerity of concord remains firm in the reciprocal 
love which is well pleasing to God. 

Since, then each single duty is then salubriously fulfilled when there is one president who may be referred 
to, we have therefore perceived it to be opportune, in the Churches that are under the dominion of our most 
excellent son king Childebert, to give our vicariate jurisdiction, according to ancient custom, to our brother 
Virgilius, bishop of the city of Arelate, to the end that the integrity of the catholic faith, that is of the four holy 
synods, may be preserved under the protection of God with attentive devotion, and that, if any contention 
should by chance arise among our brethren and fellow-priests, he may allay it by the rigour of his authority 
with discreet moderation, as representing the Apostolic See. We have also charged him that, if such a 
dispute should arise in any cases as to require the presence of others, he should assemble our brethren 
and fellow-bishops in competent number, and discuss the matter salubriously with due regard to equity, and 
decide it with canonical integrity. But if a contention (which may the Divine power avert) should happen to 
arise on matters of faith, or any business come up about which there may perchance be serious doubt, and 
he should be in need of the judgment of the Apostolic See in place of his own greatness, we have directed 
him that, having diligently enquired into the truth, he should take care to bring the question under our 
cognizance by a report from himself, to the end that it may be terminated by a suitable sentence so as to 
remove all doubt. 

And, since it is necessary that the bishops should assemble at suitable times for conference before him to 
whom we have granted our vicariate jurisdiction as often as he may think it, we exhort that none of you 
presume to be disobedient to his orders, or defer attending the general conclave, unless perchance bodily 
infirmity should prevent any one, or a just excuse in any case should allow his absence. Yet let such as are 
unavoidably prevented from attending the synod send a presbyter or a deacon in their stead, to the end that 
the things that, with the help of God, may be decided by our vicar, may come to the knowledge of him who is 
absent by a faithful report through the person whom he had sent, and be observed with unshaken 
steadfastness, and that there be no occasion of excuse for daring to violate them. 

About this also we take the precaution of warning you, that none of you may attempt in any way to depart to 
places at any great distance without the authority of our aforesaid brother and fellow-bishop Virgilius, 
knowing that the orders of our predecessors, who granted vicariate jurisdiction to his predecessors, 
undoubtedly lay this down. 

Furthermore, we exhort that each one of you give careful attention to his own office, so that he who desires to 
receive the reward promised for feeding the sheep may guard the flock committed to him with carefulness 

and prayer, lest the prowling wolf should invade and tear the sheep entrusted to him, and there should be in 
the retribution punishment instead of reward. We hope, therefore, most dear brethren, and we entreat 
Almighty God with all our prayers, that He would make you to be fervent more and more in the constancy of 
His love, and grant you especially to be retained in the peace of the Church, and in agreement together. 
It has been reported to us that some are promoted to sacred orders through simoniacal heresy; and we 
have ordered our above-written brother and fellow-bishop Virgilius that this must be altogether prohibited; 
and, that your Fraternity may know and studiously observe this, our letter to him is to be read in your 
presence. Given the 12th day of August, Indiction 13. 

EPISTLE LV. 

TO KING CHILDEBERT. 

Gregory to Childebert, king of the Franks(2). 

The letter of your Excellency has made us exceedingly glad, testifying as it does that you are careful, with 
pious affection, of the honour and reverence due to priests. For you thus shew to all that you are faithful 
worshippers of God, while you love His priests with the acceptable veneration that is due to them, and 
hasten with Christian devotion to do whatever may advance their position. Whence also we have received 
with pleasure what you have written, and grant what you desire with willing mind; and accordingly we have 
committed, with the favour of God, our vicariate jurisdiction to our brother Virgilius, bishop of the city of 
Arelate, according to ancient custom and your Excellency's desire; and have also granted him the use of 
the pallium, as has been the custom of old. 

But, inasmuch as some things have been reported to us which greatly offend Almighty God, and confound 
the honour and reverence due to the priesthood, we beg that they may be in every way amended with the 
support of the censure of your power, lest, while headstrong and perverse doings run counter to your 
devotion, your kingdom, or your soul (which God forbid) be burdened by the guilt of others. 
Further, it has come to our knowledge that on the death of bishops some persons from being laymen are 
tonsured, and mount to the episcopate by a sudden leap. And thus one who has not been a disciple is in his 
inconsiderate ambition made a master. And, since he has not learned what to teach, he bears the office of 
priesthood only in name; for he continues to be a layman in speech and action as before. How, then, is he to 
intercede for the sins of others, not having in the first place bewailed his own? For such a shepherd does not 
defend, but deceives, the flock; since, while he cannot for very shame try to persuade others to do what he 
does not do himself, what else is it but that the Lord's people remains a prey to robbers, and catches 
destruction from the source whence it ought to have had a great support of wholesome protection? How bad 
and how perverse a proceeding this is let your Excellency's Highness consider even from your own 
administration of things. For it is certain that you do not put a leader over an army unless his work and his 
fidelity have first been apparent; unless the virtue and industry of his previous life have shewn him to be a fit 
person. But, if the command of an army is not committed to any but men of this kind, it is easily gathered from 
this comparison of what sort a leader of souls ought to be. But it is a reproach to us, and we are ashamed to 
say it, that priests snatch at leadership who have not seen the very beginning of religious warfare. 
But this also, a thing most execrable, has been reported to us as well: that sacred orders are conferred 
through simoniacal heresy, that is for bribes received. And, seeing that it is exceedingly pestiferous, and 
contrary to the Universal Church, that one be promoted to any sacred order not for merit but for a price, we 
exhort your Excellency to order so detestable a wickedness to be banished from your kingdom For that 
man shows himself to be thoroughly unworthy of this office, who fears not to buy the gift of God with money, 
and presumes to try to get by payment what he deserves not to have through grace. 
These things, then, most excellent son, I admonish you about for this reason, that I desire your soul to be 
saved. And I should have written about them before now, had not innumerable occupations stood in the way 
of my will. But now that a suitable time for answering your letter has offered itself, I have not omitted what it 
was my duty to do. Wherefore, greeting your Excellency with the affection of paternal charity, we beg that all 
things which we have enjoined on our above-named brother and fellow-bishop to be done and observed, 
may be carried out under the protection of your favour, and that you allow them not to be in any way upset by 
the elation or pride of any one. But, as they were observed by his predecessor under the reign of your 
glorious father, so let them be observed now also, by your aid, with zealous devotion. It is right, then, that we 
should thus have a return made to us; and that, as we have not deferred fulfilling your will, so you too, for the 
sake of God and the blessed Peter, Prince of the apostles, should cause our ordinances to be observed in 
all respects; that so your Excellency's reputation, praiseworthy and well-pleasing to God, may extend itself 
all around. Given the 12th day of August, Indiction 13. 

EPISTLE LVI. 

TO MARINIANUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Marinianus, Bishop of Ravenna. 

Moved by the benevolence of the Apostolical See and the order of ancient custom, we have thought fit to 
grant the use of the pallium to thy Fraternity, who art known to have undertaken the office of government in 
the Church of Ravenna(3). And remember thou to use it in no other way but in the proper Church of thy city, 
when the sons (i.e. laity) have been already dismissed, as thou art proceeding from the audience 
chamber(4) to celebrate the sacred solemnities of mass; but, when mass is finished, thou wilt take care to 
lay it by again in the audience chamber. But outside the Church, we do not allow thee to use it any more, 
except four times in the year, in the litanies which we named to thy predecessor John; giving thee at the 
same time this admonition; that, as through the Lord's bounty thou hast obtained from us the use of an 
adornment of this kind to the honour of the priestly office, so thou strive to adorn also the office undertaken 
by thee to the glory of Christ with probity of manners and of deeds. For thus wilt thou be conspicuous for two 
adornments answering to each other, if with such a vesture of the body as this the good qualities also of thy 
soul agree. For all privileges also which appear evidently to have been formerly granted to thy Church we 
confirm by our authority, and decree that they continue inviolate. 

EPISTLE LVII. 

TO JOHN, BISHOP. 

Gregory to John, Bishop of the Corinthians 

Now that our God, from whom nothing is hidden, having cast out an atrocious plague of pollution from the 
government of His Church(5), has been pleased to advance you to the rule thereof, there is need of anxious 
precaution on your part that the Lord's flock, after the wounds and various evils inflicted by its former 
shepherd, may find consolation and wholesome medicine in your Fraternity. Thus, then, let the hand of your 
action wipe away the stain of the previous contagion, so as tO suffer no traces even to remain of that 
execrable wickedness. 

Let, therefore, your solicitude towards your subjects be worthy of praise. Let discipline be exhibited with 
gentleness. Let rebuke be with discernment. Let kindness mitigate wrath; let zeal sharpen kindness: and let 
one be so seasoned with the other that neither immoderate punishment afflict more than it ought, nor again 
laxity impair the rectitude of discipline. Let the conduct of your Fraternity be a lesson to the people 
committed to you. Let them see in you what to love, and perceive what to make haste to imitate. Let them be 
taught how to live by your example. Let them not deviate from the straight course through your leading; let 
them find their way to God by following you; that so thou mayest receive as many rewards from the Saviour 
of the human race as thou shalt have won souls for Him. Labour therefore, most dear brother, and so direct 
the whole activity of thy heart and soul, that thou mayest hereafter be counted worthy to hear. Well done, 
thou goad and faithful servant: enter thou into the joy of thy Lord (Matth. xxv. 21). 

As you requested in your letter which we received through our brother and fellow-bishop Andrew, we have 
sent you the pallium, which it is necessary that you should so use as your predecessors, by the allowance 
of our predecessors, are proved to have used it. 

Furthermore, it has come to our ears that in those parts no one attains to any sacred order without the giving 
of a consideration. If this, is so, I say with tears, I declare with groans, that, when the priestly order has fallen 
inwardly, neither will it stand long outwardly. For we know from the Gospel what our Redeemer in person did; 
how He went into the temple, and overthrew the seats ofthem that sold, doves (Matth. xxi. 12). For to sell 
cloves is to receive a temporal consideration for the Holy Spirit, whom, being consubstantial with Himself, 
Almighty God gives to men through imposition of hands. And what follows from this evil, as I have said 
before, is intimated; for the seats of those who presumed to sell doves in the temple of God fell by the 
judgment of God. And in truth this transgression is propagated with increase among subordinates. For one 
who attains to a sacred dignity tainted in the very root of his promotion is himself the more prepared to sell to 
others what he has bought. And where then is that which is written. Freely ye have received; freely give 
(Matth. X. 8)? And, since the simoniacal heresy was the first to arise against holy Church, why is it not 
considered, why is it not seen, that whosoever ordains any one for a price in promoting him causes him to 
become a heretic? Seeing, then, that the holy universal Church utterly condemns this most atrocious 
wickedness, we exhort your Fraternity in all ways to repress, with all the urgency of your solicitude, this so 
detestable and so huge a sin in all places that are under you. For, if we shall perceive anything of the kind to 
be done henceforth, we will correct it, not with words, but with canonical punishment; and we shall begin to 
have a different opinion of you; which ought not so to be. 
Further, your Fraternity knows that formerly the pallium was not given except for a consideration received. 

But, since this was incongruous, we iield a council before tiie body of tiie blessed Peter, Prince of the 
apostles, and forbade under a strict interdiction the receiving of anything, as well for this as for ordinations. 
It is your duty then, that neither for a consideration, nor for favour or the solicitation of certain persons, you 
consent to any persons being advanced to sacred orders. For it is a grave sin, as we have said, and we 
cannot suffer it to continue without reproof. 

I delayed receiving the above named Andrew, our brother and fellow-bishop, because by the report of our 
brother and fellow-bishop Secundinus we learnt that he had forged letters, as to himself from us, in the 
proceedings against John of Larissa(6). And, unless your goodness had induced us, we would on no 
account have received him. Given the 15th day of the month of August, Indiction 13. 

EPISTLE LVIII. 

TO ALL THE BISHOPS THROUGHOUT HELLADIA(7). 

Gregory to all bishops constituted in the province of Helladia. 

I return thanks with you, dearest brethren, to Almighty God, who has caused the hidden sore which the 
ancient enemy had introduced to come to the knowledge of all, and has cut it away by a wholesome 
incision from the body of His Church. Herein we have cause both to rejoice and to mourn; to rejoice, that is, 
for the correction of a crime, but to mourn for the fall of a brother. But, since for the most part the fall of one is 
wont to be the safeguard of another, whosoever fears to fall, let him give heed to this, that he afford no way of 
approach to the enemy, nor think that deeds done lie hidden. For the Truth proclaims. There is nothing 
hidden that shall not be revealed(Matth. x. 26). For this voice is already the herald of our doings, and He 
himself, being witness, brings in all ways to public view what is done in secret. And who may strive to hide 
his deeds before Him Who is both their witness and their judge? But, since sometimes, when one thing is 
attended to, another is not guarded against, it behoves every one to be watchful against all the snares of the 
enemy, lest, while he conquers in one point he be vanquished in another. For an earthly enemy too, when he 
desires to invade fortified places, thus employs the art of warfare. For indeed he lays ambushes latently; but 
shews himself as though entirely bent on the storming of one place, so that, while there is a running together 
for defence of that place where the danger is imminent, other places about which there is no suspicion may 
be taken. And the result is, that he who, when perceived, was repulsed by the valour of his opponent, 
obtains by stealth what he could not obtain by fighting. But, since in all these things there is need of the aid of 
divine protection, let every one of us cry to the Lord with the voice of the heart, saying. Lord, remove not Thy 
help far from me; Look Thou to my defence(Ps. xxi. 20)[8]. For it is manifest that, unless He Himself should 
help, and defend those who cry to Him, our enemy cannot be vanquished. 

Furthermore, know ye that, having received the letter of your Charity through Andrew our brother and 
fellow-bishop, we have transmitted the pallium to John our brother, the bishop of the Corinthians; whom it is 
by all means fitting that you should obey, especially as the order of ancient custom claims this, and his 
good qualities, to which you yourselves bear testimony, invite it. For from the account given me by certain 
persons I have learnt that in those parts no one attains to any sacred order without the giving of a 
consideration. If this is so, I say with tears, I declare with groans, that, when the priestly order has fallen 
inwardly, neither will it be able to stand long outwardly. For we know from the Gospel what our Redeemer 
did in person; how He went into the temple, and overthrew the seats of them that sold doves. For in truth to 
sell doves is to receive a temporal consideration for the Holy Spirit, whom, being consubstantial with 
Himself, Almighty God gives to men through imposition of hands. And, as I have said before, what follows 
from this evil is intimated; for the seats of them that presumed to sell doves in the temple of God fell by 
God's judgment And in truth this transgression is propagated with increase among subordinates. For he 
who is advanced to a sacred order already tainted in the very root of his promotion is himself more 
prepared to sell to others what he has bought. And where is that which is Written, Freely ye have received; 
freely give(Matth. x. 8)? And, since the simoniacal heresy was the first to arise against the holy Church, why 
is it not considered, why is it not seen, that whosoever ordains any one for a price in promoting him causes 
him to become a heretic? And so we exhort that none of you suffer this to be done any more; or dare to 
promote any to sacred orders for the favour or supplication of any person, except such a one as the 
character of his life and actions has shewn to be worthy. For, if we should perceive the contrary in future, 
know ye that it will be repressed with strict and canonical punishment. Given on the 1 5th day of the month of 
August, Indiction 13. 

REGISTER OF THE EPISTLES OF SAINT GREGORY 
THE GREAT, BOOK VI 

BOOK VI 

EPISTLE I. 

TO MARINIANUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Marinianus, Bishop of Ravenna. 

As unjust demands should not be conceded, so the petition of such as desire what is lawful ought not to be 
set aside. Now your Fraternity's presbyters, deacons and clergy have presented to us a petition 
complaining that the late John, your predecessor, made a will burdening his Church with various bequests. 
And they have petitioned that these, which are to the detriment of his Church, should under no excuse be 
paid, as being prohibited by law. And although, heredity and succession having been by him renounced, no 
reason binds thee to satisfy any such claims, nevertheless we hereby exhort thee over and above that with 
regard to such bequests as he has made, contrary to the ordinances of the laws, of property belonging to 
his Church, or acquired by him in his episcopate, your Fraternity neither lend your authority nor on any 
account consent to them. But, if he has wished or directed anything to be done with regard to his private 
property which he had before his episcopate, and which he had not previously bestowed upon his Church, it 
is necessary that this disposition should be held valid in all respects, and that no one of the ecclesiastics 
should attempt against reason on any pretext to set it aside. 

But, inasmuch as during his life he often begged of us that we should confirm by our authority what he had 
conferred on the monastery which he had himself constructed near the church of Saint Apollinaris, and we 
promised to do this, we hold it needful to exhort your Fraternity to suffer nothing of what he has there 
conferred and constituted to be diminished, but to see to all being preserved and firmly established. Since, 
then, he is known to have made mention of this monastery, and of the property conferred on it, in the will 
which he made, you must know that we have not confirmed this part of it by reason of our following his last 
wishes, but because, as we have said, we promised it to him when he was alive. Let your Fraternity, 
therefore, make haste so carefully to accomplish all these things that both what was by him constituted and 
by us confirmed in the above-named monastery may be maintained, and what he has by will directed to be 
given or done to the detriment of his Church may have no validity, seeing that the law forbids it. 

EPISTLE II 

TO THE CLERGY AND PEOPLE OF RAVENNA. 

Gregory to the clergy and people of the Church of Ravenna. 

We have been informed that certain men, instigated by the malignant spirit, have wished to corrupt your 
minds by false speech with regard to the reputation of our brother and fellow-bishop Marinianus[1]; saying 
that this our brother venerates the holy synod of Chalcedon less than becomes him[2]. On this head both he 
himself in person will satisfy you all of the integrity of his faith, and we fully testify that, having been nursed 
from his cradle in the bosom of the holy Universal Church, he has held the right preaching of the faith with the 
attestation of his life. For he venerates the holy Nicene synod in which Arius, the Constantinopolitan, in which 
Macedonius, the first Ephesine, in which Nestorius, and the holy Chalcedonian, in which Dioscorus and 
Eutyches were condemned. And if any one presumes ever to speak anything against the faith of these four 
synods and against the tome and definition of pope Leo of holy memory, let him be anathema. Accordingly, 
receiving the fullest satisfaction, love ye your pastor in entire charity with a pure heart, that the intercession of 
the same your pastor, poured out purely before God, may avail to your profit. 

EPISTLE III. 

TO MAXIMUS OF SALONA. 

Gregory to Maximus, pretender to the Church of Salona[3]. 

As often as anything is said to iiave been done contrary to ecclesiastical discipline, we dare not leave it 
unexamined, lest we should be guilty before God for connivance. Now it has come to our ears that thou wast 
ordained by means of simoniacal heresy. Nay and many other things have been said of thee here, whereof 
there was one especially on account of which we held it needful to prohibit thee urgently by letter from 
celebrating the solemnities of mass until we might ascertain the state of the case more certainly. Wherefore, 
lest the children of the Church should be too long without a shepherd, and lest, in case ofthese things which 
are said remaining unexamined, vice of this nature should extend itself to many, we exhort thee to make 
haste to come to us, laying aside all excuses, to the end that with due regard to justice we may be able to 
gain knowledge ofthese things, and terminate them according to the canonical institutes, Christ shewing us 
the way. But do thou so act that there be no more ofthese successive delays of thy coming, lest thy very 
absence point thee out as the more obnoxious to these charges against t hee, and lest we should be thus 
compelled to pass in council a harder sentence on thee, not only for thy alleged crimes from which thou 
evadest purging thyself, but also for the fault of disobedience, to wit as one that is contumacious. 

EPISTLE V. 

TO QUEEN BRUNICHILD. 

Gregory to Brunichild, Queen of the Franks[4]. 

The laudable and God-pleasing goodness of your Excellence is manifested both by your government of 
your kingdom and by your education of your son[5]. To him you have not only with provident solicitude 
conserved intact the glory of temporal things, but have also seen to the rewards of eternal life, having 
planted his mind in the root of the true faith with maternal, as became you, and laudable care of his 
education. Whence not undeservedly it ensues that he should surpass all the kingdoms of the nations[6], in 
that he both worships purely and confesses truly the Creator ofthese nations. But that faith may shine forth in 
him the more laudably in his works, let the words of your exhortation kindle him, to the end that, as royal 
power shews him lofty among men, so goodness of conduct may make him great before God. 
Now inasmuch as past experience in many instances gives us confidence in the Christianity of your 
Excellence, we beg ofyou, for the love of Peter, Prince of the apostles, whom we knowthatyou love with 
your whole heart, that you would cherish with the aid of your patronage our most beloved son the presbyter 
Candidus[7], who is the bearer of these presents, together with the little patrimony for the government of 
which we have sent him, to the end that, strengthened by the favour of your support, he may be able both to 
manage profitably this little patrimony, which is evidently beneficial towards the expenses of the poor, and 
also to recover into the possession of this little patrimony anything that may have been taken away from it. 
For it is not without increase of your praise that after so long a time a man belonging to Church has been 
sent for the management of this patrimony. Let your Excellency, then, deign so willingly to give your attention 
to what we request ofyou that the blessed Peter, Prince of the apostles, to whom the power of binding and 
loosing has been given by the Lord Jesus Christ, may both grant to your Excellence to rejoice here in your 
offspring, and after courses of many years cause you to be found, absolved from all ills before the face of 
the eternal Judge. 

EPISTLE VI. 

TQKING CHILDEBERT. 

Gregory to Childebert, King of the Franks[8]. 

As much as royal dignity is above that of other men, so much in truth does the high position of your kingdom 
excel that of the kingdoms of other nations. And yet to be a king is not extraordinary, there being others also; 
but to be a Catholic, which others are not counted worthy to be, this is enough. For as the splendour of a 
great lamp shines by the clearness of its light in the darkness of earth's night, so the clear light of your faith 
glitters and flashes amid the dark perfidy of other nations. Whatever the other kings glory in having you 
have. But they are in this regard exceedingly surpassed, because they have not the chief good thing which 
you have. In order, then, that they may be overcome in action as well as in faith, let your Excellence always 
shew yourself kind to your subjects. And, if there are any things such as to offend your mind, punish them not 
without enquiry. For then you will the more please the King of kings, that is the Almighty Lord, if, restraining 
your power, you feel that you may not do all that you can. 

Now that you keep purity of faith both in mind and deed, the love that is in you of the blessed Peter, Prince of 
the apostles, evidently shews, whose property has been so far well governed and preserved under the 
sway of your supremacy. But since Dynamius the Patrician, who on our recommendation looked after this 
property, is not able, as we have learnt, to govern it now, lest the little patrimony which is in your parts should 

be ruined from neglect, we have therefore sent the bearer of these presents, our most beloved son the 
presbyter Candidus[9] to govern it, whom we commend in all respects to your Excellency, greeting you in 
the first place with paternal charity, with the request that, if by any chance any wrong has been done there, or 
if the property of the same little patrimony is detained by any one, the matter may be set right, and what has 
been alienated may be restored to its original ownership; that so your equity, as well as your faith, may 
shine forth to all nations, which will be something very glorious and laudable. 

Moreover we have sent to your Excellency Saint Peter's keys, containing a portion of his chains, to protect 
you from all evils, when hung on your neck[1]. 

EPISTLE VII. 

TO CANDIDUS, PRESBYTER. 

Gregory to Candidus, Presbyter, going to the patrimony of Gaul. 

Now that thou art proceeding, with the help of our Lord God Jesus Christ, to the government of the patrimony 
that is in Gaul, we desire thy Love to procure with the money thou mayest receive clothing for the poor, or 
English boys of about seventeen or eighteen years of age, who may profit by being given to God in 
monasteries, that so the money of Gaul, which cannot be spent in our country[2], may he expended 
profitably in its own locality. Further, if you should succeed in getting anything from the moneys accruing to 
revenue which are called ablatae[3], from this too we desire thee to procure clothing for the poor, or, as we 
have before said, boys who may profit in the service of Almighty God. But, since such as can be found there 
are pagans, I desire that a presbyter be sent hither with them to provide against the case of any sickness 
occurring on the way, that he may baptize those whom he sees to be about to die. Wherefore let your Love 
so proceed as to lose no time in accomplishing these things diligently. 

EPISTLE VIM. 

TO THE BISHOPS OF EPIRUS. 

Gregory to Theodorus, Demetrius, Philip, Zeno, and Alcissonus, Bishops of Epirus. 
The notification of your letters, most dear brethren, has made known to us that our brother Andrew has, by 
the favour of God, been solemnly ordained bishop of the city of Nicopolis. And, since you signify that his 
consecration has taken place with the assent of the clergy and provincials, we rejoice; and we pray that the 
good which you testify of him may remain in him, and by the co-operation of God's grace receive increase, 
since the goodness of prelates is the safety of their subordinates. It is your duty then to make naste 
studiously to imitate what you show by your praises to be pleasing to you in his person. For it is faulty before 
men and penal before God for any one to be unwilling to imitate the good that pleases him. Wherefore let 
your obedience supply credit to your testimony. Let no one gainsay him in what, with preservation of 
integrity, be may enjoin for the common profit of the Church. Let each one of you willingly exhibit his devotion 
that, while there is among you priestly concord pleasing to God and constant, no ill feeling may avail to 
loose you from the bond of mutual charity, or difference disturb you. For neither will there be access to your 
hearts for the crafty foe, since he knows that he can in no degree be admitted or received, where sincere 
charity finds place. 

More over be ye attentive, most dear brethren, and bestow on the flock committed to you the vigilance 
which ye have taken upon yourselves, and which ye owe; meet the frauds of the enemy by attention and 
prayer. Surrender with uncontaminated faith to our God the people over which ye are, that your priestly office 
may avail you not for a penalty but for a crown before the sight of the eternal Judge. 
Know ye then that we have sent a pallium to the above-written Andrew our brother and fellow-bishop, and 
have granted him all the privileges which our predecessors conferred on his predecessors. 
Furthermore, it has come to our ears that sacred orders in your parts are conferred for a consideration 
given. And, if this is so, I say it with tears, I declare it with groans, &c.[See Lib. V. Ep. 53, to "become a 
heretic"][4]. On this account I admonish and conjure you to be altogether attentive to this, that no giving of a 
consideration, no favour, no supplication of any persons whatsoever, put in any claim in regard to sacred 
orders, but that one be promoted to this office whom gravity of manners and behaviour commends. For if, as 
we do not believe will be the case, we should perceive anything of the kind to be done, we will correct it, as 
is fit, with canonical severity. Now may Almighty God, who orders all things wonderfully by the power of His 
wisdom, and guards what He has ordered, grant unto you both to will and to do what He commands. 

EPISTLE IX. 

TO DONUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Donus, Bishop of Messana(Messene). 

Moved by the benevolence of the Apostolic See, and by the order of ancient custom, we have thought fit to 
grant to thee, who art known to have undertaken the office of government in the Church of Messana, the use 
of the pallium; to wit, at such times and in such manner as we dispute not that thy predecessor used it; at the 
same time warning thee that, as thou rejoicest in having received from us a decoration of this kind to the 
honour of thy priestly office, so also thou strive, by probity of manners and deeds, to adorn, to the glory of 
Christ, the office which thou hast undertaken under our authority. For so wilt thou be conspicuous for 
decorations mutually answering to each other, if with such an habiliment of the body as this all good 
qualities of thy soul also agree. For all the privileges which are known to have been granted of old to thy 
Church we confirm by our authority, and decree that they shall continue inviolate. 

EPISTLE XII. 

TO MONTANA AND THOMAS. 

Gregory to Montana, &c. 

Since our Redeemer, the Maker of every creature, vouchsafed to assume human flesh for this end, that, the 
chain of slavery wherewith we were held being broken by the grace of His Divinity, He might restore us to 
pristine liberty, it is a salutary deed if men whom nature originally produced free, and whom the law of 
nations has subjected to the yoke of slavery, be restored by the benefit of manumission to the liberty in 
which they were born. And so, moved by loving-kindness and by consideration of this case, we make you, 
Montana and Thomas, servants of the holy Roman Church which with the help of God we serve, free from 
this day, and Roman citizens, and we release to you all your private property. 

And, inasmuch as thou, Montana, declarest that thou hast applied thy mind to monastic profession, we 
therefore this day give and grant to thee two unciae, which the presbyter Gaudiosus by the disposition of his 
last will is known to have left to thee in the way of institution[5], provided that all go in all respects to the 
advantage of the monastery of Saint Laurence, over which the abbess Constantina presides, and in which 
by the mercy of God thou art about to make profession. But, if it should appear that thou hast in any way 
concealed any part of the property left by the above-written Gaudiosus, the whole of this must undoubtedly 
be transferred to the possession of our Church. 

Moreover to thee, Thomas above-written, whom for enhancement of thy freedom we desire also to serve 
among the notaries, we in like manner this day give and grant by this writ of manumission the five unciae 
which the aforesaid presbyter Gaudiosus by his last will left to thee under the title of inheritance, together with 
the dowry which he had bestowed upon thy mother; to wit with this annexed law and condition, that, in case of 
thy dying without legitimate children, that is children born in lawful wedlock, all that we have granted thee 
shall revert without any diminution to the possession of the holy Roman Church. But, if thou shouldest have 
children both in wedlock, as we have said, and recognized by the law, and shouldest leave them surviving 
thee, then we appoint thee to remain master of this same property without any condition, and give thee full 
power to make a will with respect to it. These things, then, which we have appointed and granted by this 
charter of manumission, know ye that we and our successors will observe without any demur. For the rule of 
justice and reason suggests that one who desires his own orders to be observed by his successors should 
undoubtedly keep to the will and ordinances Of his predecessor. This writ of manumission we have dictated 
to the notary Paterius to be put in writing, and for the fullest security have subscribed it with our own hand, 
together with three chief presbyters and three deacons, and have delivered it to you. 
Done in the city of Rome. 

EPISTLE XIV. 

TO THE COUNT NARSES[6]. 

Gregory to Nurses, &c. 

Your Charity, being anxious to learn our opinion, has been at the pains of writing to us to ask what we think of 
the book against the presbyter Athanasius which was sent to us. Having thoroughly perused some parts of 
it, we find that he has fallen into the dogma of Manichaeus. But he who has noted some places as heretical 
by a mark set against them slips also himself into Pelagian heresy; for he has marked certain places as 
heretical which are catholicly expressed and entirely orthodox. For when this is written; that when Adam 
sinned his soul died, the writer shews afterwards how it is said to have died, namely that it lost the 
blessedness of its condition Who soever denies this is not a Catholic. For God had said. In the hour ye eat 

thereof, in death ye shall die(Gen. 11. 17). When, therefore, Adam ate of the forbidden tree, we know that he 
did not die in the body, seeing that after this he begat children and lived many years. If, then, he did not die 
in the soul, the impious conclusion follows that He himself lied who foretold that in the day that he sinned he 
should die. But it is to be understood that death takes place in two ways; either from ceasing to live, or with 
respect to the mode of living. When, then, man's soul is said to have died in the eating of the forbidden thing, 
it is meant, not in the sense of ceasing to live, but with regard to the mode of living;-that he should live 
afterwards in pain who had been created to live happily in joy[7]. He, then, who has marked this passage in 
the book sent to me by my brother the bishop John as heretical is a Pelagian; for his view is evidently that of 
Pelagius, which the apostle Paul plainly confutes in his epistles. The particular passages in his epistle I 
need not quote, as I write to one who knows. But Pelagius, who was condemned in the Ephesine synod, 
maintained this view with the intention of shewing that we were redeemed by Christ unreally. For, if we did not 
through Adam die in the soul, we were redeemed unreally, which it were impious to say. Further, having 
examined the acts of the synod of Ephesus, we find nothing at all about Adelphius and Sava, and the others 
who are said to have been condemned there, and we think that, as the synod of Chalcedon was in one 
place falsified by the Constantinopolitan Church[8] so something of the kind has been done with regard to 
the synod of Ephesus. Wherefore let your Charity make a thorough search for old copies of the acts of this 
synod, and thus see whether anything of the kind is found there, and send such copy as you may find to me, 
which I will return as soon as I have read it. For recent copies are not entirely to be trusted; and it is for this 
reason that I have been in doubt, and have not wished as yet to reply in this case to my aforesaid brother 
the bishop John. Further, the Roman copies are much more correct than the Greek ones, since, as we have 
not your cleverness, so neither have we any impostures. 

Now concerning the presbyter John, know that his case has been decided in synod, whereby I have clearly 
ascertained that his adversaries have wished and long endeavoured to make him out a heretic, but have 
entirely failed. 

Salute in my name your friends, who are ours: ours also, who are yours, salute you heartily through me. May 
Almighty God protect thee with His hand in the midst of so many thorns, that thou mayest, unhurt, gather 
those flowers which the Lord hath chosen. 

EPISTLE XV. 

TO JOHN, BISHOP. 

Gregory to John, Bishop of Constantinople. 

As the pravity of heretics is to be repressed by the zeal of a right faith, so the integrity of a true confession is 
to be embraced. For, if one who declares himself sound in the faith is scorned, the faith of all is brought into 
doubt, and fatal errors are generated from inconsiderate strictness. And hence not only are wandering 
sheep not recalled to their lord's folds, but even those that are within them are exposed to be cruelly torn by 
the teeth of wild beasts. Let us then fully consider this, most dear brother, and not suffer any one who truly 
professes the catholic faith to be distressed under pretext of heresy, nor (which God forbid) allow heresy to 
grow the more under shew of correcting it. 

But we have wondered much why those who were deputed by you as judges in a matter of faith against 
John, presbyter of the church of Chalcedon, believed report, disregarding truth, and would not believe him 
when he distinct professed his faith; especially as his accusers, when asked what was the heresy of the 
Marcionists which they spoke of, and on the ground of which they endeavoured to make him out guilty, 
replied by a plain confession that they did not know. From which circumstance it evidently comes out that, 
without regard to God, not justly, but against their own souls, they were desirous only of injuring him 
personally of their own mere will. We therefore, after Council held (as the tenor of the proceedings before us 
shews), having thoroughly examined and considered all that was necessary, inasmuch as we have been 
unable to find the aforesaid presbyter in any respect guilty, and especially as the plea which he delivered to 
the judges delegated by you is in entire accordance with the integrity of a right faith, we I say on this account, 
disapproving the sentence of the said judges, through the revealing grace of Christ our God and 
Redeemer, pronounce him by our definite sentence catholic and free from all charge of heresy. Seeing, 
then, that we have sent him back to your Holiness, it is for you to receive him with the kindness which you 
shew to all, and bestow on him your priestly charity, and defend him from all molestation, nor allow any one 
to busy himself in causing him trouble: but, as you defend others from oppression, so from him ought you not 
to withold your succour. 

EPISTLE XVI. 

TO MAURICIUS, AUGUSTUS. 

Gregory to Mauricius, &c. 

Seeing that in you, most Ciiristian of princes, uncorrupt soundness of faitii siiines as a beam sent down from 
iieaven, and tiiat it is l<nown to all that your Serenity embraces fervently and loves with entire devotion of 
heart the pure profession in which by God's favour you are powerful, we have perceived it to be very 
necessary to make request for those whom one and the same faith enlightens, to the end that the Piety of 
our lords may protect them with its favour, and defend them from all molestation. When certain men scorn 
the confession of faith of such persons they are shewn to contradict the true faith. For, since the Apostle 
declares that confession of the mouth is made unto salvation, he who will not consent to believe a right 
profession accuses himself in rejecting others (Rom. x. 10). 

Now all the proceedings against John, presbyter of the church of Chalcedon, having been read in council 
and considered in order, we have found that he has suffered the greater injustice in that, when he declared 
and shewed himself to be a Catholic, it was not his guilt, but an uncertain accusation of long standing, that 
crushed him; and this to such an extent that his accusers declared in their open reply that they did not know 
the heresy of the Marcionists which they referred to. And, whereas they ought therefore to have been 
rejected from the very beginning of the trial, they were allowed, vague as they were, to remain in court for his 
accusation. But, lest at any rate alleged report might injure him, he produced a written confession of his faith 
with the purpose of shewing evidently that he was a professor and follower of the right faith. But this the 
judges deputed by the most holy John, our brother and fellow-bishop, unjustly and unreasonably 
disregarded; and so, in doing all they could to put him down, shewed themselves more to blame than he. 
For no one doubts that it is unfaithfulness not to have faith in the faithful. Seeing then that, everything having 
been thoroughly enquired into and considered, the decision of the holy Council with me, by the revealing 
grace of Divine power, has declared tile above-written John the presbyter to be a Catholic, and that no spot 
of heretical pravity has been found in him, I entreat that the pious protection of your Serenity may order him 
to be kept unharmed from all annoyance, nor allow a professor of the catholic faith to suffer any molestation. 
For not to believe one who professes truly is not to purge heresy, but to make it. If this should be allowed, 
occasion of infidelity will arise, and people will themselves incur the guilt which they would correct unwarily. 
These things therefore let the most Serene Lord with pious precaution consider, and, as I have already 
requested, with profuse entreaties I again implore, that he allow not an innocent man to be afflicted anew as 
though he were guilty; to the end that Almighty God, who sees your Clemency love and defend the purity of 
catholic rectitude, may cause you both to rule over a pacified republic with your foes subdued, and to reign 
with His saints in life eternal. 

EPISTLE XVII. 

TOTHEOTISTUS. 

Gregory to Theotistus, kinsman of the Emperor. 

We know that the Christianity of your Excellency is always intent on good works and therefore we provide for 
you occasions for reaping reward, which you are certain to be glad of, so that we by so providing may have 
a share in your merits. 

We therefore inform you that John the presbyter, the bearer of these presents, has come out free from those 
by whom he had been accused. For having, according to his request held a council, and subjected his faith 
to a subtle scrutiny, we found him guiltless of any wrong confession. And, inasmuch as he appeared to be, 
by the mercy of God, a professor and follower of the right faith, we absolved him by our definite sentence; 
especially as his accusers professed that they did not know what the heresy of the Marcionists, which they 
spoke of, was. On this account, saluting you with paternal affection, we request you to protect him with the 
grace of your favour. And, lest any one hereafter should be disposed to afflict him to no purpose, or in any 
way to cause him annoyance in this matter, let the advocacy of your Excellency so protest and defend 
him-and this the more instantly in consideration of your own reward-that no unjust affliction may any more 
consume him. and that the Creator and Redeemer of the human race, whom you worship with a sincere 
confession, may recompense your action in this behalf among your many good works. The month of 
October. Indiction 14. 

EPISTLE XVIII. 

TO JOHN, BISHOP. 

Gregory to John, Bishop of Syracuse. 

Moved by the benevolence of the Apostolic See and by the order of ancient custom, we have thought fit to 

grant to thy Fraternity, who art known to have received the office of government in the Church of Syracuse, 
the use of the pallium; that is, at such times and in such manner as thou knowest without doubt that it was 
used by thy predecessor; nevertheless admonishing thee that, as thou rejoicest in having received from us 
the use of this decoration for the honour of thy priestly office, so also by probity of manners and deeds thou 
strive to adorn the office thou hast received unto our glory in Christ. For thus wilt thou be conspicuous for 
decorations mutually answering to each other, if with this habit for the body the excellence also of thy mind 
agrees. 

For all privileges which are known to have been granted formerly to thy Church we confirm by our authority, 
and decree that they shall remain inviolate. 

EPISTLE XXII. 

TO PETER, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Peter, Bishop of Aleria in Corsica. 

Inasmuch as in the isle of Corsica, at the place Nigeunum, in the possession which is called Cellas Cupias 
belonging to the holy Roman Church, which by the providence of God we serve, we have ordered to be 
founded a basilica, with a baptistery [9], to the honour of the blessed Peter, Prince of the apostles, and of 
Laurentius the martyr, we therefore hereby exhort thy Fraternity to proceed at once to the aforesaid place, 
and with observance of the venerable solemnities of dedication to consecrate solemnly the aforesaid 
church and baptistery. Deposit also reverently the holy relics (sanctuaria) which you have received. 

EPISTLE XXIV. 

TO MARINIANUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Marinianus, Bishop of Ravenna. 

We have received by the deacon Virgilius the letter of your Fraternity, in which you inform us that certain of 
the clergy and people have cried out that it is contrary to the laws and canons that the cause between your 
Church and the abbot Claudius should be examined and decided here. But, had they paid attention to 
ecclesiastical order and to the persons between whom the case is pending, they would by all means have 
abstained from needless complaint; especially as the cause could not be pleaded there, where the 
aforesaid abbot has complained of having endured injustice from your predecessor and of still suffering 
from it. For the objection might perhaps have been made if he had not appealed to a superior authority, and 
sought to have the rights of his case determined before it. Nay, but dost thou not thyself know that the case 
which arose on the part of the presbyter John against John of Constantinople, our brother and fellow-bishop, 
came before the Apostolic See, and was decided by our sentence?, [1] If, then, a cause was brought under 
our cognizance from that city where the prince is, how much more should an affair between you have the 
truth about it ascertained and be terminated here? But as for you, let not the words of foolish men there move 
you, and believe not that through us any detriment to your Church is caused. For, if you will enquire of the 
servant of God Secundinus your deacon and of Castorius our notary, you will learn from them how your 
predecessor had already desired to arrange this case. But your Fraternity has done wisely in sending 
persons hither for this business, and in not listening to vain words. Now we trust in Almighty God that this 
cause may be terminated in a way well-pleasing to God, so that no room may be left for renewed complaint 
and that neither party may be aggrieved unjustly. The sword' which our most beloved son Peter, then 
deacon and guardian (defensor) in your parts, had left for us with your predecessor, please to send to us by 
the servant of God Secundinus, and Castorius the notary, the bearers of these presents. 

EPISTLE XXV. 

TO MAXIMUS OF SALONA. 

Gregory to Maximus, intruder in the Church of Salona[3]. 

While, seeking this or that excuse, thou deferrest obedience to our letters, while thou puttest off coming to us 
for ascertainment of the truth after being so often admonished, thou lendest credibility all the more to what is 
alleged against thee; and, even though there had been nothing else to go against thee and do thee harm, 
thy delay alone would render thee culpable and accuse thee. Humble thyself at length, and submit thyself to 
obedience, and make haste to come to us without any excuses, that, the truth being investigated and 
ascertained, in the fear of God, whatever may be fair and canonical may be decided. For be assured that 
we will observe towards thee justice and the ordinances of the canons, and, by the revelation of God, who is 

the Author of truth, will terminate thy cause agreeably to justice. For, as to thy demand that we should send 
some one to your city, in whose presence there might be proof of the things alleged, this would be in some 
degree excusable, if reason ever imposed on the accused the necessity of proof. But, inasmuch as this 
burden lies not on thee but on thine accusers, do not thou hesitate to come to us, as we have before said, 
putting it off no longer; and either thine accuser will be present without delay to support with suitable proof 
what has been alleged as to simoniacal heresy or other things; or certainly, as far as regards a sound 
settlement of this business, a just dealing with it will, through the intervention of Peter, Prince of the apostles, 
ensue; that so no guiltiness may confound us before God for any connivance, now that these things have 
come to our knowledge. But, as to thy allegation that our most serene lords have ordered cognizance of the 
matter to be taken in your city, we indeed have received no other commands of theirs on the subject except 
that thou weft to come to us. But, even if by chance, occupied as they are by many thoughts and anxieties for 
the good of their republic which by the divine bounty has been granted to them, this has been suggested to 
them, and a command has been surreptitiously elicited from them, yet, inasmuch as it is known to us and to 
all how our most pious lords love discipline, observe degrees, venerate the canons, and refrain from mixing 
themselves up in the causes of priests, we will still execute with instancy what is for the good both of their 
souls and of the republic, and what we are driven to by regard to the terrible and tremendous judgment. 
Cease then from all excuses, and delay not to appear here, that, fortified by investigation of the truth, we may 
at length bring thy cause to a termination. But, whereas we have been informed that thou art greatly afraid 
and altogether in trepidation lest we should avenge on thee the known fact of thy having forced thy way 
irregularly into the order of priesthood without our consent, this was indeed an intolerable misdemeanour: 
but, in accordance with the commands of our most serene lord the Emperor, we forgive thee this, provided 
that thou in no wise persist any longer in the error of thy contumacy; and we are by no means moved against 
thee on this account. But other things that have been reported to us we cannot suffer to pass without enquiry. 
Now inasmuch as we long ago sent thee a letter warning thee by no means to dare to celebrate the 
solemnities of mass till we should ascertain the will of the said our most serene lord, and as thou hast 
cunningly contrived that this letter should not come into thy hands, though thou nevertheless knewest in one 
way or another what its purport was, but hast refused to comply with it;-we therefore confirm what was before 
sent thee in writing, that thou must not dare to celebrate the solemnities of mass until all that has been 
alleged against thee has been thorougly enquired into and sifted. And, if, with perverse daring, thou 
shouldest presume to celebrate, know that thou art not free from the former threat of interdiction from 
communion. For, even though there were no other transgressions, we deprive thee of the communion of the 
body and blood of the Lord for this sin of pride alone. Wherefore, shewing the obedience that becomes 
thee, make haste, as we have said, with all diligence to come to us; but so as to have a space of thirty days 
for preparing for thy journey; and so, laying aside all excuses, defer not thy appearance here. 
Moreover, if any occasion of hindering thy journey has arisen from the judges, or the military force, or the 
people, we acknowledge the skilfulness with which things are done. Do thou thyself, then, see what account 
of this obligation, thou canst render either to men here or to Almighty God in the future judgment, having by 
thy contempt provoked a strict sentence against thee. 

Furthermore, it has come to my knowledge that my brother and fellow-bishop Paulinus, and Honoratus, 
archdeacon of the Church of Salona[4], for having refused to give assent to thy presumption are suffering 
grievous molestation at thy hands, so as to have been constrained to give sureties to the end that may not 
be at liberty to leave the city or their own houses. If this is so, do thou on receipt of this present writing, 
returning at last, though late, to a sound mind, desist from molesting either of them, that they may have free 
license either to come to me if they wish, or to go anywhere else for their advantage. 

EPISTLE XXVI. 

TO THE SALONITANS. 

Gregory to his most beloved sons, the clergy and nobles dwelling at Salona[5]. 

It has come to my ears, that certain men of perverse disposition, in order to poison your minds, beloved, 

have tried to insinuate to you that I am moved by some grudge against Maximus, and that I am desiring to 

carry out not so much what is canonical as what anger dictates. But far, far be it from the priestly mind to be 

moved in any cause by private feeling. It is on the contrary as taking thought for you, beloved, and as 

fearing the judgment of Almighty God on my own soul, that I desire the case of this same Maximus to be 

thoroughly investigated, as to whether he is burdened by no such crimes as are a bar to ordination, and 

makes no attempt to attain to the priestly office through simoniacal heresy; that is by giving bribes to some 

of his electors. He will then be a free intercessor for you before the Lord, if he shall come to the place of 

intercession bound by no sins of his own. 

And yet his sin of pride is already manifestly shewn, in that, having been summoned to come to us, he 

resists under various excuses, siiuns coming, is afraid to come. Wiiattiien is lie afraid of, if iiis conscience 
does not accuse iiim witii respect to tiie tilings lie is cliarged witli? Lo, beloved, ye iiave now been long 
without a pastor, and may Almighty God make known to you how earnestly and from the bottom of my heart I 
sympathize with you in your destitution. For I hear what ravages are being made in the Lord's flock. But, 
when there is no shepherd, who may watch against the wolves? Wherefore urge ye the aforesaid Maximus 
to come hither to us, to the end that we may confirm him if we are able to find him innocent; but, if the things 
that are said of him should turn out to be true, that you, beloved, may be no longer left destitute through the 
interposition of his person. 

For as to me, be assured that I am not moved against him by any grudge or any animosity of private feeling; 
but whatever may be canonical and just with the help of God I will determine. 

But I have been greatly astonished that among so many clergy and people of the Church of Salona hardly 
two in sacred orders have been found-to wit our brother and fellow-bishop Paulinus and my most beloved 
son Honoratus, archdeacon of the same Church-who refused to communicate with Maximus when he 
seized the priesthood, and who remembered that they were Christians. 

For you ought, most dear sons, to have considered your own orders, and recognized as rejected him whom 
the Apostolical See rejected, that he might first be purged, if he could be, from the charges brought against 
him, and that then your Love might communicate with him without being partakers in his liability. We however 
are bound to your Charity in the bowels of loving-kindness; and, since we have learnt that some of you were 
pressed by force to accept him and communicate with him, we implore Almighty God to absolve you from 
all guilt of your own sins and from all implication in the liability of others, and to give you the grace of His 
protection in the present life, and grant to us to rejoice for you in the eternal country. 

EPISTLE XXVII. 

TO THE CLERGY AND PEOPLE OF JADERA[6]. 

Gregory to the presbyters, deacons, and clergy, nobles and people, dwelling at Jadera, and who have 
communicated with the prevaricator Maximus. 

It has come to my knowledge that some of you, deceived by ignorance or under compulsion, have 
communicated with those who, their fault as you know requiring it, have been deprived of communion by the 
Apostolic See, but that others, with wholesome discretion, have under the Lord's protection abstained; and 
as much as I rejoice in those that have been constant so much do I groan for those who have gone astray, 
since they have partaken of the mysteries of holy communion, which have been granted to us by Divine 
loving-kindness for absolution, rather to the detriment of their souls. And because (as I pray Almighty God to 
make known to you) I earnestly and from the bottom of my heart sympathize will your Charity, I adjure and 
entreat you with fatherly affection, that every one of you abstain from unlawful communion, and altogether 
shun those whom the Apostolic See does not receive into the fellowship of its communion, lest any one 
should stand guilty in the sight of the eternal Judge from that whereby he might have been saved. 
Moreover I have discovered that certain men of perverse mind in your parts have tried to insinuate that I am 
moved against Maximus by some grudge, and that I desire to carry out not what is canonical, but what anger 
dictates. But far, far be this from the priestly mind, that it should be moved in any cause by private animosity. 
But as for me, it is as taking thought for the people dwelling in those parts and for my own soul, and as 
fearing the judgment of Almighty God, that I wish to have the cause of this Maximus enquired into, and, God 
shewing me the way, to decide canonically. Now, inasmuch as I have written to him frequently that he was 
not to celebrate the sacred solemnities of mass until I had been able to obtain knowledge of his case, he 
would in any case be deprived of communion; and now his sin of pride is openly shewn from this,-that, 
having (as I have said) been often admonished to come to us, under various excuses he refuses, he shuns, 
he fears coming. What then is he afraid of, if his conscience does not accuse him with regard to the things 
that have been said? Since then you know these things, now that you can make no excuse on the plea of 
ignorance, I beseech, I exhort, I warn you, that you altogether refrain from fellowship with forbidden 
communion, and that not one of you presume, against his own soul, to communicate with any priest who 
communicates with the above written Maximus. 

Since however I hear, as I have said before, hat some of you fell in ignorance, and that some were even 
driven by force to communicate, I implore the Almighty Lord, that He would keep with His perpetual 
protection, and answer with His wished for bounty, those who have given no assent to this iniquity; and as to 
those whom either party spirit, or ignorance, or any other cause soever, has drawn into a fault, that He would 
absolve hem from all guilt of their sins, and from all implication in the liability of others, and both give them all 
the grace of His protection in the present life, and grant to me to rejoice for them in the eternal country. 
Wherefore, that this intercession may avail for you with God our Saviour, do ye shew obedience to our 
exhortations for the weal of your souls, and receive the holy communion from those whom ye know to have 

abstained, and to abstain still, from communion with the aforesaid Maximus. 

EPISTLE XXIX. 

TO MARINIANUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Marinianus, Bishop of Ravenna[7]. 

We wonder why the discernment of thy Fraternity should have been so changed in a short time that it does 
not consider what it asks for. On this account we grieve, since thou affordest manifest proof that the words of 
evil counsellors have availed with thee more than the study of divine lore has profited thee. And, when thou 
oughtestto be protecting monasteries, and with all thy power congregating the religious therein so as to 
make gain from the gathering together of souls, thou art on the contrary desiring to exercise thyself in 
oppressing them, as thy letters testify; and, what is worse, art trying to make us partakers in thy fault; to wit, in 
wishing, with our consent, to oppress the monastery which thy predecessor founded under the name of 
looking after its property and business affairs. 

For thou oughtestto call to mind that, in thy presence, and in the presence also of sundry of thy presbyters, 
deacons, and clerics, we granted, as they requested, a precept contrary to the testament of thy 
predecessor. Yet, though the disposition he had made with regard to the monastery itself was still therein 
confirmed, thou now dissemblestthis, and demandest of us that we should order the contrary. And indeed 
we know that this device is not thine own; but, when thou refusest not to listen to those who say incongruous 
things, thou injurest not only thine own reputation, but also souls. Since, then, I love thee much, I urgently 
admonish thee-consider this attentively-that thou care not more for money than for souls. The former 
should be regarded collaterally; but the latter should be regarded with the whole bent of the mind, and 
vehemently striven after. On this spend vigilantly thy labour and solicitude, since our Redeemer seeks from 
the priest's office not gold, but souls. 

Further, it has reached our ears that monasteries which are constituted under thy Fraternity are oppressed 
by importunities and various annoyances from the clergy. That this may no longer be so, restrain it by strict 
prohibition, to the end that the monks who live therein may be able to exult freely in the praises of our God. 
With regard to the clerics Romanus and Dominicus, who presumed with rash daring to depart from this city 
without our blessing, though they were to have been stricken with heavier punishment, nevertheless such 
relaxation ought to be made in a spirit of kindness that they be urged to come back to their duty. The month 
of April, Indict. 14. 

EPISTLE XXX. 

TO SECUNDUS. 

Gregory to Secundus, servant of God at Ravenna[8]. 

Now that Castorius[9] has returned and made known to us all that has been done between you and King 
Agilulph, we have taken care to send him back to you with all speed, lest any one should find an excuse 
against us on the ground of delay. Having learnt then from him all that is to be done, give the matter your 
earnest attention, and press in all ways for this peace to be arranged, since, as report goes, there are some 
who are trying to hinder it. On this account make haste to act strenuously, that your labour may not remain 
without effect. For both these parts and various islands are already placed in great danger. 
Stir up with such words as thou canst use our brother the bishop Marinianus[1]: for I suspect that he has 
fallen asleep. For certain persons have come to me, among whom were some aged mendicants, who were 
questioned by me as to what they had received and from whom they had received it; and they told me 
particularly how much had been given them on their journey, and by whom it had been given. But, when I 
enquired of them what my aforesaid brother had given them, they replied that they had asked him, but had 
received nothing at all from him; so that they did not get even bread on the way, though it has always been 
the familiar usage of that Church to give to all. For they said. He answered saying, I have nothing that I can 
give you. And I am surprised, if he who has clothes, money, and storehouses, has nothing to give to the 
poor. 

Tell him, then, that with his place he should change his disposition too. Let him not believe reading and 
prayer alone to be enough for him, so that he should think to sit apart, and nowise fructify with his hand; but 
let him have a liberal hand; let him succour those who suffer need; let him believe the wants of others to be 
his own; since, if he has not these things, be bears but a bishop's empty name. I did indeed give him some 
admonitions about his soul in my letter; but he has sent me no reply whatever; whence I suppose that he has 
not even deigned to read them. For this reason it is needless now for me to admonish him at all in my letter 
to him; and so I have written only what 1 was able to dictate as his adviser in wordly matters. For it is not 

incumbent on me to tire myself, by dictation for a man wiio does not read wiiat is said to iiim. Let, tiien, tiiy I 
ove speal< to iiim about all these things privately, and admonish him how he ought to demean himself, lest 
through present negligence he lose the advantage of his former life, which God forbid. 

EPISTLE XXXII. 

TO FORTUNATUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Fortunatus, Bishop of Neapolis (Naples). 

We have written before now to your Fraternity that, if any [slaves] by the inspiration of God, desire to come 
from Jewish superstition to the Christian faith, their masters have no liberty to sell them, but that from the time 
of their declaring their wish they have a full claim to freedom. But since, so far as we have learnt, they [i.e. 
Jewish masters], weighing with nice discrimination neither our wish nor the ordinances of the law, think that 
they are not bound by this condition in the case of pagan slaves, your Fraternity ought to attend to such 
cases, and, if any one of their slaves, whether he be a Jew or a pagan, should wish to become a Christian, 
after his wish has been openly declared, let not any one of the Jews, under cover of any device or argument 
whatever, have power to sell him; but let him who desires to be converted to the Christian faith be in all ways 
supported by you in his claim to freedom. Lest, however, those who have to lose slaves of this kind should 
consider that their interests are unreasonably prejudiced, it is fitting that with careful consideration you 
should observe this rule;-that if pagans when they have been brought out of foreign parts for the sake of 
traffic should chance to flee to the Church, and say that they wish to become Christians, or even outside tire 
Church should announce this wish, then, till the end of three months during which a buyer to sell them to may 
be sought for, they [the Jewish owners] may receive their price; that is to say, from a Christian buyer. But if 
after the aforesaid three months any one of such slaves should declare his wish and desire to become a 
Christian, let not either any one afterwards dare to buy him, or his master, under colour of any occasion 
whatever, dare to sell him; but let him unreservedly attain to the benefit of freedom; since he (i.e. the master) 
is in such case understood to have acquired him not for sale hut for his own service. Let, then, your Fraternity 
so vigilantly observe all these things that neither the supplication of any nor respect of persons may avail to 
inveigle you[2]. 

EPISTLE XXXIV. 

TO CASTORIUS, NOTARY. 

Gregory to Castorius, our notary at Ravenna. 

When Florentinus, deacon of the Church of Ravenna, treated with us in behalf of our most reverend brother 
and fellow-bishop Marinianus concerning the use of the pallium, on our asking him what was the ancient 
custom, he replied that the bishop of the Church of Ravenna used the pallium in all litanies[3]. But that this 
was not so we both learnt from others, and it appeared evidently from the letters of the former bishop John, 
which we shewed to him. But he said what he had been ordered to say. For, at the time when this same John 
was inhibited by thee from presuming to use the pallium out of order and unadvisedly, he wrote to us that the 
ancient custom had been this; that the bishop of that city should use the pallium in solemn litanies. We send 
thee, for thy information, copies of his letters. But when Adeodatus, deacon of the aforesaid Church, at the 
time when he was here, in like manner pressed us strongly concerning this use of the pallium, we, desiring to 
ascertain the truth, in like manner had him questioned as to what the custom was: and he, that he might 
persuade us to believe him, and succeed in obtaining from us what he sought, testified under oath that it had 
been the ancient custom for the bishop of his city to use the pallium in four or five solemn litanies. Let 
therefore thy Experience look to the matter diligently, and enquire with all carefulness how many solemn 
litanies there have been from ancient times. Take care also to make enquiry by calling them, not the 
solemn, but the greater litanies; that when, through what the aforesaid deacon Adeodatus testified to us and 
what the letter of the aforesaid bishop John acknowledges, it shall appear how many of these solemn 
litanies there were, we, knowing how often the pallium used to be worn in litanies, may most willingly grant 
the privilege. But do not make this enquiry of those who are put forward by the ecclesiastics, but of others 
whom you know to be impartial: and whatever after careful investigation you discover communicate to us 
with accuracy, that having ascertained the truth, as we have said, we may relieve the mind of our brother and 
fellow-bishop, the most reverend Marinianus. 

EPISTLE XXXV. 

TO ANTHEMIUS, SUBDEACON. 

Gregory to Anthemius, our Neapolitan Sub-deacon[4]. 

How great is our grief, and iiow great tiie affliction of our heart, from what has taken place in the regions of 
Campania we cannot express; but thou mayest thyself gather it from the greatness of the calamity. With 
regard to this state of things, we send thy Experience by the magnificent Stephen, bearer of these presents, 
money for the succour of the captives who have been taken, admonishing thee that thou give thy whole 
attention to the business, and carry it out strenuously; and, in the case of freemen whom thou knowest to 
have no sufficient means for their own redemption, that thou make haste to redeem them. But, should there 
be any slaves, and thou findest that their masters are so poor that they cannot come forward to redeem 
them, hesitate not to recover them also. In like manner also thou wilt take care to redeem the slaves of the 
Church who have been lost by thy neglect. Further, whomsoever thou shalt have redeemed, thou wilt by all 
means be at pains to make out a list, containing their names, and a statement of where each is staying, and 
what he is doing, and where he came from; which list thou mayest bring, with thee when thou comest. 
Moreover, hasten to shew thyself so diligent in this business that those who are to be redeemed may incur 
no risk through thy negligence, or thou come afterwards to be highly culpable before us. But work especially 
for this also; that, if possible, thou mayest be able to recover those captives at a moderate price. But set 
down in writing, with all clearness and nicety, the whole sum expended, and transmit to us this thy written 
account with speed. The month of May, Indiction 14. 

EPISTLE XXXVII. 

TO COLUMBUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Columbus, Bishop of Numidia[5] 

The letters of your Fraternity, full of priestly sweetness, we have received at the hands of Rogatianus the 
deacon, the bearer of these presents. And their kind expressions rejoiced us much, especially as we were 
informed through them of what we long to hear of, your welfare. But the devotion of your Holiness we have 
both known of old; and as you now write, so we hold it to be. For of what kind the sincerity of your Fraternity 
towards us is we need nothing to satisfy us, since we know it from the love of our own heart which encircles 
you. We have given to the above-named hearer, whom you commended to us by letter, writings addressed 
to the Rector of the patrimony of Sicily, bidding him urge the opposite party to do what is just, to the end that, 
idle excuses being put aside, the whole case in dispute may be speedily brought to an end. 
We now inform your Holiness that a certain man has come to us, Peter by name, who asserted that he was a 
bishop, and requested from us a remedy of his complaint. And at first indeed he related things that might 
have been deserving of pity; but on enquiry we found things to be very different from what he told us, and his 
behaviour has exceedingly distressed us. But, inasmuch as, separated as we are by so great a distance, 
we could by no means learn thoroughly the gist of his ca e, we have been unable to determine it, being in 
doubt. But now, seeing that the aforesaid deacon, who is returning to you, has asked that this person should 
be allowed to go with him, and he himself has requested to be sent to you, both of them knowing that your 
Holiness has, as becomes you, zeal for the faith and a love of justice, the proposal has been acceptable to 
us, and we have granted what they asked. Since, then, you being on the spot can ascertain the merits of the 
case more thoroughly, we exhort you so to observe what is just and canonical towards the same Peter that 
both the requirements of rectitude may be fulfilled by you in all respects, and his case may be seen to have 
been judged after the fear of God and the rules of the Church. But, if any one is said to have been privy to, or 
a partaker in, the things which the aforesaid Peter is accused of, accurate enquiry must be made, and, when 
the truth is known, judgment in like manner pronounced canonically. 

Furthermore, a thing altogether hard to be borne, and hostile to the right faith, has come to our ears; namely 
that catholics (which is awful to be told and religious persons[6] (which is worse) consent to their children 
and their slaves, or others whom they have in their power, being baptized in the heresy of the Donatists. And 
so, if this is true, letyour Fraternity study with all your power to correct it, to the end that the purity of the faith 
may through your solicitude stand inviolate, and innocent souls who might be saved by catholic baptism 
perish not from the infection of heretics. Whosoever, then, of the persons above mentioned has suffered any 
one belonging to him to be baptized among the Donatists, study with all your power, and with all urgency, to 
recall such to the catholic faith. But, if any one of such persons should under any pretext endure the doing of 
this thing in the case of such as are his in future, let him be cut off entirely from the communion of the clergy. 

EPISTLE XLIII. 

TO VENANTIUS, PATRICIAN. 

Gregory to Venantius, Patrician, and Ex-monl<[7]. 

Your communication to us lias found us mucin distressed from liaving become aware tliat offence lias 
arisen between you and Jolin our brotlier and fellow-bisliop, in wliose agreement witli you we were 
desirous of rejoicing. For, wliatever tlie cause may iiave been, rage ouglit not to liave brol<en out to sucii a 
pitcli tliat your armed men, as we liave heard, should have burst into the episcopal palace, and committed 
divers evil deeds in a hostile manner, and that this affair should meanwhile separate you from his paternal 
charity. Could not the dispute, whatever it may have been, have been quietly arranged, so that neither party 
might suffer disadvantage, nor good feeling be disturbed? Now it is not unknown to us gravity, of what 
holiness, of what gentleness our above-named brother is. Whence we gather that, unless excessive force of 
vexation had compelled him, his Fraternity would by no means have resorted to the measure which you say 
that you are aggrieved, however, on hearing of it by letter from him, at once wrote to him, admonishing him to 
receive your offerings as before, and not only to allow masses to be celebrated in your house, but, if you 
wish it, even to officiate himself, and that he ought to have prosecuted his cause without breach of charity. 
And, inasmuch as we wish none to come or continue to be at variance, we have taken care to renew this 
same admonition. Hence it is necessary, dearest son, that you, as becomes sons, should shew him the 
reverence due to a priest, and not provoke his spirit to anger. For with whom will you have assured goodwill, 
it (which God forbid) you are at variance with your priest? Wherefore, putting away swelling of spirit, try ye so 
to transact the causes that ye have one with another that both charity may remain inviolate, and what is to 
your mutual advantage may be peaceably attained. 

EPISTLE XLIV. 

TO JOHN, BISHOP. 

Gregory to John, Bishop of Syracuse[8]. 

Although there may have been cause to provoke the spirit of your Fraternity not unreasonably to anger, so 
that you would neither receive the offerings of the lord Venantius nor allow the sacred solemnities of mass to 
be celebrated in his house, yet, inasmuch as our earthly interests should be prosecuted in such a manner 
that no quarrel may avail to sever us from the bond of charity, we therefore exhort your Holiness, as we have 
already written, that you should both receive the offerings of the aforesaid man with all sweetness and 
God-pleasing sincerity, and allow the mysteries of the mass to be performed in his house; and that, as we 
have written, you should, if perchance he should wish it, go there in person, and by celebrating mass with 
him renew your former friendly feeling. For it is your duty to bestow priestly affection on sons, though still m 
causes that may arise, by no means to pretermit, as reason approves, the jurisdiction of your Church. 
Wherefore, considering this, it is necessary that your Fraternity should try so to demean yourself with 
discreet moderation with respect to these matters as both to transact advantageously what the nature of the 
business requires, and not to recede from the grace of paternal charity. 

EPISTLE XLVI. 

TO FELIX, BISHOP OF PISAURUM (Pesaro). 

Gregory to Felix, Bishop, &c. 

We wonder at your Fraternity, that, disregarding the tenor of the precept given you by our predecessor of 
holy memory, you, should consecrate the monastery constructed by John, the bearer of these presents, 
otherwise than as ancient use demands. For, while it is ordered among other things in the said precept that 
you should dedicate the place itself without a public mass, still, as we have heard, your chair has been 
placed there, and the sacred solemnities of mass are there publicly celebrated. If this is true, we hereby 
exhort you that, putting aside all excuse, you cause your chair to be altogether removed thence, and that 
henceforth you perform no public masses there. But, as both custom and the tenor of the precept direct, if 
they should wish mass to be celebrated for them there, let a presbyter be appointed by thee for the 
purpose[9]. 

Further, we desire that with the favour of God there shall always remain a congregation of servants of God in 
the same monastery, as the aforesaid John has requested, and as is now the case. As to the cup also 
which he informs me has been taken away by your Fraternity, if it be so, make haste to restore it. These 
things, then, let your Holiness so study to fulfil that the aforesaid bearer may have no need to resort to us 
again on the same account. 

EPISTLE XLVIII. 

TO URBICUS, ABBOT. 

Gregory to Urbicus, Abbot of Saint Hermes, which is situated in Panormus. 

Whosoever, incited by divine inspiration, hastens to leave the employments of this world and to be 
converted to God should so be received with charity, and refreshed in all ways with kind consolations, that, 
by the help of God, he may delight in all ways to persevere in the state of life which he has chosen. Since, 
then, Agatho, the bearer of these presents, desires to be converted[1] in thy Love's monastery, we exhort 
thee to receive him with all sweetness and love, and by assiduous exhortation kindle his longing for eternal 
life, and study to be diligently solicitous for his soul's salvation; to the end that, while by thy admonition he 
shall persist with devoted mind in the service of our God, it may both profit him to have left the world, and his 
conversion may be to the increase of thine own reward. Know, however, that he is to be so received only if 
his wife also should wish to be similarly converted. For, when the bodies of both have been made one by 
the tie of wedlock, it is unseemly that part should be converted and part remain in the world[2]. 

EPISTLE XLIX. 

TO PALLADIUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Palladius, Bishop of Santones in Gaul (Saintes). 

Leuparic your presbyter, the bearer of these presents, when he came to us informed us that your Fraternity 
has built a church in honour of the blessed apostles Peter and Paul, and also of the martyrs Laurentius and 
Pancratius, and placed there thirteen altars, of which we learn that four have remained not yet dedicated 
because of your desiring to deposit there relics of the above-named saints. And, seeing that we have 
reverently supplied you with relics of the Saints Peter and Paul, and also of the martyrs Laurentius and 
Pancratius, we exhort you to receive them with reverence, and deposit them with the help of the Lord, 
providing before all things that supplies for the maintenance of those who serve there be not wanting. 

EPISTLE L. 

TO QUEEN BRUNICHILD. 

Gregory to Brunichild, Queen of the Franks. 

The tenor of your letters, which evinces a religious spirit and the earnestness of a pious mind, causes us not 
only to commend the purpose of your request, but also to grant willingly what you demand. For indeed it 
would ill become us to refuse what Christian devotion and the desire of an upright heart solicits, especially 
as we know that you demand, and embrace with your whole heart, what may both protect the faith of 
believers, and work no less the salvation of souls. Accordingly, greeting your Excellency with befitting 
honour, we inform you that to Leuparic, the bearer of these presents, through whom we received your 
communication, and whom you described as a presbyter, we have handed over, according to your 
Excellency's request, with the reverence due to them, certain relics of the blessed apostles Peter and Paul. 
But, that laudable and religious devotion may be more and more conspicuous among you, you must see 
that these benefits of the saints be deposited with reverence and due honour, and that those who serve in 
attendance on them be vexed with no burdens or molestations, lest perchance, under the pressure of 
outward necessity, they be rendered unprofitable and slow in the service of God, and (which God forbid) the 
benefits of the saints that have been bestowed sustain injury and neglect. Let, then, your Excellency see to 
their quiet, to the end that, while they are guarded by your bounty from all disquietude, they may render 
praises to our God with minds undisturbed, and that reward may also accrue to you in the life eternal. 

EPISTLE LI. 

TO THE BRETHREN GOING TO ENGLAND 

(Angliam)[3]. 

Gregory, servant of the servants of God, to the servants of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Since it had been better not to have begun what is good than to return back from it when begun, you must, 
most beloved sons fulfil the good work which with the help of the Lord you have begun. Let, then, neither the 
toil of the journey nor the tongues of evil-speaking men deter you; but with all instancy and all fervour go on 
with what under God's guidance you have commenced, knowing that great toil is followed by the glory of an 
eternal reward. Obey in all things humbly Augustine your provost (proeposito), who is returning to you, whom 
we also appoint your abbot, knowing that whatever may be fulfilled in you through his admonition will in all 

ways profit your souls. May Almighty God protect you with His grace, and grant to me to see the fruit of your 
labour in the eternal country; that so, even though I cannot labour with you, I may be found together with you 
in the joy of the reward; for in truth I desire to labour. God keep you safe, most beloved sons. Given the tenth 
day of the Kalends of August, the fourteenth year of the Emperor our lord Mauricius Tiberius, the most pious 
Augustus, the thirteenth year of the consulship of our said lord, Indiction 14. 

EPISTLE Lll. 

TO PELAGIUS AND SERENUS, BISHOPS. 

Gregory to Pelagius of Turni[4] and Serenus of Masilia (Marseilles) Bishops of Gaul. A paribus[5]. 
Although with priests who have the charity that is well pleasing to God religious men need no 
commendation, yet, since an apt time for writing has offered itself, we have thought well to send a letter to 
your Fraternity, mentioning that we have sent into your parts, with the help of the Lord, for the benefit of souls, 
the servant of God Augustine, of whose earnestness we are assured, with other servants of God. Him your 
Holiness must needs assist with priestly earnestness, and hasten to afford him your succour. We have also 
enjoined him, that so you may be the more ready to support him, to make you fully acquainted with the 
matter he has in hand, knowing that, when it is known to you, you will lend yourselves with entire devotion for 
God's sake to succour him as the case requires. 

Moreover, we commend in all ways to your charity our common son the presbyter Candidus, whom we have 
sent for the government of the patrimony of our Church. Given on the tenth day of the Kalends of August, 
Indiction 14. 

EPISTLE Llll. 

TO VIRGILIUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Virgilius, Bishop of Arelate (Aries), Metropolitan. 

Although we are confident that your Fraternity is intent on good works, and that you come forward of your 
own accord in causes well-pleasing to God, we nevertheless deem it advantageous to address you with 
fraternal charity, that, being provoked also by our letters, you may increase the solace which it becomes 
you voluntarily to bestow. And accordingly we inform your Holiness that we have sent Augustine, the servant 
of God, the bearer of these presents, with other servants of God, for the winning of souls in the parts whither 
he is going, as he will be able himself to inform you face to face. In these circumstances you must needs aid 
him with prayer and assistance, and, where need may require, afford him the support of your succour, and 
refresh him, as is fit, with fatherly and priestly consolation, to the end that, when he shall have obtained the 
succour of your Holiness, if he should succeed in winning any gain for God, as we hope he may, you too 
may be able to gain a reward along with him, having devoutly administered to his good works the 
abundance of your support. Moreover, as to Candidus the presbyter, our common son, and the little 
patrimony of our Church, let your Fraternity, as being of one mind with us, study to hold both as commended 
to you; that so, with the help of your Holiness, something may thence accrue for the sustenance of the poor. 
Inasmuch, then, as your predecessor held this patrimony for many years, and kept in his own hands the 
collected payments, let your Fraternity consider whose the moneys are, and to whom they should be paid, 
and restore them to us, handing them to the above-written presbyter Candidus, our son. For it is very 
execrable that what has been preserved by the kings of the nations should be said to be taken away by 
bishops. 

EPISTLE LIV. 

TO DESIDERIUS AND SYAGRIUS, BISHOPS. 

Gregory to Desiderius of Vienna (Vienne), and Syagrius of Augustodunum (Autun), Bishops of Gaul. A 
paribus[6]. 

Having regard to your sincere charity we are well assured that out of love for Peter, the Prince of the 
apostles, you will devotedly afford your succour to our men; especially, since the nature of the case 
requires you to give assistance even of your own accord, and the more when you see them labour. 
Wherefore we inform your Holiness that, the Lord so ordering it, we have despatched Augustine, the servant 
of God, the bearer of these presents, whose zeal and earnestness are well known to us, with other servants 
of God, in behalf of souls in those parts; from whose account of things when you have fully learnt what is 
enjoined on him, let your Fraternity bestow your succour on him in all ways which the case may require, that 

you may be able, as is becoming and fit, to be iielpers of a good worl<. Let, tiien, your Fratemity study to 
siiew yourself so devoted in this matter that your action may prove to us the truth of the good report that we 
have heard of you. We commend to you in all respects our most beloved common son, Candidus the 
presbyter, to whom we have committed the patrimony of our Church situated in those parts. 

EPISTLE LV. 

TO PROTASIUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Protasius, Bishop of Aquae in Gaul (Aix). 

How great love of the blessed Peter, Prince of the apostles, distinguishes you is evident, not only from the 
prerogative of your office, but also from the devotion you bestow on what is to the advantage of his Church. 
And Having learnt that this is the case from the relation of Augustine, servant of God, the bearer of these 
presents, we rejoice exceedingly for the affection and zeal for truth that is in you; and we give thanks that, 
though absent in the body, you still shew that you are with us in heart and mind, seeing that you exhibit 
brotherly charity towards us, as is fit. In order then that actual fact may confirm the good report of you, tell our 
brother and fellow-bishop Virgilius to hand over to us the payments which his predecessor received for 
many years and retained in his own hands: for it is the property of the poor. And if perchance, as we do not 
believe will be the case, he should desire in any way to excuse himself, do you, who know the real truth 
more exactly, inasmuch as you acted as steward (vicedominus) at that time, explain to him how the matter 
stands, and urge him not to retain in his hands the property of Saint Peter and of his poor. But, though 
perhaps our men may not need this, do not refuse your testimony in the case; that so, with regard to the truth 
as well as to the devotion of your good will, the blessed apostle Peter, for whose love you do this, may 
respond to you by his intercession both here and in the life to come. We heartily commend to your Holiness 
the presbyter Candidus, our common son, to whom we have committed the charge of this patrimony. 

EPISTLE LVI. 

TO STEPHEN, ABB0T[7]. 

Gregory to Stephen, &c. 

The account given us by Augustine, servant of God, the bearer of these presents, has made us joyful, in that 

he has told us that your Love is vigilant as you ought to be; and he further affirms that the presbyters and 

deacons and the whole congregation live in unanimity and concord. And, since the goodness of presidents 

is the salutary rule of their subjects, we implore Almighty God to enkindle thee always in good works by the 

grace of His loving-kindness, and to keep those who are committed to thee from all temptation of diabolical 

deceit, and grant to them to live with thee in charity and in the manner of life that pleases Him. 

But, since the enemy of the human race never rests from plotting against our doings, so as to deceive in 

some part souls that are serving God, therefore, most beloved son, we exhort thee to exercise vigilantly thy 

anxious care, and so to keep those who are committed to thee by prayer and heedfulness that the prowling 

wolf may find no opportunity for tearing the flock: to the end that, when thou shall have rendered to our God 

unharmed those of whom thou hast undertaken the charge. He may both of His grace repay thee with 

rewards for thy labour and multiply in thee longings for eternal life. 

We have received the spoons and plates which thou hast sent us, and we thank thy Charity, because thou 

hast shewn how thou lovest the poor in having sent for their use such things as they need. 

EPISTLE LVII. 

TO ARIGIUS, PATRICIAN (8). 

Gregory to Arigius, Patrician of Gaul. 

We have learnt from the servant of God, Augustine, the bearer of these presents, how great goodness, how 
great gentleness, with the charity that is well-pleasing to Christ, is in you resplendent; and we give thanks to 
Almighty God, who has granted you these gifts of His loving-kindness, through which you may have it in your 
power to be highly esteemed among men, and - what is truly profitable - glorious in His sight. We therefore 
pray Almighty God, that He would multiply in you these gifts which He has granted, and keep you with all 
yours under His protection, and so dispose the doings of your Glory in this world that they may be to your 
benefit both here, and - what is more to be wished - in the life to come. Saluting, then, your Glory with 
paternal sweetness, we beg of you that the bearer of these presents, and the servants of God who are with 
him, may obtain your succour in what is needful, to the end that, while they experience your favour, they may 

the better fulfil what has been enjoined on them to do. 

Furthermore, we commend to you in all respects our son the presbyter Candidus, whom we have sent for the 
government of the patrimony of our Church which is in your parts; trusting that your Glory will receive a 
reward in return from our God, if with devout mind you lend your succour to the concerns of the poor. 

EPISTLE LVIII. 

TO THEODORIC AND THEODEBERT (1). 

Gregory to Theodoric and Theodebert, brethren. Kings of the Franks. A paribus (2). 
Since Almighty God has adorned your kingdom with rectitude of faith, and has made it conspicuous among 
other nations by the purity of its Christian religion, we have conceived great expectations of you, that you will 
by all means desire that your subjects should be converted to that faith in virtue of which you are their kings 
and lords. This being so, it has come to our knowledge that the nation of the Angli is desirous, through the 
mercy of God, of being converted to the Christian faith, but that the priests in their neighbourhood neglect 
them, and are remiss in kindling their desires by their own exhortations. On this account therefore we have 
taken thought to send to them the servant of God Augustine, the bearer of these presents, whose zeal and 
earnestness are well known to us, with other servants of God. And we have also charged them to take with 
them some priests from the neighbouring parts, with whom they may be able to ascertain the disposition of 
the Angli, and, as far as God may grant it to them, to aid their wishes by their admonition. Now, that they may 
have it in their power to shew themselves efficient and capable in this business, we beseech your 
Excellency, greeting you with paternal charity, that these whom we have sent may be counted worthy to find 
the grace of your favour. And, since it is a matter of souls, let your power protect and aid them; that Almighty 
God, who knows that with devout mind and with all your heart you take an interest in His cause, may 
propitiously direct your causes, and after earthly dominion bring you to heavenly kingdoms. 
Futhermore, we request your Excellency to hold as commended to you our most beloved son, Candidus, a 
presbyter, and the rector of the patrimony of our Church, to the end that the blessed Peter, Prince of the 
apostles, may answer you by his intercession, while, looking to the reward, you afford your protection in the 
concerns of his poor. 

EPISTLE LIX. 

TO BRUNICHILD, QUEEN OF THE FRANKS. 

Gregory to Brunichild, &c. 

The Christianity of your Excellence has been so truly known to us of old that we do not in the least doubt of 
your goodness, but rather hold it to be in all ways certain that you will devoutly and zealously concur with us 
in the cause of faith, and supply most abundantly the succour of your religions sincerity. Being for this 
reason well assured, and greeting you with paternal charity, we inform you that it has come to our 
knowledge how that the nation of the Angli, by God's permission, is desirous of becoming Christian, but that 
the priests who are in their neighbourhood have no pastoral solicitude with regard to them. And lest their 
souls should haply perish in eternal damnation, it has been our care to send to them the bearer of these 
presents, Augustine the servant of God, whose zeal and earnestness are well known to us, with other 
servants of God; that through them we might be able to learn their wishes, and, as far as is possible, you 
also striving with us, to take thought for their conversion. We have also charged them that for carrying out this 
design they should take with them presbyters from the neighbouring regions. Let, then, your Excellency, 
habitually prone to good works, on account as well of our request as of regard to the fear of God, deign to 
bold him as in all ways commended to you, and earnestly bestow on him the favour of your protection, and 
lend the aid of your patronage to his labour and, that he may have the fullest fruit thereof provide for his 
going secure under your protection to the above-written nation of the Angli, to the end that our God, who has 
adorned you in this world with good qualities well-pleasing to Him, may cause you to give thanks here and 
in eternal rest with His saints. 

Furthermore, commending to your Christianity our beloved son Candidus, presbyter and rector of the 
patrimony of our Church which is situated in your parts, we beg that he may in all things obtain the favour of 
your protection. 

EPISTLE LX. 

TO EULOGIUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Eulogius, Bishop of Alexandria. 

Ciiarity, tiie motiier and guardian of all that is good, which binds together in union the hearts of many, 
regards not as absent him whom it has present in the mind's eye. Since then, dearest brother, we are held 
together by the root of charity, neither will bodily absence nor distance of places have power to assert any 
claim over us, inasmuch as we who are One are surely not far from each other. Now we wish to have always 
this common charity with the rest of our brethren. Yet there is something that binds us in a certain peculiar 
way to the Church of Alexandria, and compels us, as it were by a special law, to be the more prone to love it. 
For, as it is known to all that the blessed evangelist Mark was sent by Saint Peter the apostle, his master, to 
Alexandria, so we are bound together in the unity of this master and his disciple, so that I seem to preside 
over the see of the disciple because of the master, and you over the see of the master because of the 
disciple. 

Moreover to this unity of hearts we are bound also by the merits of your Holiness, since we know that you 
follow profitably the ordinances of your founder, and feel how you betake yourself with entire devotion to the 
bosom of your master, whence sprung the preaching of salvation in your parts. And so, when we received 
the letters of your Holiness, as much as our heart rejoiced in your brotherly visitation, so much is it 
oppressed with sadness for the untold burdens which you refer to, and we groan with you in brotherly 
sympathy for your grief. But, since a shaking of various kinds is extending itself everywhere, in the midst of a 
common need one should grieve less for one's own, but study rather, by patiently enduring, to overcome 
what we cannot altogether avoid. 

But what we ourselves are suffering from the swords of the Lombards in the daily plundering and mangling 
and slaying of our citizens, we refuse to tell, lest, while speaking of our own sorrows, we should increase 
yours from the sympathy which you bestow upon us. 

Furthermore, a little time ago we sent to Sabinianus, who represents our Church in the royal city, a letter from 
ourselves, which he should have sent on to your Fraternity (3). If you have received it, we wonder why you 
have sent us no reply to it. And accordingly, since caution must be taken lest the pride of any one whatever 
introduce offence in the Churches, it is needful that you should carefully peruse it, and with all diligence and 
full bent of mind maintain what pertains to your dignity and to the peace of the Church. 
Now may Almighty God, who by the grace of His loving-kindness has conferred on you the disposition and 
charity that becomes a priest, protect you in His service, and keep you within and without from all adversity, 
and mercifully grant that the souls of wanderers may be converted to Himself by your preaching. 
We have received with the charity that was due to the bearer of these presents, our common son the 
deacon Isidore, who brought to us the benediction (4) of Saint Mark the evangelist. And you indeed, being 
resplendent in the merit of a good life, have sent to us the sweetly smelling word, which is nigh unto 
Paradise. But we, to wit because we are sinners, send you wood from the West, which, being suitable for the 
building of ships, signifies the tumult of our mind, as being ever tossed in the sea-waves; and we wished 
indeed to send larger pieces, but the ship was not large enough to hold them (5). In the month of August, 
Indiction 14. 

EPISTLE LXI. 

TO CASTORIUS, NOTARY (6). 

Gregory to Castorius, &c. 

The magnificent lord Andreas presses me continually about restoring the use of the pallium in the Church of 
Ravenna according to ancient custom. And thou knowest that the bishop John wrote to me that it had been 
the custom for the bishops of the said Church to use the pallium in solemn litanies (7). Adeodatus, deacon of 
that church, when he besought me earnestly on the same subject, satisfied me by oath that the bishops of 
the said place were accustomed to use the pallium in litanies four times in the year. But the aforesaid lord 
Andreas says in his letters that the bishop of Ravenna was in the habit of using the pallium in litanies at all 
times except in Lent. And these litanies, which he does not blush to say were daily, he asserts to be solemn 
ones. Whence I have been altogether astonished. But let thy Experience regard no man's person, no man's 
words; keep the fear of God and rectitude only before thine eyes, and enquire of senior persons, and of the 
Archdebon of that same Church, who would not, I think, perjure himself for the honour of another, and of 
others of older standing who had been in sacred orders before the times of bishop John, or if there are any 
others of riper age not in holy orders; and let them come before the body of Saint Apollinaris, and touching 
his sepulchre swear what had been the custom before the times of bishop John; since, as thou knowest, he 
was a man who presumed greatly and endeavoured in his pride to arrogate many things to himself. And 
whatever may be sworn to by faithful and grave men, according to the subjoined form, we desire to be 
retained in the same Church. But see that thou act not negligently, and that no one corrupt thy faithfulness 
and devotion in this matter; for thy zeal I know. Act assiduously, yet so that the aforesaid Church be not 

lowered in a way contrary to justice, but tiiat it retain tiie usage tiiat existed before tiie times of bisiiop Joiin. 
IVIoreover, for satisfying tiiyself, do not enquire of two or tiiree persons, but of as many as tiiou canst find of 
old standing and grave character, that so we may neither deny to that Church what has been of ancient 
custom, nor concede to it what has been coveted and attempted newly. But do all kindly and sweetly, so 
that both thy action may be strict and thy tongue gentle. The sword s which has been left at Ravenna, as we 
have already written, bring hither with thee; and carefully attend to what our son Boniface the deacon and the 
magnificent Maurentius the chartularius have written to thee about. 

I swear by the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, the inseparable Trinity of Divine Power, and by this body of the 
blessed martyr Apollinaris, that out of favour to no person, and without any advantage to myself intervening, 
I give my testimony. But this I know, and am personally cognizant of, that, before the times of the late bishop 
John, the Bishop of Ravenna, in the presence of this or that apocrisiarius of the Apostolic See, on such and 
such days, had the custom of using the pallium, and I am not aware that he had herein usurped latently, or in 
the absence of the apocrisiarius. 

EPISTLE LXIII. 

TO GENNADIUS, PATRICIAN (9). 

Gregory to Gennadius, Patrician of Africa. 

We doubt not that your Excellency members how two years ago we wrote in behalf of Paul our brother and 
fellow-bishop, asking you to afford him the support of your Dignity in his desire to come to us on account of 
the trouble he was said to be undergoing from persecution on the part of the Donatists, to the end that, since 
it had been reported to us that he could get no aid against them there, we might, after ascertaining the truth, 
give him advice with fraternal sympathy, and treat with him as to what should be done in the way a 
wholesome arrangement against the madness of pestiferous presumption. And, so far as our aforesaid 
brother gave us to understand, he not only failed to get succour from any one, but was prevented by various 
hindrances from being able to come with safety to the Roman city. Yet, when we had caused your epistle to 
be read to him, he replied that he is not suffering from the ill-will of certain persons because he repressed 
the Donatists, but rather says that he is in disfavour with many for his defence of the Catholic faith; and he 
told me many things besides, which, since this is not a fit time for mentioning them, we have thought best to 
keep to ourselves. 

Since, then, the question before us is not one of earthly affairs, but of the health of souls, and your assertion 
and his are different, we have been unable to say anything particularly in reply, not having investigated the 
truth, seeing that, when we received the letters of your Excellency, we were confined by bodily sickness. But 
when Almighty God, if it should please Him, shall have restored us to our former health, we will sift the truth 
as we can by diligent enquiry. And according to what we may be able to learn we will so settle the case 
through the mercy of God that not only the health of souls in the cure whereof you deign to take an interest, 
lost now by them that err, may be restored, but also that which the maintainors of the true faith still possess 
may, through the protecting grace of our Redeemer, be preserved. 

But with regard to the above-named bishop, whom you assert to be deprived of communion we greatly 
wonder how it is that a letter from your Excellency, and not from his primate, has announced this to us. 

EPISTLE LXV. 

TO MAURICIUS, EMPEROR. 

Gregory to Mauricius Augustus. 

Amidst the cares of warfare and innumerable anxieties which you sustain in your unwearied seal for the 
government of the Christian republic, it is a great cause of joy to me along with the whole world that your 
Piety ever watches over custody of the faith whereby the empire of Our lords is resplendent. Whence I fully 
trust that, as you guard the causes of God with the love of a religious mind, so God guards and aids yours 
with the grace of His Majesty. Now after what manner the serenity of your Piety, out of regard to 
righteousness and zeal for the purest religion, has been moved against the most flagitious pravity of the 
Donatists, the tenor of the commands which you have sent most clearly shews. But the most reverend 
bishops who have come from the African province assert that these have been so disregarded through 
ill-advised connivance that neither is the judgment of God held in fear there, nor are the imperial commands 
so far carried into effect; adding also this: that in the aforesaid province, through the bribes of the Donatists 
prevailing, the Catholic faith is publicly let to sale. But on the other hand the glorius Gennadius (1) has 
likewise complained of one of those who made such complaints: and two others also have borne like 
testimony with him on the subject. But, inasmuch as in this case a secular judge was concerned, I have 

thought it right to send these bishops to the footsteps of your Piety, that they may represent in person to your 
most serene ears what they declare themselves to have endured for the catholic faith. 
For these reasons I beseech the Christianity of my lords, for the weal of their souls and life of their most 
pious offspring, to give orders by a strict mandate for the punishment of such as you find to be such as have 
been described, and to arrest with the hand of rescue the ruin of those who are perishing? and to apply the 
medicine of correction to insane minds, and cure them of the poisonous bite of error; that so, the darkness of 
pestiferous pravity having been driven away by the remedy of your pro vision, and the true faith having shed 
abroad in those parts the rays of its serenity, heavenly triumph may await you before the eyes of our 
Redeemer, because whomsoever you defend outwardly from the enemy, them you also set free inwardly 
from the poison of diabolical fraud; which is a still more glorious thing. 

EPISTLE LXVI. 

TO ATHANASIUS, PRESBYTER. 

Gregory to Athanasius, Presbyter of Isauria. 

As we are afflicted and mourn forthose whom the error of heretical pravity has cut off from the unity of the 
Church, so we rejoice with those whom their profession of the catholic faith retains within her bosom. And, as 
it is our duty to oppose the impiety of the former with pastoral solicitude, so it is fitting for us to bestow favour 
on the pious professions of the latter, and to declare their views to be sound. And accordingly, a suspicion 
of unsoundness in the faith having arisen against thee, Athanasius, presbyter of the monastery of Saint Mile, 
called Tamnacus, which is established in the province of Lycaonia, thou, in order that the integrity of the 
profession of faith might appear, didst elect to have recourse to the Apostolical See over which we preside, 
asserting also that, having been corporally chastised, thou hadst done some things unjustly and 
impetuously. And, although things done under compulsion by no means fall under the censure of the 
canons, and they are rightly accounted to be of no weight (since he himself invalidates them who compels 
what is unjust to be confessed and done), and though that confession is rather to be received and 
embraced which is shewn to proceed from the spontaneous will, as is known to be the case in that which 
thou madest before us; - yet still, to avoid the possibility of uncertainty, we took the precaution of writing 
about thee to our brother and fellow-bishop, the prelate of the city of Constantinople, that he might inform us 
by letter of what had been done. He, after being often admonished by us, wrote in reply to the effect that a 
volume had been found in thy possession, which contained many heretical statements, and that on this 
account he had been incensed against thee. He having lent this to us in his desire to satisfy us, we read the 
earlier portions of it attentively: and inasmuch as we found in it manifest poison of heretical pravity, we 
forbade its being read any more. But, since thou hast assured us that thou hadst read it in simplicity, and, in 
order to cut off all ground for uncertain suspicion, hast handed to us a paper in thine own handwriting in which 
expounding thy faith, thou hast most plainly condemned all heresies in general, or whatever is opposed to 
the integrity of the Catholic faith or profession, and hast declared that thou hadst always received and didst 
still receive all that the four holy Ecumenical synods receive, and hadst condemned and didst still condemn 
what they condemn, and hast promised also to accept and hold to that synod which was held in the times of 
the emperor Justinian concerning the Three Chapters, and, being forbidden by us to read that same volume 
in which the poison of pestiferous error is interwoven, rejecting also and condemning all that in it is said or 
latently implied against the integrity of the Catholic faith, thou hast promised that thou wilt not read it again; - 
we, moved by these reasons (thy faith also having clearly appeared to us from the paper under thine own 
hand, God guarding thee, to be catholic), decree thee to be, according to thy profession, free from all stain 
of heretical perversity, and catholic; and we pronounce that thou hast proved thyself, by the grace of Christ 
Jesus our Saviour to be in all things a professor and follower of the unadulterated faith: and we give thee 
free licence, notwithstanding all, to return to thy monastery, resuming thy place and rank. 
We wish to write also on this matter to our most beloved brother, the prelate of the city of Constantinople, 
who has been ordained in the place of the aforesaid holy John (2). But, since it is the custom that we should 
not write before his synodical epistle has reached us, we have therefore delayed. But, after it has reached 
us, we will inform him of these things when we find a convenient opportunity. 

REGISTER OF THE EPISTLES OF SAINT GREGORY 
THE GREAT, BOOK VII 

M 

BOOK VII 

EPISTLE II. 

TO COLUMBUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Columbus, Bishop of Numidia (1). 

We received at tiie iiands of tiie bearer, your deacon, tiie epistle of your Fraternity, in which you informed us 
of what had been done among you with regard to the person of the bishop Paul. This has been done so late 
that he could not now have appeared here in person. For his Excellency also, our son Gennadius the 
Patrician, sent his chancellor to us with reference to the same case. But when we had caused enquiry to be 
made whether he was willing to plead against him [i.e. against the bishop Paul] before us, he replied that he 
had been by no means sent with this intent but had only brought hither certain three persons from his Church 
who would allege many things against him. While, then, we neither found him prepared to commence an 
action, nor were moved by the quality of those persons to regard them as fit accusers of a bishop, we could 
not gainsay or offer hindrance to the often before-mentioned bishop Paul, who petitioned us in the hope of 
having leave given him to resort to the royal city; but we presently allowed him according to his petition, with 
two others whom he should take with him, to set forth. If, then, there have been any things that could be 
reasonably said against him, the proper course would have been for him to come here at once, and for your 
Fraternity to inform us of all particulars, as you have now done. For, as to your having signified to us that you 
suffer from the enmities of many on account of our frequently visiting you by our letters, there is no doubt, 
most reverend brother, that the good suffer from the grudges of the bad, and that those who are intent on 
divine works are harassed by the oppositions of the perverse. But, in proportion as these bad things are 
around you, ought you to be more instantly occupied with the care of the government committed to you, and 
to watch for the custody of the flock of Christ; and in proportion as the contrariety of unrighteous men presses 
upon you, ought the care of pastoral solicitude to inflame you to be more active, and very certain of the 
promised reward, to the end that you may be able to offer to the chief Shepherd gain from the work given 
you to do. 

EPISTLE IV. 

TO CYRIACUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Cyriacus, Bishop of Constantinople. 

We have received with becoming charity our common sons, George the presbyter and Theodore your 
deacon; and we rejoice that you have passed from the care of ecclesiastical business to the government of 
souls, since, according to the voice of the Truth, faithful in a little will be faithful also in much (Luke xvi. 10). 
And to the servant who administers well it is said. Because thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will 
make thee ruler aver many things (Matth. xxv. 23); to whom also it is presently said further with respect to 
eternal retribution. Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. Now you say in your letter that you had exceedingly 
wished for rest. But in this you shew that you have fitly assumed pastoral responsibility, since, as a place of 
rule should be denied to those who covet it, so it should be offered to those who fly from it. And no man 
taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron (Hebr. v. 4). And again the same 
excellent preacher says. If one died far all, then all died; and Christ died for all. It remaineth that they which 
live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again (2 Cor. v. 
14, 15). And to the shepherd of holy Church it is said, Simon, son of Jonas, lovestthou me? Feed My sheep 
(John xxi. 1 7). From which words it appears that, if one who is able refuses to feed the sheep of Almighty 
God, he shews that he does not love the chief Shepherd. For if the Only-begotten of the Father, for 
accomplishing the good of all, came forth from the secrecy of the Father into the midst of us, what shall we 
say, if we prefer our secrecy to the good of our neighbours? Thus rest is to be desired by us with all our 
heart; and yet for the advantage of many it should sometimes be laid aside. For, as we ought with full desire 
to fly from occupation, so, if there should be a want of some one to preach, we must needs put a willing 

shoulder under the burden of occupation. And this we are taught by the conduct of two prophets(2), one of 
whom attempted to shun the office of preaching, while the other desired it. For to the Lord who sent him 
Jeremias replied saying, Ah, Lord God, I cannot speak; far I am a child (Jer. i. 6). And when Almighty God 
sought for some one to preach, saying. Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? Isaias offered himself of 
his own accord, saying. Here am I, send me (Isai. vi. 8). Lo, different voices proceeded outwardly from the 
two, but they flowed from the same fountain of love. 

For indeed there are two precepts of charity; to wit, the love of God and of one's neighbour. Wherefore 
Isaias, wishing to profit his neighbours by an active life, desires the office of preaching; but Jeremias, 
longing to cling assiduously to the love of his Maker by a contemplative life, protests against being sent to 
preach. What, then, one laudably desired the other laudably shrunk from: the latter lest by speaking he 
should lose the gains of silent contemplation; the former lest by keeping silence he should feel the loss of 
diligent work. But this is nicely to be observed in both, that he who refused did not resist finally, and he who 
wished to be sent saw himself previously purged by a coal from the altar; that so no one who has not been 
purged should dare to approach sacred ministries, nor any one whom heavenly grace chooses refuse 
proudly under a show of humility. 

Moreover I find yon in your epistles seeking with great longing after serenity of mind, and panting for 
tranquillity of thought apart from perturbation. But I know not in what manner your Fraternity can attain to this. 
For one who has undertaken the pilotage of a ship must needs watch all the more as he further recedes 
from shore, so as sometimes to foresee from signs the coming storms; sometimes, when they come, either, 
if they are small, to ride over them in a straight course, or, if they swell violently, to avoid them as they rush 
on by steering sideways; and often to watch alone when all who are without charge of the ship are at rest. 
How, moreover, having undertaken the burden of pastoral charge, can you have serenity of thought, seeing 
that it is written. Behold giants groan under the waters (Job xxvi. 5)? For, according to the words of John, The 
waters are peoples (Rev. xvii. 1 5). And the groaning of giants under the waters means that whoso in this 
world has increased in degree of power, as though in a sort of massive size of body, feels the load of 
greater tribulation by so much the more as he has taken on himself the care of ruling peoples. But, if the 
power of the Holy Spirit breathes upon the afflicted mind, forthwith what was done bodily for the people of 
Israel takes place with us spiritually. For it is written. But the children of Israel walked upon dry land in the 
midst of the sea (Exod. xiv. 29). And through the prophet the Lord promises saying. When thou passest 
through the waters. I will be with thee, and the rivers shall not overflow thee (Isai. xliii. 2). For the rivers 
overflow those whom the active business of this world confounds with perturbation of mind. But he who is 
sustained in mind by the grace of the Holy Spirit passes through the waters, and yet is not overflowed by the 
rivers, because in the midst of crowds of peoples he so proceeds along his way as not to sink the head of 
his mind beneath the active business of the world. 

I also, who, unworthy as I am, have come to a place of rule, had sometimes determined to seek some place 
of retirement: but, seeing the Divine counsels to be opposed to me, I submitted the neck of my heart to my 
Maker's yoke; especially reflecting on this, that no hidden places whatever can save the soul without the 
grace of God; and this we observe sometimes, when even saints go astray. For Lot was righteous in the 
depraved city itself, and sinned on the mountain (Gen. xix.). But why speak of these instances, when we 
know of greater ones? For what is pleasanter than Paradise? What safer than Heaven? And yet man out of 
Paradise, and the angel from heaven, by sinning fell. His power, then, should be sought. His grace 
implored, without whom we are nowhere without fault, with whom we are nowhere without righteousness. We 
should, then, take care that perturbation of thought get not the better of our minds; for it can by no means be 
entirely got rid of. For whosoever is in a place of rule must needs have to think sometimes even of earthly 
things, and to have a care also of external things, that the flock committed to him may be able to subsist for 
accomplishing what it has to do. But it should be most carefully seen to, that this same care pass not due 
measure, and that, when lawfully admitted into the heart, it be not allowed to become excessive. Whence it 
is rightly said through Ezekiel(3), Let not the priests shave their heads, nor suffer their lacks to grow long; but 
palling let them poll their heads (Ezek. xliv. 20). For what are hairs in the head by signification but thoughts in 
the mind? For, rising above the brain insensibly, they denote cares of the present life, which from negligent 
perception, since they come on sometimes importunely, advance as it were without our feeling them. Since, 
then, all who are over others ought indeed to have outward anxieties, and yet not to devote themselves to 
them exceedingly, the priests are rightly forbidden either to shave the head or to let their locks grow long, so 
that they nay neither entirely cut off from themselves carnal thoughts for the life of their subjects, nor again 
allow them to grow too much. And it is also there well said. Polling let them pall their heads; meaning that the 
anxieties of a temporal charge should both proceed as far as is needful, and yet should be soon cut short, 
lest they grow to an immoderate length. While therefore both, through external provision administered, the 
life of bodies is protected, and again intentness of heart is not hindered through the same being 
immoderate, the hairs on the head of the priest are kept to cover the skin, and cut short so as not to veil the 
eyes. 

Furthermore, we have received in full faith your letters addressed to us, and give thanks to Almighty God, 
who, by the mutual confession of the faithful, guards the coat that is without seam woven from the top 
throughout, that is to say His Church, in the unity of grace, from all rent of error; and against the deluge (so to 
speak) of so many sins of the perishing world constructs an ark of many planks in which the elect of Almighty 
God may be preserved unto life. For, when we in our turn send the confession of our faith to you, and you 
shew your charity towards us, what are we doing in holy Church but smearing the ark with pitch; lest any 
wave of error enter, and kill all the spiritual as being men, and the carnal as being beasts. 
But, when you have wisely professed a right faith, it remains doubtless that you should keep the more warily 
the peace of hearts, because of what the Truth says. Have salt in yourselves, and have peace one with 
another (Mark ix. 50). And Paul the apostle admonishes, saying. Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit 
in the bond of peace (Ephes. iv. 3). And again he says. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without 
which no man shall see God (Hebr. xii. 14). Which peace indeed you will then truly have with us, if you turn 
away from the pride of a profane name, according to what the same teacher of the Gentiles says, O 
Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding profane novelties of words (1 Tim. vi. 20). For 
indeed it is too bad, if these who have been made preachers of humility should glory in the elation of a vain 
name, when the true preacher says. But God forbid that I should glory, save in the crass of our Lord Jesus 
Christ (Gal. vi. 14.). He then is truly glorious who glories not in temporal power, but, for the name of Christ, 
glories in His passion. Herein therefore we embrace you from the bottom of our heart, herein we recognize 
you as priests, if, rejecting the vanity of words, you occupy the place of holiness with holy humility. For 
behold, we have been scandalized by this impious appellation, and retain in our mind and express in words 
by no means slight complaints. But your Fraternity knows how the Truth says. If thou offerest thy gift before 
the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee, leave there thy gift, and go thy way 
to be first reconciled to thy brother, and then thou shale come and after thy gift (Matth. v. 23, 24). Herein is to 
be considered, that, while every fault is done away by the offering of sacrifice, so great is the evil of offence 
engendered in another's heart that from one who has so sinned the Lord accepts not the sacrifice itself 
which is wont to do away sin. Take heed then with speed to wipe off cause of offence from your heart, that 
Almighty God may be able to regard as acceptable the sacrifice of your offering. 

Furthermore, while you have truly and accurately professed the right faith, we find that among those whom 
you have held to be condemned by the most holy general synods you have condemned a certain 
Eudoxius; whose name we have not found mentioned in the Latin language either in synods or in the books 
of the bishops of blessed memory, Epiphanius, Augustin, or Philaster, whom we know to have been the 
chief disputants against heretics(4). Now if any one of the catholic Fathers really condemns him, we 
undoubtedly follow their opinion. If, however, in your synodical epistle you have wished to condemn by 
name those also who, apart from the holy synods, are condemned in the writings of the Fathers, your 
Fraternity has mentioned too few by many; but if those whom the general synods reject, then too many by 
this one. But in the midst of all these things it is to be remembered, that in order that we may be free to 
profess the true faith and to order whatever has to be done in peace and concord, we ought to pray 
incessantly for the life of our most serene lords and of their offspring, that Almighty God would subdue 
barbarous nations under their feet, and grant them long and happy lives, to the end that through a Christian 
empire the faith which is in Christ may reign. 

EPISTLE V. 

TO CYRIACUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Cyriacus, Bishop of Constantinople. 

When in time past I represented the Apostolic See in the royal city, I became acquainted with the good 
qualities of your Holiness. And I greatly rejoice that the care of souls has been committed to you. And 
though unworthy, I beseech Almighty God with all the prayers in my power that He would even increase His 
grace in you, and cause you to gather gain of souls for the eternal country. But, whereas you say that you 
are weak for this work that has been put upon you, we know that the first virtue is acknowledgment of infirmity; 
and from this we gather that you can fulfil well the ministry you have undertaken, that we see how, out of 
humility, you acknowledge your own infirmity For we are all infirm; but he is more infirm who has not strength 
to consider his infirmity. But you, most blessed brethren, are for this reason strong, that, distrusting your own 
strength, you trust in the power of Almighty God. 

I cannot, however, express by the words of a letter how much my heart is bound to your Charity. But I pray 
that Almighty God may by the gift of His grace multiply the same charity that is between us, and may take 
away all occasion of offence, lest the holy Church, united by the profession of the true faith, and compacted 
by conjunction of the hearts of the faithful, should suffer any damage from priests disputing with each other, 
which God forbid. I at any rate, in all that I speak, in all that I say, against the proud conduct of certain 

persons, still, through the bounty of Almighty God, never relinquish custody of inward charity; but so execute 

outwardly what belongs to justice as by no means to disregard inwardly what belongs to love and kindness. 

And do you also ever return my love, and guard what belongs to peace and kindness; that, remaining of 

one mind, so as to allow no dissension to come in between us, we may be better able from the very unity of 

our hearts to obtain what we seek from the Lord. 

Furthermore, I commend to your Holiness John, presbyter of Chalcedon, and Athanasius of Isauria, that no 

one may set you against them by underhand misrepresentations; for I have thoroughly examined their faith, 

and have found them sound in their confessions, which have also been given in writing. 

Now may the Holy Trinity protect you with His hand, and render you always vigilant anti careful in the 

custody of souls, to the end that in the eternal retribution you may be counted worthy to be crowned, not only 

for your own work, but also for the amelioration of your subjects, 

EPISTLE VI. 

TO MAURICIUS AUGUSTUS. 

Gregory to Mauricius Augustus. 

Almighty God, who has made your Piety to be the guardian of ecclesiastical peace, preserves you by the 
same faith which, through unity among priests, you preserve; and when you submit your heart humbly to the 
yoke of heavenly loving-kindness, it is brought to pass by heavenly grace that you tread your enemies 
under the foot of valour. For it cannot be of small advantage that, when John of holy memory had departed 
this life, your Piety long hesitated, and somewhat deferred the time, while seeking counsel in the fear of 
Almighty God, in order, to wit, that the cause of God might be ordered, as it should be, with great fear(5). 
Whence also I think that my brother and fellow-priest Cyriacus is proved to be exceedingly fit for pastoral 
rule, in that the long deliberation of your Piety has raised him to this degree. And we all know how diligent 
and how practised he has long been in the administration of ecclesiastical affairs. Whence also I doubt not 
that it has been brought about by Divine ordering that one who had administered the least things well should 
fitly undertake the greater, and should pass from the charge of affairs to the government of souls. Wherefore 
in all our prayers we beseech Almighty God to repay this good work to the Serenity of our lords and to their 
pious offspring both in the present world and also with a perpetual recompense, and to grant to my 
aforesaid brother and fellow-priest, who has been put over the Lord's flock, to shew himself fully solicitous in 
the care of souls; that he may be able irreprovably both to correct what is wrong in his subjects and to foster 
what is right unto further increase; to the end that the judgment of your Piety concerning him may be 
approved, not only before men, but also before the eyes of the Supernal Majesty. 

The venerable men, George the presbyter and Theodore the deacon, in consideration of the command of 
my lords and the imminence of the winter season, I have not allowed to be delayed in this city 

EPISTLE VII. 

TO PETER, DOMITIAN, AND ELPIDIUS. 

Gregory to Peter, Domitian, and Elpidius, Bishops(6). 

I rejoice exceedingly that you welcomed with great joy the ordination of the most holy Cyriacus, my brother 
and fellow-priest. And since we have learnt from the preaching of Paul the apostle that If one member 
rejoice, all the members rejoice with it (1 Cor. xii. 26), you must needs consider with how great exultation I 
rejoice with you in this thing, wherein not one member, but many members of Christ have rejoiced. 
Nevertheless, so far as I have been able to consider your Fraternity's letters on a cursory perusal, great joy 
has carried you away into immoderate praise of this my brother. For you say that he has appeared in the 
Church like the sun, so that you all cried out. This is the day which the lord hath made; let us rejoice and be 
glad in it (Ps. cxvii. 24)(7). Yet surely this is a promise of the life to come, seeing that it is said. The righteous 
shall shine forth as the sun (Matth. xiii. 43; Wisd. ill. 7). For, in whatsoever virtue any one may excel, how can 
he shine forth as the sun while still in the present life, wherein The corruptible body presseth down the saul, 
and the earthly tabernacle weigheth down the mind that museth upon many things (Wisd. ix. 15); wherein We 
see another law in our members warring against the law of our mind, and bringing us into captivity by the law 
of sin which is in our members (Rom. vii. 23); wherein Even in ourselves we have the answer of death, that 
we should not trust in ourselves (2 Cor. i. 9); wherein also the Prophet cries aloud. Fear and trembling are 
canto upon me, and darkness hath covered me (Ps. liv. 6)(8)? For it is written also, A wise man abideth as 
the sun; a fool changeth as the moan (Ecclus. xxvii. 12); where the comparison of the sun is not applied to the 
splendour of his brightness, but to perseverance in well-doing. But the good beginning of his ordination 
could not as yet be praised by you with regard to perseverance. And as to your saying that you cried out. 

This is the day which the Lord hath made, you ought to have considered of whom this is said. For what 
comes before is this; The stone which the builders refused, the same is made the head-stone of the corner. 
This is the Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes (Ps. cxvii. 22)(9). And with regard to this same stone 
it is forthwith added. This is the day which the Lord hath made. For He who for strength of building is said to 
be a stone, for the grace of illumination is called the Day, being also made, because He became incarnate. 
In Him we are enjoined to rejoice and be glad, because He has overcome in us the darkness of our error 
by the light of His excellence. In praise of a creature, then, that expression ought not to have been used 
which is suitable to the Creator alone. 

But why should I find fault with these things, knowing as I do how joy carries away the mind? For your charity 
engendered in you great gladness, which gladness of heart the tongue applauding followed. This being so, 
the praise which charity found to hand cannot now be called a fault. But to me concerning my most holy 
brother there should have been briefly said what I might accept with satisfaction, seeing that I knew him to be 
one who has long given to me especially this proof of his greatness; that, having been occupied in so many 
affairs of ecclesiastical administration, he has kept a tranquil heart in the midst of turbulent throngs, and 
always restrained himself with a gentle bearing. And this indeed is no small commendation of a great and 
unshaken mind, not to have been perturbed among the perturbations of business. 
Furthermore, your Fraternity should be instant in continual prayers, that Almighty God may guard in our 
aforesaid brother and fellow-priest what has been well begun, and ever lead him on to what is better still. 
This should ever be the prayer of you, most holy ones, and of the people subject to him. For the deserts of 
rulers and peoples are so connected with each other that often the lives of subjects are made worse from 
tile fault of those who are over them, and often the lives of pastors fall off from the ill desert of peoples. For 
that the evil doings of one who is over others does very great harm to those who are under him the 
Pharisees are evidence, of whom it is written. Ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against men. For ye neither 
go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in (Matth. xxiii. 1 3). And that the fault of 
peoples does much harm to the life of pastors we perceive in what David did (2 Kings ii. 24). For he, praised 
by the testimony of God, he, conscious of heavenly mysteries, being inflated by the turnout of hidden elation, 
sinned in numbering the people; and yet the punishment fell upon the people for David's sin. Why was this? 
Because in truth according to the desert of subject peoples are the hearts of rulers disposed. Now the 
righteous Judge rebuked the fault of the sinner by visitation on those on account of whom he sinned. But, 
because he himself, waxing proud of his own will, was not free from fault, he himself also received 
punishment of his fault. For the fierce wrath, which smote the people bodily, prostrated also the ruler of the 
people with inmost sorrow of heart. Consider therefore these things mutually; and, even as he who is put 
over you and over the people should intercede for all, so should all of you pray for his conversation and 
manners, that before Almighty God both you may profit by imitation of him, and he may be aided by your 
deserts. Further, let us all with one accord pray continually with great weeping to the utmost of our powers for 
out most serene lords and their pious offspring, that protecting heavenly grace may guard their lives, and 
subdue the necks of the nations to the Christian empire. 

EPISTLE XI. 

TO RUFINUS, BISHOP OF EPHESUS. 

Gregory to Rufinus, &c. 

The charity of your acts of friendship in the past has moved us to visit your Fraternity with the present letter. 
For we have been refreshed with great joy by learning from reports given us of your health that all is well with 
you. But, while this is so, we implore Almighty God, that as in the present life, which is as it were a shadow of 
the future one. He has granted you to rejoice in the transitory welfare of your body, so in that heavenly 
country wherein is true life He may cause us to give thanks and rejoice with a common exultation for the 
perfected salvation of your soul. Now the bearer of this, desiring to be commended to you by a letter from 
us, having been asked by us whether he had learnt letters as becomes a clerk, replied that he was ignorant 
of them. What further commendation, then, with regard to him I should give to your Fraternity I know not; 
except that you should be solicitous about his soul, and watch over him with pastoral zeal, so that, as he 
cannot read, your tongue may be a book to him, and that in the goodness of your preaching and work he 
may see what to follow. For the living voice usually draws the heart more closely than perfunctory reading. 
But, while, as his master, you supply him inwardly with this spiritual teaching, let not outward care for him also 
be wanting, that by its aid he come to long for spiritual things, and lest, if such aid is slighted, you should no 
longer have one to preach to. 

EPISTLE XII. 

TO RESPECTA, ABBESS. 

Gregory to Respecta, Abbess of Massilia (Marseilles) in Gaul. 

The demand of a pious wish ought to be accomplished by a consequent result, that so the benefit 
demanded may be validly attained, and sincerity of devotion may laudably shine forth. Accordingly to the 
monastery consecrated to the honour of Saint Cassian wherein you are selected to preside-in accordance 
with the petition of our children Dynamius and Aureliana, who are shewn, in their religious devotion, to have 
united it to the house in their possession by connecting the buildings-we have seen fit to allow these 
privileges:-We appoint that on the death of the abbess of the aforesaid monastery, not a stranger, but one 
whom the congregation may choose for itself from among its own members, shall be ordained; whom 
(provided however that she be judged worthy of this ministry) the bishops of the same place shall ordain. 
Further, with regard to the property and management of the same monastery, we decree that neither bishop 
nor any ecclesiastic shall have any power; but appoint that these things shall in all respects pertain to the 
charge of thy Solicitude, or of her who may be abbess in the same place after thee. If on the day of the 
Saint's anniversary, or of the dedication, of the aforesaid monastery the bishop should resort thither for 
celebrating the sacred solemnities of mass, still his office must be so executed that his chair be not placed 
there, except on the aforesaid days while he is celebrating there the solemnities of mass. And when he 
departs, let his chair be at the same time removed from the same oratory. But on all other days let the 
offices of mass be performed by the presbyter whom the same bishop may appoint. 
Furthermore, with regard to the life and deeds of the handmaidens of God, or of the abbess who may be 
constituted in the above-written monastery, we enjoin on the bishop, in the fear of God, to devote careful 
attention to them; so that, if any of those who dwell there, her fault demanding it, ought to be subjected to 
punishment, he may himself visit the offence according to the vigour of the sacred canons. These things, 
then, being by us ordained and granted, do thou, in the ordering of thy congregation, study to shew thyself 
so earnestly attentive in all respects that the malice of the malignant foe may find nothing there that can be 
contaminated. All these things, therefore, embraced in this paper of injunctions, we ordain to be observed, 
under Christ's protection, in all respects and by all persons for ever in thy monastery, to the end that the 
benefits of the privileges allowed may always continue firm and inviolate. The month of November, Indict. 
15. 

EPISTLE XIII. 

TO FORTUNATUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Fortunatus, Bishop of Fanum(1). 

As it is reprehensible and deserving of punishment for any one to sell consecrated vessels except in cases 
sanctioned by law and the sacred canons, so it is not a matter for reproach or penalty if they should be 
disposed of with a compassionate purpose for the redemption of captives. Since, then, we find from the 
information given us by your Fraternity that you have borrowed money for the redemption of captives, and 
have not the means of repaying it, and on this account desire, with our authority, to dispose of some 
consecrated vessels,-in this case, seeing that the decrees of both the laws and the canons approve, we 
have thought fit to lend our approval, and grant you leave to dispose of the consecrated vessels. But, lest 
their sale should possibly lead to any ill-feeling against yourself, they ought to be disposed of, up to the 
amount of the debt, in the presence of John our defensor, and their price should be paid to the creditors, to 
the end that, the business being completed with observance of this kind, neither may the creditors feel loss 
from having lent the money, nor your Fraternity sustain ill-will now or at any future time. 

EPISTLE XV. 

TO GEORGE, PRESBYTER. 

Gregory to George, Presbyter, and to Theodore, deacon, of the Church of Constantinople. 

Mindful of your goodness and charity, I greatly blame myself, that I gave you leave to return so soon: but, 

since I saw you pressing me importunately once and again for leave to go, I considered that it might be a 

serious matter for your Love to tarry with us longer. But, after I had learnt that you had lingered so long on 

your journey owing to the winter season, I confess that I was sorry that you had been sent away so soon. 

For, if your Love was trouble to accomplish your intended journey, it had been better that you had lingered 

with me than away from me. 

Moreover, after your departure I learnt from information given me by my most beloved sons the deacons 

that your Love had said that our Almighty Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, when He descended into hell. 

saved all who there acknowledged Him as God, and delivered them from the pains due to them. With 
regard to this subject I desire that your Charity should think very differently. For, when He descended into 
hell. He delivered through His grace those only who both believed that He should come and observed His 
precepts in their lives. For it is evident that after the incarnation of the Lord no one can be saved, even of 
those who hold His faith, who have not the life of faith; since it is written. They acknowledge that they know 
God, but in deeds they deny Him (Tit. i. 16). And John says. He that saith that he knows Him, and keepeth 
not His commandments, is a liar (1 John ii. 4). James also, the brother of the Lord, writes saying. Faith without 
works is dead (Jam. ii. 20). If, then, believers now are not saved without good works, while the unbelieving 
and reprobate without good action were saved by our Lord descending into hell, then the lot of those who 
never saw the incarnation of the Lord was better than that of these who have been born after the mystery of 
His incarnation. But what fatuity it argues to say or think this the Lord Himself testifies to His disciples, when 
He says. Many kings and prophets have desired to see the things which ye see, and have not seen them 
(Matth. xiii. 1 7; Luke x. 24). But, that I may not detain your Love with argument of my own, learn what Philaster, 
in the book which he wrote about heresies, says about this heresy. His words are these; "They are heretics 
who say that the Lord descended into hell, and announced himself after death to all who were already there, 
so that in acknowledging Him there they might be saved; seeing that this is contrary to the prophet David 
where he says. But in hell who shall acknowledge thee (Ps. vi. 6)? And to the Apostle; As many as have 
shined without law shall perish without law (Rom. ii. 12)." And with his words the blessed Augustine also 
agrees in the book which he wrote about heresies. 

Considering, therefore, all these things, hold ye nothing but what the true faith teaches through the Catholic 
Church: namely, that the Lord in descending into hell rescued from infernal durance those only whom while 
living in the flesh He preserved through His grace in faith and good conduct. For in that which He says in the 
Gospel, When I shall be lifted up from the earth, I will draw all to myself (John xii. 32), He means all that are 
elect. For one could not be drawn to God after death who had separated himself from God by evil living. 
May Almighty God keep you under His protection, that, wherever ye are, ye may feel in soul and body the 
aid of His grace. 

EPISTLE XVII. 

TO SABINIANUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Sabinianus, Bishop of Jadera(2). 

If thou hadst been at pains to weigh with careful consideration the rule of ecclesiastical administration and 
the order of ancient custom, neither would any fault of unlawful presumption have crept in upon thee, nor 
would others have incurred danger by occasion of thy sin. Now there is no doubt that thou wast aware how 
that, certain things having come to our ears about Maximus which were no Slight bar to his advancement to 
the priesthood, we had not given our assent to it, and that it was our will that he should not attain to what he 
strove after till there had been adequate satisfaction concerning the things that were said. But, when thou 
oughtest by all means to have observed this, it came rather to pass that he, snatching at the episcopate with 
the greediness of a blind mind, inclined thee unwarily to favour him in spite of our prohibition. But, lest even 
then the things that had been reported to us should remain unexamined, he was summoned to come hither 
by letters from us. And, when he was so perversely inclined as to defer doing so, we took care to admonish 
him in repeated letters, under pain of interdiction from communion, to make haste to come to us for his 
purification, putting aside all excuses: but he chose rather to submit to excommunication than to evince 
obedience. Whence the result is (awful to be said), that the pravity of his perverse disposition involves 
others in his own perdition. Now however, inasmuch as we have learnt that thou dissentest from his 
wickedness, we exhort thee by the present writing (that so it may profit thy soul to have severed thyself, even 
though late, from him) that thou henceforth neither communicate with him nor make mention of his name in the 
sacred solemnities of mass; and also that thou defer not coming to us without delay, yea and bring others 
with thee too, such as thou canst, whether bishops or other religious persons, so that (the cause being 
thoroughly examined), both your absolution, should the case require it, may fittingly and decently ensue, 
and that those who have fallen into the sin of the like temerity may be recalled to the way of salvation, with 
the help of the blessed Peter, Prince of the apostles, by an arrangement well-pleasing to Christ. Moreover, 
let any bishop or religious person that may come to us know that he will sustain no prejudice or injustice, but 
that all will be arranged so as to please our Redeemer after full ascertainment of the truth; to the end that 
even from our way of ordering the matter, with the Lord's approval, it may appear to all that we are not 
moved by private grudge against any man, but by zeal for God and for the adjustment of ecclesiastical 
order. 

EPISTLE XIX 

TO MARINIANUS, ARCHBISHOP. 

Gregory to Marinianus, Archbishop of Ravenna(3). 

Your Fraternity has been long aware after what manner the Church of Ariminum has been hitherto deprived 
of pastoral government by reason of the known bodily affliction of the priest who was ordained by us(4). 
Now we, moved by the prayers of the inhabitants of that place, having frequently exhorted him to return with 
the help of the Lord to his Church, if he should feel himself relieved from this affliction of the head whereby he 
was kept away, he has been expected now for four years since the leave of absence given him. And, when 
at the instance of clergy and citizens who have come from thence anti urged us with entreaties, we urgently 
exhorted him to return with them, the Lord helping him, if able to do so, he begged of us by a supplication in 
writing(5), that, inasmuch as by reason of this affliction wherewith he is held he can in no wise rise to the 
government of the same Church, or to the office undertaken by him, we should ordain a bishop to this same 
Church. Hence, seeing that the charge laid upon us of caring for all the Churches constrains us to see that 
pastoral guardianship be no longer wanting to the flock of the faithful, and being compelled by their 
entreaties, and by his renunciation on the ground of his own inability, we have resolved that a bishop should 
be ordained to this same Church of Ariminum: and, having issued our precept according to custom, we have 
not failed to admonish the clergy and people of the same Church, to the end that they may concur with 
concordant provision to choose for themselves a prelate(6). We therefore exhort your Fraternity that him 
whom all with one consent shall choose (as they themselves also have requested leave to do) you cause 
to be summoned before you; and test him by cautious enquiry on all sides. And if, by favour of the Lord, 
none of the things that are punished with death in the text of the Heptateuch are found in him, and if, on the 
report of trustworthy persons, his life should approve itself to you, send him to us with the certification of his 
election, adding your own letter of testification, to the end that a prelate of this same Church may, under the 
ordering of the Lord, be by us consecrated. 

EPISTLE XX. 

TO THE CLERGY AND PEOPLE ARIMINUM(7). 

Gregory to the Clergy, &c. 

Our pastoral charge constrains us to succour with anxious consideration any Churches that are deprived of 
the government of a priest. Accordingly, inasmuch as your Church has long been deprived of pastoral rule 
from the malady, as you know, of its own priest, we, moved by your entreaties, have not failed to admonish 
the said bishop, that, if he should feel himself recovered from that malady, he should resume the ministry of 
the priesthood undertaken by him. And be, having been again and again warned by us, has now under the 
pressure of the same malady intimated by a supplication addressed to us in writing that by reason of this 
malady he can by no means rise to the government of the said Church or to the office undertaken by him. 
We therefore, compelled by the hopeless condition of this same person, have held it necessary to take 
thought for the setting in order of your Church. We exhort, then, that all of you, with one consent, without noise 
or disturbance, choose with the help of the Lord such a priest to preside over you as may not be 
disapproved by the venerable canons, and also be found worthy of so great a ministry. And let him, when 
required, come to us to be ordained, with the solemnity of a decree attested by the subscriptions of all and 
followed up by the written approval of the visitor(8), to the end that your Church, by the Lord's ordering, may 
have its own priest. 

We desire also that him whom your unanimity may have chosen you take without delay to our brother and 
fellow-bishop Marinianus at Ravenna(9), that, having been thoroughly examined and tested by him, he may 
be supported by his testimony also when he comes to us. 

EPISTLE XXIII. 

TO FORTUNATUS AND ANTHEMIUS(9a). 

Gregory to Fortunatus, bishop, and Anthemius, guardian (defensori). 

Catellus, the bearer of these presents, has informed us that his sister, who had been betrothed to one 
Stephen, has, through divine mercy moving her, been converted(l) in a monastery at Naples, and that the 
same Stephen improperly detains a house and some other things belonging to her. And, inasmuch as legal 
decrees (Caus. 17, q. 2, c. 28) have appointed that a betrothed woman, should she wish to be converted, 
shall suffer no loss whatever, let thy Fraternity, together with Anthemius the subdeacon, endeavour by 
diligent enquiry to investigate the truth. And it; as we have been informed, you find that the Stephen 

above-named is keeping a iiouse or anytiiing else unjustly, let him be urgently warned by your exhortation 
to restore without any delay or altercation what he unduly detains, and not to defer under any kind of excuse 
the restitution of what is not his own. And if perchance you find him neglect your exhortation, notify this to us, 
giving also an accurate account of the facts of the case, to the end that, when the merits of the case are 
known, he may be forced by other means, in accordance with equity, to make the restitution which he scorns 
to make of his own accord out of regard to honesty. Commending the bearer of these presents to thy 
Fraternity, we exhort thee to allow him no longer to suffer from delay on this account. 

EPISTLE XXV. 

TO GREGORIA. 

Gregory to Gregoria, Lady of the Bed-chamber (cubicularioe) to Augusta. 

I have received the longed for letters of your Sweetness, in which you have been at pains all through to 
accuse yourself of a multitude of sins: but I know that you fervently love the Almighty Lord, and I trust in His 
mercy that the sentence which was pronounced with regard to a certain holy woman proceeds from the 
month of the Truth with regard to you: Her sins, which are many, are forgiven her, for she loved much (Luke 
vii. 47). And how they were forgiven is shewn also by what follows afterwards; that she sat at the Lord's feet, 
and heard the word from His mouth (Luke x. 39)(2). For, being rapt in the contemplative, she had 
transcended the active life, which Martha her sister still pursued (lb. 40). She also sought earnestly her 
buried Lord, and, stooping over the sepulchre, found not His body. But, even when the disciples went away, 
she remained standing before the door of the sepulchre, and whom she sought as dead. Him she was 
counted worthy to see alive, and announced to the disciples that He had risen again. And this was by the 
wonderful dispensation of the loving-kindness of God, that life should be announced by a woman's mouth, 
because by a woman's mouth had been the first taste of death in Paradise. And at another time also, with 
another Mary, she saw the Lord after His resurrection, and held His feet. Bring before your eyes, I pray you, 
what hands held whose feet. That woman who had been a sinner in the city, those hands which had been 
polluted with iniquity, touched the feet of Him who sits at the right hand of the Father above all the angels. Let 
us estimate, if we can, what those bowels of heavenly loving-kindness are, that a woman who had been 
plunged through sin into the whirlpool's depth should be thus lifted high on the wing of love through grace. It 
is fulfilled, sweet daughter, it is fulfilled, what was promised to us by the prophetic voice concerning this time 
of the holy Church: And in that day the house of David shall be an open fountain for ablution of the sinner and 
of her that is unclean (Zach. xiii. 1). For the house of David is an open fountain for ablution to us sinners, 
because we are washed from the filth of our iniquities by mercy now disclosed through the son of David our 
Saviour. 

But as to what thy Sweetness has added in thy letters, namely that thou wilt continue to be urgent with me till I 
write that it has been revealed to me that thy sins are forgiven, thou hast demanded a difficult, nay even an 
unprofitable thing; difficult indeed, because I am unworthy of having a revelation made to me; but 
unprofitable, because thou oughtest not to become secure about thy sins, except when in the last day of thy 
life thou shall be able no longer to bewail them. But, until that day comes, thou oughtest, ever suspicious and 
ever fearful, to be afraid of faults, and wash them with daily tears. Assuredly the apostle Paul had already 
ascended into the third heaven, had also been caught up into Paradise, and heard secret words which it 
was not lawful for a man to speak (2 Cor. xii. 2, &c.), and yet, still fearful, he said, I keep under my body, and 
bring it into subjection, lest that by any means, while preaching to others, I myself should become a 
castaway (1 Cor. ix. 27). One who is caught up into heaven still fears; and shall one whose conversation is 
still on earth desire already not to fear? Consider, most sweet daughter, that security is wont to be the mother 
of carelessness. Thou oughtest not, then, in this life to have security, whereby thou mayest be rendered 
careless. For it is written, Happy is the man that is always afraid (Pray, xxviii. 14). And again it is written. 
Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice unto him with trembling (Ps. ii. 1 1). In short, then, it must needs be that in 
the time of this life trembling possess your soul, to the end that it may hereafter rejoice without end through 
the joy of security. May Almighty God fill your soul with the grace of His Holy Spirit, and, after the tears which 
you daily shed in prayer, bring you to eternal joys. 

EPISTLE XXVI. 

TO THEOCTISTA, PATRICIAN(3). 

Gregory to Theoctista, &c. 

That your Excellency, though placed in so great a tumult of affairs, is full of the fruitfulness of the sacred word, 

and incessantly pants after eternal joys, for this I give great thanks to Almighty God, in that in you I see 

fulfilled what is written of the elect fathers, But the children of Israel walked on dry land through the midst of 
the sea (Exod. xv. 19). But on the other hand, I am come into the depth of the sea, and the storm hath 
overwhelmed me (Ps. Ixviii. 3)(4). But you, as I see, walk with dry feet through the waves of secular affairs to 
the country of promise. Let us give thanks, then, to that Spirit who lifts up the hearts which He fills; who amid 
the tumults of men makes a solitude in the soul; and in whose presence there is no place, wherein a soul 
moved by compunction can be, which is not a secret one. For you inhale the odour of eternal sweetness, 
and so ardently love the bridegroom of your soul as to be able to say with the heavenly bride. Draw me 
after thee; we run in the odour of thine ointments (Cant. i. 3). But in the letters of your Excellency I find this 
deficiency; that you have been unwilling to tell me about your most serene mistress, how studiously she 
reads, or how she is moved by compunction in her reading. For your presence ought to be of great 
advantage to her, that amid the billows of affairs under which she continually suffers and by which, whether 
she will or no, she is drawn abroad, she may be recalled inwardly to the love of the heavenly country. And 
this also you ought to investigate, as often as tears are given her for her soul, whether her compunction 
arises still from fear, or whether now from love(5). 

For there are two kinds of compunction, as you know: one that is afraid of eternal pains, the other that sighs 
for heavenly rewards; since the soul that is athirst for God is first moved to compunction by fear, and 
afterwards by love. For in the first place it is affected to tears because, while recollecting its evil doings, it 
fears to suffer for them eternal punishments. But, when fear has died away in the anxiety of a long sorrow, a 
certain security has birth from a sense of pardon; and the mind is enflamed with love of heavenly joys. And 
one who previously wept for fear of punishment begins afterwards to weep most bitterly for being kept back 
from the kingdom. For the soul contemplates what are those choirs of angels, what is the very society of 
blessed spirits, what the vision of the inward brightness of God; and laments more for the lack of unending 
good than it wept before when it feared eternal evil; and thus it comes to pass that the compunction of fear, 
when perfected, draws the mind to the compunction of love. All this is well described in the sacred and true 
history, understood figuratively, which says, Axa the daughter of Caleph sighed sitting on an ass. And her 
father said to her. What wouldest than? Who answered. Give me a blessing. Thou hast given me a South 
and dry land; give me also a watered land. And her father gave her the upper springs, and the nether 
springs (Josh. xv. 18)(6). For indeed Axa sits on an ass, when the soul presides over the irrational motions of 
the flesh. And sighing she seeks a watered land from her father, because the grace of tears is to be sought 
with great longing from our Creator. For there are some who have already freely received the gift of 
speaking in behalf of justice, of protecting the oppressed, of giving of their own to the needy, of having 
ardour of faith, but have not yet the grace of tears. These, that is to say, have a South and dry land, but still 
need springs of water; because, while they are occupied in good works, wherein they are great and fervent, 
they have still sore need (either from fear of punishment, or from love of the heavenly kingdom) to lament the 
sins which they cannot be without while they live. But since, as I have said, there are two kinds of 
compunction, her father gave her the upper springs and the nether springs. For the soul receives the upper 
springs, when she afflicts herself in tears for desire of the heavenly kingdom; but she receives the nether 
springs, when she shudders with weeping at the punishments of hell. And indeed the nether springs are 
given flrst, and the upper springs afterwards. But, because the compuncflon of love is far above the other 
indignity, there was need for the upper springs to be menfloned first, and the nether springs afterwards. You 
then, who through the operation of the Almighty Lord know by experience both kinds of compuncflon, ought 
anxiously to try to discover day by day how much you are proflling your most serene mistress by your 
words. 

Further, I beg you to take especial care to instruct in good morals the little lords whom you are bringing up, 
and to admonish the glorious eunuchs who are appointed to attend them that they should speak to them 
such things as may move their minds to mutual charity between themselves and to gentteness towards 
subjects; lest, if they should conceive now any grudge against each other, it should break out openly 
hereafter. For in truth the words of those who bring up children will be either milk, if they are good, or poison if 
they are evil. Let them therefore so speak now to the little ones that the latter may shew hereafter what good 
words they had sucked from the months of those who nursed them. 

Furthermore, my beloved son, Sabinianus the deacon, has brought thirty pounds of gold, sent by your 
Excellency to be given for the redempflon of captives and for distribution to the poor; with regard to which I 
rejoice, but tremble for myself, seeing that I shall have to render an account before the tremendous Judge, 
not only of the substance of Saint Peter, Prince of the aposttes, but also of your possessions. But to you may 
Almighty God return heavenly things for earthly, and eternal for temporal. I have now to inform you that from 
the city of Crotona, which, lying on the Adriaflc Sea in the land of Italy, was taken last year by the Lombards, 
many noble men and many noble women were led away captive, and children were parted from their 
parents, parents from their children, husbands from their wives, and wives from their husbands; of whom 
some have already been redeemed. But, because of the heavy prices put upon them, many have 
remained so far in the hands of those most abominable Lombards. But I sent at once for their redempflon a 

moiety of the money sent by you. Out of the other moiety I have arranged for the purchase of bed-clothes for 
the handmaidens of God whom you in Greel< language call monastriae; seeing that they suffer from 
grievous bareness in their beds during the very severe cold of this winter; there being many of them in this 
city. For, according to the official list of them, they are found to be three thousand in number. They do indeed 
receive fourscore pounds a year from the possessions of Saint Peter, Prince of the apostles. But what is this 
for so great a multitude, especially in this city, where everything is so dear? Their life, moreover, is such, and 
strict to such a degree in tears and abstinence, that we believe that, but for them, not one of us could have 
subsisted for so many years in this place among the swords of the Lombards. 

Furthermore, I send you, as a blessing from Saint Peter the apostle, a key from his most sacred body; with 
respect to which key the miracle has been wrought which I now relate. A certain Lombard, having found it on 
his entrance into a city in the parts beyond the Po, and, paying no regard to it as Saint Peter's key, but 
wishing to make something of it for himself in that he saw it to be of gold, took out a knife to cut it. But 
presently seized by a spirit, he plunged the knife wherewith he had thought to cut it into his own throat, and in 
the same hour fell down dead. And when Autharith, king of the Lombards(7), and many others belonging to 
him came to the place, and he who had stabbed himself was lying apart in one place dead, and this key on 
the ground in another, exceeding fear came upon all, so that no one ventured to lift this same key from the 
ground. Then a certain Lombard who was a Catholic, and known to be given to prayer and almsgiving, 
Minulf by name, was called, and himself lifted it from the ground. But Autharith, in consideration of this 
miracle, made another golden key, and sent it along with this to my predecessor of holy memory, declaring 
what kind of miracle had through it occurred. I have taken thought, then, to send your Excellence this key, 
through which Almighty God cut off a proud and faithless man, that through it you who fear and love Him may 
be enabled to have both present and eternal welfare. 

EPISTLE XXVII. 

TO ANASTASIUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Anastasius, Bishop of Antioch. 

I have received through the hands of our common son the deacon Sabinianus the longed for letter of your 
most sweet Holiness, in which the words have flowed not from your tongue but from your soul. And it is not 
surprising that one speaks well who lives perfectly. And, since you have learnt, through the Spirit teaching 
you in the school of the heart, the precepts of life-to despise all earthly things and to speed to the heavenly 
country, -in proportion as you have advanced in good you think what is good of others. But, when I heard 
many things said in the letters of your Blessedness in praise of me, I understood your intention; how that you 
wished to describe not what I am, but what I ought to be. But as to your saying that I ought to remember my 
manner of life, and on no account give place to the malignant spirit who seeks to sift souls, I indeed recollect 
myself to have been always of bad manner of life, and hasten to overcome and put an end to this my 
manner of life, if I can. If however, as you believe, I have had anything good in me, I trust in the help of 
Almighty God that I have not forgotten it. But your Holiness, as I see, by the words of sweetness at the 
beginning and the words that follow, has wished your letter to be like a bee, which carries both honey and a 
sting, satiating me with the honey and piercing me with the sting. But meanwhile I return to meditation on the 
words of Solomon, That better are the wounds of one that loves than the kisses of a flattering foe (Prov. xxvii. 
6). Thus, as to your saying that we ought not to give occasion of offence for no cause at all, this is what your 
son, our most pious lord (for whose life we ought continually to pray) has already written repeatedly; and 
what he says out of power I know that you say out of love. Nor do I wonder that you have made use of 
imperial language in your letters, since there is a very close relationship between love and power. For both 
presume in a princely way; both ever speak with authority. 

And indeed on the receipt of the synodical epistle of our brother and fellow-bishop Cyriacus it was not worth 
my while to make a difficulty on account of the profane title at the risk of disturbing the unity of holy Church: 
but nevertheless I took care to admonish him with respect to this same superstitious and proud title, saying 
that he could not have peace with us unless he corrected the elation of the aforesaid expression, which the 
first apostate invented. You, however, ought not to say that this is a matter of no consequence, since, if we 
bear it with equanimity, we are corrupting the faith of the Universal Church; for you know how many not only 
heretics but heresiarchs have issued from the Constantinopolitan Church. And, not to speak of the injury 
done to your dignity, if one bishop is called Universal, the Universal Church comes to ruin, if the one who is 
universal falls. But far, far be this levity from my ears. Yet I trust in Almighty God that what He has promised 
He will soon fulfil; Whosoever exalteth himself shall be humbled (Luke xiv. 11). 

So much, in the midst of many occupations. I have briefly replied to what you have said in your letters: for 
what I ought not just now to express in writing remains imprinted on my mind. I beg your Blessedness always 
to recall me to your memory in your holy prayers, that so your intercessions may rescue me from temporal 

and eternal ills. Pray moreover zealousy and fervently for the most serene lord the Emperor; for his life is 
very necessary for the world. I refrain from saying more, for I doubt not that you know. 

EPISTLE XXVIII. 

TO THEODORE, PHYSICIAN. 

Gregory to Theodore, Physician at Constantinople. 

My most beloved son the deacon Sabinianus(8), on his return to me, brought me no letter from your Glory; 
but he conveyed hither what had been sent for the poor and captives; whence I understood the reason. It 
was that you would not speak by letters to a man, having by a good deed made your address to Almighty 
God. For this same deed of yours has a voice of its own, which calls to the secret ears of God, as it is written. 
Hide thy alms in the bosom of the poor, and it shall entreat for thee (Eccles. xxix. 15). And indeed to me, I 
confess, it is sad to expend what is not my own, and to add to the accounts which I keep of the substance of 
the Church those also of the property of my most sweet son the lord Theodore. And yet I rejoice with your 
benignity that you carefully attend to and observe what the Truth says; Give alms, and behold, all things are 
clean unto you (Luke xi 41); and this which is written. Even as water quencheth fire, so alms quench sin 
(Ecclus. ill. 33). Paul the apostle also says. Let your abundance supply their want, that their abundance also 
may be a supply to your want (2 Cor. viii. 14). Tobias admonishes his son, saying. If thou hast much, give 
abundantly; but if thou hast little, of that little impart willingly (Tob. iv. 9). You therefore observe all these 
precepts: but we beg you to pray for us, lest we should dispense the fruits of your labours indiscreetly, and 
not as need requires; lest from that whereby you diminish sins we should heap up sins. Now may Almighty 
God keep you under His protection, and so grant you human favour in an earthly court as to bring you after a 
long life to the eternal joys of a heavenly court. 

We send you as the benediction of Saint Peter, Prince of the apostles, whom you greatly love, a key from 
his most sacred body, in which is enclosed iron from his chains, that what bound his neck for martyrdom, 
may loose yours from all sins. 

EPISTLE XXX. 

TO NARSES, THE RELIGIOUS (Narsae relegioso)(9) 

Gregory to Narses, &c. 

When I was sending Romanus the guardian (defensorem) to the royal city, he sought long your letters, but 
they could not be found: but afterwards they were found among many letters from other persons, your 
Sweetness, therein telling me of your afflictions and tribulations of spirit, and making known the oppositions 
to you of bad men. But, I pray you, in all this recall to your mind what I believe too that you never forget. That 
all who will live godly in Christ stiffer persecution. (2 Tim. ill. 12). And with regard to this I confidently say that 
you would live less godly if you suffered persecution less. For let us hear what else the same teacher of the 
Gentiles says to his disciples; Yourselves know, brethren, our entrance in unto you, that it was not in vain; for 
we lead before suffered and been shamefully entreated (1 Thess. ii. 1). Lo, most sweet son, the holy 
preacher declared that his entrance would have been of no effect, if he had not been shamefully entreated; 
and thy Charity wishes to say good things, but refuses to endure evil things. Wherefore thou must needs gird 
thyself up more tightly in the midst of adverse circumstances, that adversity itself may the more increase thy 
desire for the love of God and thy earnestness in good works. So the seeds of harvests germinate the more 
fruitfully for being covered over with frost; so fire is kept down by a blast, that it may grow greater. I know 
indeed that from the perverse speeches of so many evil tongues thou endurest a violent storm, and bearest 
in thy soul billows of contradictions. But remember what the Lord says by the Psalmist, I heard thee in the 
secret place of storm; I proved thee at the waters of contradiction (Psal. Ixxx. 8) (9a). For, if in the midst of 
them that contradict thou doest the things that are of God, then thou art proved a true worker. 
Further, your most sweet Charity has written to me that I should write something in the way of admonition to 
the monasteries which, through your prayers and influence, have been instituted by our son the lord Paul. 
But, if they are vessels of God, I know that they have through the grace of compunction a fountain of wisdom 
within, and ought not to take in the little drops of my dryness. Further, your perfect wisdom recollects that in 
Paradise there was no rain, but a fountain ascended from the midst of Paradise to water the face of the 
ground. Those souls, then, that through the grace of compunction have a fountain in themselves have no 
need of rain from another's tongue. 

Further, you inform me in your letter of the passing away of the lady Esychia (1); and I rejoiced with great 
exultation that that good soul, which laboured in a foreign country, has arrived happily at its own. Further, 
greet in my behalf my glorious daughters, the lady Dominica and the lady Eudochia. But, inasmuch as I hear 

that it is now a long time since tiie aforesaid lady Dominica was made a prioress, let your Charity watch over 
her in this regard; that, as she is no longer compelled to serve in the toil of an earthy court, she may fly 
perfectly from all noises of this world, devote herself entirely to God, and leave no part of herself outside 
herself; but that she also gather together as many souls as she can to the service of her Creator, that their 
minds through her word may receive the grace of compunction, and that she herself may so much the more 
speedily be absolved from all her sins as, through her life and her tongue, the souls of others also shall 
have broken loose from the bands of sins. Moreover, since no one among men in this world is without sin 
(and what else is sinning but flying from God?), I say confidently that this my daughter also has some sins. 
Wherefore, that she may perfectly satisfy her mistress, that is eternal Wisdom, let her, who fled alone, return 
with many. For the guilt of turning away will be imputed to no one who in returning brings back gain. 
Further, I beg you to greet in my behalf the lord Alexander and the lord Theodorus. But with respect to your 
saying in your letter that I ought to write to my most excellent daughter the lady Gurdia, and her most holy 
daughter the lady Theoctista (2), and their magnificent husbands, the lord Marinus and the lord Christidorus, 
and to give them some admonition about their souls, your most sweet Greatness well knows that there are 
none at present in the city of Constantinople who can translate well into Greek what has been dictated in 
Latin. For keeping to the words, but attending little to the sense, they both fail to make the words understood 
and also mangle the sense. On this account I have written shortly to my aforesaid daughter the lady Gurdia; 
but have not addressed the others. Further, I have sent you two camisiae and four oraria, which I beg may 
be humbly offered, with the blessing of St. Peter, to the aforesaid men. Besides, a certain person on his 
death has left me by will a little boy; taking thought for whose soul, I have sent him to your Sweetness, that he 
may live in this world in the service of one through whom he may be able to attain to the liberty of heaven. 
Further, I beg your most sweet Charity to visit frequently my most beloved son, the deacon Anatolius, whom I 
have sent to represent the Church in the royal city, that after the toils which he endures in secular causes he 
may find rest with you in the word of God, and wipe away the sweat of this his earthly toil as it were with a kind 
of white napkin. Commend him to all who are known to you, though I am sure that, if he is perfectly known, he 
needs no commendation. Yet do you shew with regard to him how much you love the holy apostle Peter, 
and me. Now may Almighty God guard your Charity, to me most sweet, from enemies within and without, 
and, when it shall please Him, bring you to heavenly kingdoms. 

EPISTLE XXXI. 

TO CYRIACUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Cyriacus, Bishop of Constantinople. 

We have received the letters of four Blessedness, which speak to us in words not of the tongue but of the 
soul. For they open to me your mind, which, however, was not closed to me, since of myself I retain 
experience of the same sweetness. Wherefore I return thanks continually to Almighty God, since, if charity 
the mother of virtues abides in your heart towards us, you will never lose the branches of good works, 
seeing that you retain the very root of goodness. You ought, then, to shew the beauty of this charity to me 
and to all your brethren by this good work in the first place, - your hastening to discard that word of pride 
whereby grave offence is engendered in the Churches, thus fulfilling in all ways what is written. 
Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace (Ephes. iv. 3): and again. Give none 
occasion to the adversary to speak reproachfully (1 Tim. v. 14). For then will true charity be displayed, if 
there is no schism among us through an example of pride. For, as for me, I call Jesus to witness in my soul, 
that to no one among men from the highest to the lowest do I wish to give occasion of offence. I desire that 
all should be great and honourable, yet so that their honour detract not from the honour of Almighty God. For 
whoso covets to be honoured against God to me is not honourable. But, that you may learn what good will I 
have towards your Blessedness, I have sent my son the deacon Anatolius to the feet of our most pious 
lords, for satisfying their Piety and your Fraternity that I desire to injure no man m this matter, but to keep the 
humility that is pleasing to God, and the concord of holy Church. And because Antichrist, the enemy of God, 
is near at hand, I studiously desire the he may not find anything belonging, to himself, not only in the 
manners, but even m the titles of priests. Let then what has been introduced after a new fashion be removed 
in like manner as it was brought in, and peace in the Lord will remain with us inviolate. For what 
pleasantness, what charity, will there be amongst us, if we cheer ourselves up with words, while we are 
galled by facts? Let then your Holiness so act that we may feel in our inmost hearts the good things you 
speak of, to the end that, the hearts of priests being in unanimity, when we supplicate for the life of our most 
pious lords, we may be counted worthy to be heard all the more as peace illuminates your prayers before 
the eyes of God, and no stain of discord darkens them. 

EPISTLE XXXII. 

TO ANASTASIUS, PRESBYTERS (3). 

Gregory to Anastasius, &c. 

That a good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth good things (IVIatth. xii. 35; Lul<e vi. 45), 
this thy Charity has shewn, both in thy habitual life and lately also in thy epistle; wherein I find two persons at 
issue with regard to virtues; that is to say, thyself contending for charity, and another for fear and humility. 
And, though occupied with many things, though ignorant of the Greek language, I have nevertheless sat as 
judge of your contention. But, in very truth, thou hast, in my judgment, thyself conquered thy opponent by the 
apostolical sentence, which I proffered to you during your contention. That there is no fear in charity,, but 
perfect charity casteth out fear; because fear hath torment. He that feareth is not made perfect in charity. I 
know then how much thy Fraternity is made perfect in charity. And, since thou lovest Almighty God much, 
thou oughtest to presume on thy neighhour much. For it is not places or ranks that make us neighbours to 
our Creator; but either our good deserts join us to Him, or our bad deserts separate us from Him. Since, 
then, it is still uncertain what any one is inwardly, how was it that thou wast afraid to write, ignorant as thou art 
as to which of us two is the superior? And indeed that thou livest well I know, but I am conscious myself of 
being burdened by many sins. And though thou art thyself a sinner, still thou art much better than I, since thou 
bearest thine own sins only, but I those also of the persons committed to me. In this, then, I look upon thee as 
lofty, in this I look upon thee as great, that in a great place and lofty before human eyes thou hast not felt 
thyself advanced at all. For therein, while honour is paid thee by men outwardly, thy mind is sunk into depths, 
because burdened by distracting cares. But to thee Almighty God has done as it is written; He hath laid 
down ascents in the heart, in the valley of tears (Ps. Ixxxiii. 6). To me, however, thou mightest have appeared 
far loftier, far more sublime, hadstthou never undertaken the leadership of the monastery which is called 
Neas, seeing that in that monastery, as I hear, there is indeed an appearance of monks kept up, but many 
secular things are done under the garb of sanctity. But even to this I shall think that heavenly grace has 
brought thee, if what in that place displeases Almighty God should be corrected under thy guidance. 
But, since there have been wont to be quarrels between the father of this same monastery and the pastor of 
the Church of Jerusalem, I believe that Almighty God has willed that thy Love and my most holy brother and 
fellow-priest Amos should be at the same time at Jerusalem for this end, that the quarrels which I have 
spoken of should be put an end to. Shew, then, now how much you loved before. For I know that both of you 
are abstinent, both learned, both humble; whence the glory of our Saviour must needs be praised, 
according to the language of the Psalm, in timbrel and chorus (Ps. cl. 4). For in a timbrel the sound from the 
skin is dry, but in a chorus there is a concord of voices. What therefore is denoted by a timbrel but 
abstinence, and what by a chorus but unanimity? Since then by abstinence ye praise the Lord in timbrel, I 
beg that by unanimity ye praise Him in chorus. The Truth also in person says. Have salt in yourselves, and 
have peace one • with another (Mark ix. 50). What is denoted by salt but wisdom, as Paul attests, who says. 
Let your speech be alway in grace, seasoned with salt (Col. iv. 6)? Since, then, we know that you have salt 
through the teaching of the heavenly word, it remains that through the grace of charity you keep with all your 
hearts peace between yourselves. All this I say, dearest brother, because I love you both exceedingly, and 
am much afraid lest the sacrifices of your prayers should be stained by any dissension between you. 
The blessing which you sent, first by Exhilaratus the Secundicerius (4), and afterwards by Sabinianus the 
deacon, I received with thanksgiving, since from a holy place it became you to send holy things, and to 
shew by your very gift whom you serve continually. May Almighty God protect you with His right hand, and 
preserve you scatheless from all evils. 

EPISTLE XXXIII. 

TO MAURICIUS AUGUSTUS. 

Gregory to Mauricius Augustus. 

The provident piety of my lords, test perchance any scandal might be engendered in the unity of Holy 
Church by the dissension of priests, has once and again deigned to admonish me to receive kindly the 
representatives of my brother and fellow-priest Cyriacus, and to give them liberty to return soon. And 
although, most pious lord, all your injunctions are suitable and provident, yet I find that by such an 
admonition I am reproved as being m your judgment indiscreet. But, even though my mind has been 
wounded in no slight degree by a proud and profane title, could I possibly be guilty of so great indiscretion 
as not to know what I owed to the unity of the faith and to ecclesiastical concord, and to refuse to receive the 
representatives and the synodical letter of my brother on account of bitterness from whatever cause 
intervening? Far be this from me. Such wisdom had been unwisdom. For what is due from us for conserving 
unity of faith is one thing; what is due for restraining elation is another. Times therefore were to be 

distinguished, lest tiie newness of my aforesaid brotiier migiit in any point be disturbed (5). Wiience also I 
received his representatives with great affection. Whatever charity I owed to them I displayed, and 
honoured them more than it had been the ancient custom to do, and caused them to celebrate the sacred 
solemnities of mass with me; since, even as my deacon ought not to serve, for exhibition of the sacred 
mysteries, him who has either committed the sin of elation or corrects it not himself when committed by 
others, so it was right that his ministers should attend, in the celebration of mass, on me, who, under the 
keeping of God, have not fallen into the error of pride. 

I have however taken care to admonish earnestly the same my brother and fellow-bishop that, if he desires 
to have peace and concord with all, he must refrain from the appellation of a foolish title. As to this, the piety 
of my lords has charged me in their orders, saying that offence ought not to be engendered among us for 
the appellation of a frivolous name. But I beseech your imperial Piety to consider that some frivolous things 
are very harmless, and others exceedingly harmful. Is it not the case that, when Antichrist comes and calls 
himself God, it will be very frivolous, and yet exceedingly pernicious? If we regard the quantity of the 
language used, there are but a few syllables; but if the weight of the wrong, there is universal disaster. Now I 
confidently say that whosoever calls himself, or desires to be called. Universal Priest, is in his elation the 
precursor of Antichrist, because he proudly puts himself above all others. Nor is it by dissimilar pride that he 
is led into error; for, as that perverse one wishes to appear as above all men, so whosoever this one is who 
covets being called sole priest, he extols himself above all other priests. But, since the Truth says. Every 
one that exalteth himself shall be humbled (Luke xiv. 1 1 ; xviii. 1 4), I know that every kind of elation is the 
sooner burst as it is the more inflated. Let then your Piety charge those who have fallen into an example of 
pride not to generate any offence by the appellation of a frivolous name. For I, a sinner, who by the help of 
God retain humility, need not to be admonished to humility. Now may Almighty God long guard the life of our 
most serene lord for the peace of holy Church and the advantage of the Roman republic. For we are sure, 
that if you live who fear the. Lord of heaven, you will allow no proud doings to prevail against the truth. 

EPISTLE XXXIV. 

TO EULOGIUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Eulogius, Bishop of Alexandria, and Anastasius, Bishop of Antioch (6). 

The charity wherewith I am greatly bound to you allows me by no means to keep silence, that your Holiness 
may know all that is going on among us, and, deceived by no false rumours, may keep more perfectly the 
way of your justice and rectitude, as you have perfectly begun to do. Now the representatives (responsales) 
of our brother and fellow-bishop Cyriacus came to me, bringing me his synodical epistle. And indeed 
between us and him there is, as your Blessedness knows, serious difference on account of the appellation 
of a profane name; but I thought that his representatives sent in the cause of the faith ought to be received, 
lest the sin of elation which has arisen in the Constantinopolitan Church almost against all priests, might 
cause I a shaking of the faith and a breach in ecclesiastical unity. I also caused the same representatives, 
inasmuch as they very humbly requested it, to celebrate with me the solemnities of mass, because, as I 
have taken care to intimate to the most serene lord the Emperor, it was right that the representatives of our 
brother and fellow priest Cyriacus should communicate with me, since by God's help I have not fallen into 
the error of elation. But my deacon ought not to celebrate the solemnities of mass with our aforesaid-brother 
Cyriacus, since, through a profane title, he has either committed or accedes to the sin of pride; lest if he (my 
deacon) proceeds (7) with one who is in such a position of elation, we might seem (which God forbid) to 
confirm the vanity of that foolish name. But I have taken care to admonish our said brother to correct himself 
of such elation, since, if he does not correct it, he will in no way have peace with us. 
Furthermore, our said brother in his synodical letters has by the grace of God expressed himself in all 
respects as a Catholic. But he has condemned a certain Eudoxius, whom we find neither condemned in 
synods, nor repudiated by his predecessors in their synodical letters (8). It is true that the canons of the 
council of Constantinople condemn the Eudoxiaus; but they say nothing as to who their author Eudoxius 
was. But the Roman Church does not possess so far these same canons, or the acts of that council, nor has 
it accepted them, though it has accepted this same synod with regard to what was defined by it against 
Macedonius. It does certainly repudiate the other heresies therein spoken of, which had already been 
condemned by other Fathers: but so far it knows nothing about the Eudoxians. Some things are indeed told 
in Sozomen's history about a certain Eudoxius, who is said to have usurped the episcopate of the Church of 
Constantinople. But this history itself the Apostolic See refuses to accept, since it contains many false 
statements, and praises Theodore of Mopsuestia too much, and says that he was a great doctor of the 
Church even to the day of his death. It remains then that, if any one receives that history, he contradicts the 
synod held in the times of Justinian of pious memory concerning the three chapters. But one who cannot 
contradict this synod must needs reject that history. Moreover in the Latin language we have so far found 

nothing about this Eudoxius, either in Philaster or in the blessed Augustine, who wrote much about heresies, 
Let therefore your Charity inform me in your letters if any one of the approved Fathers among the Greeks 
has made mention of him. 

Furthermore three years ago, with reference to the case of the monks of Isauria, who were accused as 
being heretics (9), my brother and fellow-bishop the lord John once sent me letters for my satisfaction, in 
which he attempted to shew that they had contradicted the definitions of the synod of Ephesus; and he 
forwarded to me certain chapters, purporting to be those of the same synod, which they were said to 
oppose (1). Now among other things it was in these chapters asserted concerning the soul of Adam, that by 
sin it did not die, in that the devil does not enter into the heart of man; and that whoso said it was so was 
anathema. When this was read to me I was much grieved. For if the soul of Adam, who was the first to sin, 
did not die by sin, how was it said to him concerning the forbidden tree. In the day that ye eat thereof ye shall 
surely die (Gen. ii. 17)? And certainly Adam and Eve ate of the forbidden tree, and yet in their flesh they lived 
afterwards more than nine hundred years. It is therefore evident that in his flesh he did not die. If then he did 
not die in his soul, the impious conclusion follows that God pronounced a false sentence concerning him, 
when He said that in the day that he ate he should die. But far be this error, far be it from the true faith. For 
what we say is, that the first than died in soul in the day that he sinned, and that through him the whole human 
race is condemned in this penalty of death and corruption. But through the second man we trust that we can 
be freed, both now from the death of the soul, and hereafter from all corruption of the flesh in the eternal 
resurrection: - as moreover we said to the aforesaid representatives; 'We say that the soul of Adam died 
by sin, not from the substance of living, but from the quality of living. For, inasmuch as substance is one thing, 
and quality another, his soul did not so die as not to be, but so died as not to be blessed. Yet this same 
Adam returned afterwards to life through penitence. (1) 

But that the devil enters into the heart of man cannot be denied, if the Gospel is believed. For it is there 
written. And after sop Satan entered into hint (John xiii. 27). And again it is therein also said. When the devil 
had now put himself into the heart of Judas, that Judas should betray Him (Ibid. 2). He that denies this falls 
into Pelagian heresy. Seeing then that, having examined the Ephesine synod, we found nothing of the kind 
to be contained therein, we caused to be brought to us also a very old Codex of the same synod from the 
Church of Ravenna, and we found it to agree with the report of the synod which we have so as to differ in no 
respect, and to contain nothing else in its decree of anathema and rejection, except that they reject the 
twelve chapters of Cyril of blessed memory. But this whole argument we set forth much more fully and 
particularly to his representatives when they were with us, and most fully satisfied them. Wherefore lest 
either these or any like things should creep in yonder, so as to cause offence to holy Church, it is necessary 
for us to indicate these things to your Holiness. And, although we know our brother and fellow-bishop 
Cyriacus to be orthodox, yet on account of others we ought to be cautious, that the seeds of error may be 
trampled down before they spring up to public view. 

I received the letters of your Holiness on the arrival here of our common son the deacon Sabinianus; but, as 
their bearer is already prepared for departure and cannot be detained, I will reply when the deacon, my 
responsalis, comes. 

EPISTLE XXXV. 

TO DOMINICUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Dominicus, Bishop of Carthage. 

Though we believe that thy Fraternity gives attention with pastoral vigilance to the care of monasteries, yet 
we think it necessary to inform you of what we have learnt about a monastery in the African province. Now 
the abbot Cumquodeus, the bearer of these presents, complaints that, if at any, time he wishes to restrain 
under regular discipline the monks over whom he presides, they at once leave the monastery, and are 
allowed to wander wherever they will. Seeing, then, that this is both altogether pernicious to themselves and 
also sets an example of perdition to others, we exhort your Fraternity that, if it is so, you should bring 
ecclesiastical censure to bear upon them, and withhold them by suitable punishment from such undoubted 
presumption; and that you should so bring them to obedience by salubrious provision, subduing their proud 
minds to the yoke of discipline, that correction may recall from guilt others whom their example might have 
provoked to similar transgression, and teach them to obey their superiors, as is fit. But, since he tells us that 
stray monks are defended by some bishops, let your Fraternity give careful attention to this, and restrain 
them by your menaces in all ways from such defence. The month of July, Indiction 15. 

EPISTLE XXXVIII. 

TO DONUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Donus, Bishop of Messana (Messene). 

The ordinances both of the sacred canons and of the laws allow the utensils of the Church to be sold for the 
redemption of captives. And so, seeing that Faustinus, the bearer of these presents, is proved to have 
contracted a debt of three hundred and thirty solidi for the purpose of redeeming his daughters from the 
yoke of captivity, and that, thirty thereof having been repaid, it is certain that he has not sufficient means for 
the repayment of the remaining sum, we exhort thy Fraternity by this communication that thou by all means 
give him fifteen pounds, taking his receipt for the same, out of the silver in thy hands belonging to the 
Meriensian Church, of which he is known to be a soldier; so that, it being sold, and the debt paid, he may be 
freed from the bond of his obligation. But of this also your Fraternity should be careful, that in case of the 
aforesaid Church having so much current coin, he should receive from it the amount above-written; but 
otherwise you must needs supply him for the purpose in view with the sum we have stated from the 
consecrated vessels. For, as it is a very serious thing to sell idly ecclesiastical utensils, so on the other 
hand it is wrong, under pressing necessity of this kind, for an exceedingly desolated Church to prefer its 
property to its captives, or to loiter in redeeming them. 

EPISTLE XXXIX. 

TO JOHN, BISHOP. 

Gregory to John, Bishop of Syracuse. 

Lest attention to secular affairs should disjoin the hearts of religious men (which God forbid) from mutual 
charity, very earnest endeavour should be made to bring any matter that has come into dispute to the 
easiest possible termination. Since, then, from the information of Caesarius, abbot of St. Peter's monastery, 
constituted in a place called Baias, we find that between him and John, abbot of St. Lucia's monastery, 
constituted in the city of Syracuse, there has arisen a serious question about certain boundaries, we, lest 
this contention should be prolonged between them, have taken thought for their dispute being terminated by 
the determination of a land-measurer. And accordingly we have written to the defensor Fantinus, bidding 
him direct John the land-measurer, who has gone from Rome to Panormus, to resort to your Fraternity. 
We exhort, therefore, that you go with him to the places about which there is contention, and, both parties 
having been brought together, cause the places in dispute to have their boundaries defined in your 
presence, though still with a claim of prescription for forty years preserved to either party. But, whatever may 
be determined, let it be your Fraternity's anxious and studious care to have it so observed that no strife may 
henceforth be stirred up anew, nor any further complaint reach us. 

We believe that it is not unknown to your Fraternity that the venerable abbot Caesarius was formerly our 
friend; and therefore, saving equity, we commend him to you in all respects. And, seeing that he is entirely 
inexperienced in secular causes, it is needful for him to be aided by your solicitude; yet so that, in this as in 
all cases, you observe, as is fit, reason and justice. 

EPISTLE XL. 

TO EULOGIUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Eulogius, Bishop of Alexandria. 

Your most sweet Holiness has spoken much in your letter to me about the chair of Saint Peter, Prince of the 
apostles, saying that he himself now sits on it in the persons of his successors. And indeed I acknowledge 
myself to be unworthy, not only in the dignity of such as preside, but even in the number of such as stand. But 
I gladly accepted all that has been said, in that he has spoken to me about Peter's chair who occupies 
Peter's chair. And, though special honour to myself in no wise delights me, yet I greatly rejoiced because 
you, most holy ones, have given to yourselves what you have bestowed upon me. For who can be ignorant 
that holy Church has been made firm in the solidity of the Prince of the apostles, who derived his name from 
the firmness of his mind, so as to be called Petrus from petra. And to him it is said by the voice of the Truth, 
To thee I will give the keys of the kingdom of heaven (Matth. xvi. 19). And again it is said to him. And when 
thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren (xxii. 32). And once more, Simon, son of Jonas, lovestthou Me? 
Feed my sheep (Joh. xxi. 17). Wherefore though there are many apostles, yet with regard to the principality 
itself the See of the Prince of the apostles alone has grown strong in authority, which in three places is the 
See of one[2]. For he himself exalted the See in which he deigned even to rest and end the present life. He 
himself adorned the See to which he sent his disciple as evangelist. He himself stablished the See in which, 
though he was to leave it, he sat for seven years. Since then it is the See of one, and one See, over which by 
Divine authority three bishops now preside, whatever good I hear of you, this I impute to myself. If you 

believe anything good of me, impute tiiis to your merits, since we are one in Him Wiio says, Tiiat tiiey all 
may be one, as Thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee that they also may be one in us (Joh. xvii. 21). 
Moreover, in paying you the debt of salutation which is due to you, I declare to you that I exult with great joy 
from knowing that you labour assiduously against the barkings of heretics; and I implore Almighty God that 
He would aid your Blessedness with His protection, so as through your tongue, to uproot every root of 
bitterness from the bosom of holy Church, lest it should germinate again to the hindrance of many, and 
through it many should be defiled. For having received your talent you think on the injunction. Trade till I 
come (Luke xix. 13). I therefore, though unable to trade at all nevertheless rejoice with you in the gains of 
your trade, inasmuch as I know this, that if operation does not make me partaker, yet charity does make me 
a partaker in your labour. For I reckon that the good of a neighbour is common to one that stands idle, if he 
knows how to rejoice in common in the doings of the other. 

Furthermore, I have wished to send you some timber: but your Blessedness has not indicated whether you 
are in need of it: and we can send some of much larger size, but no ship is sent hither capable of containing 
it: and I think shame to send the smaller sort. Nevertheless let your Blessedness inform me by letter what I 
should do. 

I have however sent you, as a small blessing from the Church of Saint Peter who loves you, six of the 
smaller sort of Aquitanian cloaks (pallia), and two napkins (oraria); for, my affection being great, I presume 
on the acceptableness of even little things. For affection itself has its own worth, and it is quite certain that 
there will be no offence in what out of love one has presumed to do. 

Moreover I have received the blessing of the holy Evangelist Mark, according to the note appended to your 
letter. But, since I do not drink colatum[3] and viritheum[4] with pleasure, I venture to ask for cognidium[5], 
which last year, after a long interval, your Holiness caused to be known in this city. For we here get from the 
traders the name of cognidium, but not the thing itself. Now I beg that the prayers of your Holiness may 
support me against all the bitternesses which I suffer in this life, and defend me from them by your 
intercessions with Almighty God. 

EPISTLE XL!!. 

TO MARINIANUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Marinianus, Bishop of Ravenna. 

We find from the information given in your Fraternity's letter that the sons of the Church of Cornelium are 
continually supplicating you to consecrate a bishop for them in place of their former bishop who has lapsed, 
and that you are in doubt as to what should be done in the matter, and await our plain command. Inasmuch, 
then, as no sort of reason allows any one who has departed criminally to be recalled to the place from which 
he has lapsed, and as the ordinances of the sacred canons allow not a Church to be without a bishop 
beyond three months, lest (which God forbid) the ancient foe should lie in wait to tear the Lord's flock, your 
Fraternity ought to comply with their entreaty, and ordain a bishop in the place of the lapsed one. For, seeing 
that you ought to have admonished them to this thing by your exhortations before they asked you, you can 
have no excuse for refusing them when they demand it of you, since a Church of God ought not to remain 
long widowed of a bishop of its own. 

EPISTLE XLIII. 

TO MARINIANUS, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Marinianus, Bishop of Ravenna. 

It has for some time reached us from the report of many that the monasteries constituted in the district of 
Ravenna are everywhere aggrieved by the domination of your clergy; so that-grievous to be said-under 
the pretext of government they take possession of them as if they were their own. Condoling in no small 
degree with these monasteries, we sent letters to your predecessor bidding him correct this evil. But, seeing 
that he was soon overtaken by the close of life, we remember having written in like manner to your Fraternity, 
lest this burden on the monasteries should continue. And because, as we have discovered, there has been 
loitering so far in the correction of this thing, we have thought fit to address you a second time by this letter. 
We exhort you, then, that, putting aside all delay and all excuses, you so study to relieve these monasteries 
from this kind of grievance that clerics, or such as are in sacred orders, may henceforth have no leave of 
access to them on any other ground except only for the purpose of praying, or if perchance they should be 
invited for solemnizing the sacred mysteries of mass. But, lest haply the monasteries should sustain a 
burden through the promotion of any monk or abbot, you must take care that, if any of the abbots or monks 
of any monastery should accede to any clerical office or sacred order, he shall have, as we have said, no 

power there any longer, lest under cover of this occasion the monasteries should be compelled to sustain 
the burdens which we prohibit. Let not your Holiness, then, after this second admonition, delay correcting all 
this with vigilant care, lest, if we should after this perceive you to be negligent (as we do not believe will be 
the case), we be compelled to provide otherwise for the quiet of the monasteries. For be it known to you that 
we will no longer suffer the congregations of the servants of God to be subjected to such requirements. Lest, 
however, any excuse should be put forward with regard to the monks, let your Fraternity without fail send 
hither such person as you may see to be serviceable, and we will depute monks to go with him to you, to 
provide for whom you must place them in monasteries, if indeed there are among you places such as may 
afford them a maintenance. 

REGISTER OF THE EPISTLES OF SAINT GREGORY 
THE GREAT, BOOK VIII 

M 

BOOK VIII 

EPISTLE I. 

TO PETER, BISHOP. 

Gregory to Peter, Bishop of Corsica[1]. 

On receiving tiie letters of your Fraternity we returned great tlianl<s to Almigiity God, tiiat you iiad been so 
good as to refresii us witii tiie news of tiie gatiiering in of many souls. And accordingly let your Fraternity 
strive anxiously to bring to perfection, with the help of the Lord, the work which you have begun. And with 
regard to those who have once been faithful, but from negligence or under constraint have returned to the 
worship of idols, make haste to bring them back to the faith, imposing on them a penance of a few days, that 
they may bewail their guilt, and keep to that to which they return, God helping them, the more firmly as they 
shall have perfectly deplored that from which they now depart; and with regard to those who have not yet 
been baptized, let thy Fraternity make haste, by admonishing, by beseeching, by alarming them about the 
coming judgment, and also by giving reasons why they should not worship stocks and stones, to gather 
them in to Almighty God; that so, at His advent, when the strict day of judgment comes, thy Holiness may be 
found in the number of the Saints. For what more profitable work or more lofty canst thou be engaged in than 
taking thought for the quickening and gathering together of souls and bringing in immortal gain to thy Lord, 
Who has given to thee the post of preaching? 

Further, we send thy Fraternity fifty solidi for procuring vestments for those who are to be baptized; and we 
have also caused to be given to the presbyter of the Church situated in Mount Negeugnus[2] the 
possession which thy Fraternity has asked for, so that its value may be deducted from the money that he 
had been accustomed to receive. 

Further, your Fraternity has asked to be allowed to make for yourself an episcopal residence in the church 
that is not far from the same mountain; which proposal I most gladly accede to, since the nearer you are, the 
more will you be able to do good to the souls that are there. 

In consideration of your Holiness's intercessions for him we have made the bearer of these presents an 
acolyte, and have sent him back to attend upon you, in order that, if he should be of still more service in 
winning souls, he may be in a position to be still further advanced. 

EPISTLE II. 

TO ANASTASIUS, BISHOP OF ANTIOCH. 

Gregory to Anastasius, Patriarch of Antioch. 

I have received the letters of your most sweet Blessedness, which flowed with tears for words. For I saw in 
them a cloud flying aloft as clouds do; but, though it carried with it a darkness of sorrow, I could not easily 
discover at its commencement whence it came orwhither it was going, since by reason of the darkness I 
speak of I did not fully understand its origin. Yet it becomes you, most holy ones, ever to recall to mind what 
the preacher to the Gentiles says; In the last times perilous times shall be at hand, and there shall be men 
loving themselves, covetous, lifted up (1 Tim. iv. 1); and what follows, which it would be a trouble for me to 
speak, and which is not necessary for you to hear. Lo, in your holy old age, your Blessedness labours 
under many tribulations; but consider in whose seat you sit[3]. Is it not in his to whom it was said by the voice 
of the truth. When thou shalt be old, another shall gird thee and carry thee whether thou wouldest not (Job. 
xxi. 18)? But in saying this I recollect that your Holiness even from your youth has toiled under many 
adversities. Say then with the good king, I will think again over all my years in the bitterness of my soul (Isai. 
xxxviii. 15). For there are many who, as you say in your letter, make to themselves pastime over our wounds: 
but we know who said. Ye shall lament and weep, but the world shall rejoice; and ye shall be sorrowful (Joh. 
xvi. 20): where also he forthwith adds. But your sorrow shall be turned into joy. But, since we already suffer 
what was foretold, it remains that we should also hope for what was promised. For as to these of whom you 
say that they themselves lay on the burdens which they ought to have lightened, I know that they are those 

who come in sheep's clothing, and inwardly are ravening wolves (Match, vii.). But They are so much the 
more to be endured as they persecute us not only with a malicious mind, but also in religious guise. And in 
that they desire to have to themselves above others what it were not fit that they should have even with their 
brethren, we are in no wise disturbed at this, since we trust in Almighty God that those who desire what 
belongs to others will be the sooner deprived even of what is their own. For we know who said. That every 
one that exalteth himself shall be abased (Luke xiv. 1 1). And again it is written. Before a fall the heart is 
exalted (Prov. xvi. 18). 

But in these days, as I find, new wars of heretics are arising, about whom I have before now written to your 
Blessedness, in such sort that they attempt to invalidate the prophets, the Gospels, and all the sayings of 
the Fathers. But, while the life of your Holiness endures, wetrust in the favour of our Protector that their 
mouths which have been opened against the solidity of the truth may be the sooner stopped, inasmuch as, 
however sharp may be the swords that are employed, they recoil broken when they strike the rock. 
Moreover there is this by the great favour of Almighty God; that among those who are divided from the 
doctrine of Holy Church there is no unity, since every kingdom divided against itself shall not stand (Luke 
xi.). And holy Church is always more thoroughly equipped in her teaching when assaulted by the 
questionings of heretics; so that what was said by the Psalmist concerning God against heretics is fulfilled. 
They are divided from the wrath of his countenance, and his heart hath drawn nigh (Ps. liv. 22[4]). For while 
they are divided in their wicked error, God brings His heart near to us, because, being taught by 
contradictions, we more thoroughly learn to understand Him. 

Further, what ills we suffer from the swords of barbarians, and what from the perversity of judges, I shrink from 
relating to your Blessedness, lest I should increase your groaning, which I ought to diminish by consolation. 
But in all these things the precepts of our Master comfort me, who says. These things have I spoken unto 
you, that in me ye might have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation (John xvi. 33). For I consider to 
whom it was said. This is your hour, and the power of darkness (Luke xxii. 53). If, then, the hour of light will be 
afterwards, since it is said to the elect. Ye are the light of the world (Matth. v. 14), and as it is written. The 
righteous shall have dominion over them in the morning (Ps.xlviii. 15)[5], whatever we suffer in the hour of the 
power of darkness is not to be deplored. 

Moreover your most sweet Holiness tells me that you would have wished, if it could have been so, to 
converse with me without paper and pen, and grieves that a distance almost as far as the East is from the 
West lies between us. But this which I feel I declare is true; that on paper your soul speaks to me without 
paper, since in the words of your Holiness charity alone sounds, and we are not divided by distance of 
place who, of the gift of Almighty God, are joined together in the bond of love. Why then seek you to have 
given you the wings of a dove covered with silver, when you already have them? For indeed these wings 
are love of God and of our neighbour. For by these holy Church flies aloft, and by these transcends all that is 
earthly; which if your Holiness had not, you would not have come to me by letter with so great charity. 
Further, I beg you to pray earnestly in behalf of the weakness of my heart, to the end that Almighty God may 
through your intercession defend my soul from all evils, and the sooner snatch me away from the hurricanes 
of this time, which are so many, and bring me to the shores of eternal rest. 

I have received all the very rich blessings[6], directed to me, which thou, as a man of God poor in spirit, hast 
sent me, saying of them. For what can a poor man give but what is poor? But had you not been poor through 
a spirit of humility, your blessings would not have been rich. May Almighty God guard you by His protection 
from all evils; and, since your life is very necessary for all good men, bring you after many years yet to 
come to the joys of the heavenly country. 

EPISTLE III. 

TO DONUS, BISHOP OF MESSANA (in Sicily). 

Gregory to Donus, &c. 

The most eloquent than, our son Faustinus, has come to us and complained that his late father Peltrasius 
left some things which were not his own to your Church for his burial. And indeed he knows himself, and we 
have heard, what the secular law is in such a case; namely, that the heir is bound to pay if his father has 
bequeathed what was not his own. But, as we know that your Fraternity lives by the law of God and not of the 
world, it seems to me very unjust that an amber cup, and a boy who is said to be of a certain church situate 
on his property in the diocese of Consentia, should be detained by thy Fraternity. For, when the most 
reverend Palumbus, now bishop, but then archdeacon, had testified that things were as I have said, you 
certainly ought tO have taken his word, and restored what was not your own. Further, you ought in my opinion 
to have considered the golden brooch, which would be his whole substance were there anything for the 
sustenance of those he had left behind him, and accepted it at that time for his burial. Nevertheless, you 
know our ordinance, how that we have entirely forbidden the old custom in our Church, nor give our assent to 

any one being allowed to acquire burial-places for a human body for a price. For, if the men of Sichem, who 
were as we suppose Gentiles, offered without charge to Abraham sepulture for the dead Sara to be buried 
in a place of her own, and were hardly prevailed upon by his great importunity to receive a price for her 
place of burial, ought we, who are called bishops, to make any charge for burying the bodies of the faithful? 
This, then, we commit to the judgment of your Fraternity [7]. 

The aforesaid most eloquent man complains also of this; that Sisinnius, the guardian (defensor) of thy 
Church, unreasonably detains slaves in his possession: concerning whom also he asserts that it had been 
decided by the judgment of bishop Maximianus of holy memory that the detainer of them should give them 
up, but that he has so far wilfully put off their restitution. We therefore exhort thy Fraternity that, if the case has 
manifestly been adjudged, what was ordained be carried out. Otherwise, some one being deputed to act in 
the case, cause him to resort to the parts of our brother and fellow-bishop Secundinus for judgment, that, 
when it shall have been declared by his sentence to whom the slaves in question belong, neither the one 
party may appear to suffer prejudice nor the other bear a grudge. 

EPISTLE V. 

TO VARIOUS METROPOLITANS AND BISH0PS[8]. 

Gregory to Eusebius of Thessalonica, Urbitius of Dyracchium, Constantius of Mediolanum (Milan), Andrew 
of Nicopolis, John of Corinth, John of Prima Justiniana, John Cretensi Scoritano, John of Larissa, Marinianus 
of Ravenna, Januarius of Canalis (Cagliari) in Sardinia, and all the bishops of Sicily. 

I have taken care to transmit to your Fraternity the law which the most pious Emperor has issued, to the effect 
that such as are bound by engagements of military service or public liabilities, may not in any case, in order 
to escape risk of being called to account, assume the condition of ecclesiastics, or become monks: and 
this I especially press upon you, that such as are involved in secular engagements are not to be received 
hastily among the clergy of the Church, since, while they live in an ecclesiastical condition no otherwise than 
they had lived before, they are by no means trying to escape secular affairs, but to change them. But, if any 
such should even seek a monastery, they are by no means to be received unless they have first been 
absolved from their public liabilities. Further, if any from the military order are in haste to become monks, 
they are not to be received rashly, or until their life has been fully enquired into. And, according to the regular 
rule, they ought to undergo a probation of three years, and then, God granting it, assume the monastic habit. 
And if they have thus been proved and accepted, and are anxious, for the good of their souls, to do 
penance for the sins they have committed, then, with a view to their heavenly life and gain, monastic 
profession should not be denied them. With respect to this matter also, believe me, the most serene and 
most Christian Emperor is in every way pacified, and willingly allows the monastic profession of those whom 
he knows not to be implicated in public liabilities. The Month of December, first Indiction. 

EPISTLE VI. 

TO AMOS, PATRIARCH OF JERUSALEM. 

Gregory to Amos, Bishop of Jerusalem. 

Being confident that your Fraternity pays regard to the ordinances of the canons and the vigour of discipline, 
lest the falseness of one of your clerics should succeed in imposing on you so as to escape the strictness 
of ecclesiastical order, we have thought it right to inform you of his fault, that through your solicitude he may 
be subjected to the discipline from which he has fled. We understand, then, that Peter, an acolyte, whom we 
bad caused to serve under our son the deacon Sabinianus, our ecclesiastical representative in the royal 
city, has fled, and resorted to your Church. If this is true, let your Fraternity be at pains to secure him, and 
send him back hither when an opportunity occurs. But if by chance, fearing this, he shall have departed from 
your Church, and be lurking in various places to escape detection, order him to be diligently sought for in all 
your parishes, and, when found, send him back to us, as we have before said. And we desire also to notify 
through you that he is deprived of communion: nor let him dare to receive the mysteries of the Lord's body 
and blood until he shall return to us, unless by chance he should be in imminent peril of death. 

EPISTLE X. 

TO SABINIANUS, BISHOP OF JADERA[9]. 

Gregory to Sabinianus, &c. 

As to one who perseveres in a fault punishment is rightly due, so pardon should be granted to those who 

return to a better mind. For, as in tiie former case anger against tiie culprit is deservedly provoked, so in the 
latter good-will displayed is wont to promote concord. And so, inasmuch as a recollection of the gravity of 
the priestly office has now withdrawn thy Fraternity from fellowship and communion with Maximus, into which 
thoughtlessness had before betrayed thee; and this to such an extent that thou couldest by no means allow 
thyself to be content with mere separation from him without also bewailing thy past transgression by 
betaking thyself to the retirement of a monastery, therefore doubt not that thou art received again into our 
favour and communion: for, as much as thy fault had before offended us, so much has thy penitence 
appeased us. We exhort thee, therefore, most beloved brother, that thou be instant in bestowing pastoral 
solicitude on the Lord's flock, and be diligently on the watch to make profit of the sheep committed to thy 
charge; that so the retribution of a copious reward may abound to thee in proportion as thou shalt offer 
multiplied fruits of thy labour at the coming of the eternal Judge. Strive then to rescue those who have fallen 
into sin; strive to shew the way of retracing their steps to those that go astray; strive to recall salubriously to 
the grace of communion those who have been deprived of communion. Let the coming back of your Charity 
lay on you the duty of rescuing others, and be an example of salvation; to the end that, while your anxious 
care shall direct the wandering steps of sheep to the folds of the chief shepherd, both they themselves may 
not be left exposed to the teeth of wolves, and (what is above all things to be desired.) that the 
compensation of condign retribution may await thee in the life eternal. 

As to the cause about which you wrote to us, requesting us to guard against any clandestine proceedings 
against you in the royal city, let not this matter disturb your mind. For we have with all possible care given 
orders to our responsalis to shew himself solicitous and on his guard. And we trust in the power of our God 
that things are being so conducted that the opposition of no one shall avail against reason, so as in any way 
to trouble you or to bear hard upon you. 

Furthermore, the inhabitants of the city of Epidaurus have most urgently requested us to restore to them 
Florentius, whom they allege to be their bishop, asserting that he was driven into exile invalidly by the mere 
will of the bishop Natalis[1]. And so, if your Fraternity has any knowledge of his case, please to inform us 
accurately by letter. But, if so far you have no knowledge of it, make enquiry, and report to us, that we may 
be able, with the Lord's help, to deliberate with full knowledge before us as to what should be determined 
concerning him. In the month of February, first Indiction. 

EPISTLE XIII. 

TO COLUMBUS. 

Gregory to Columbus, Bishop of Numidia[2]. 

How we may presume on your Charity we gather from the disposition of our own mind with regard to you. 
Nor do we think that you love the Apostolic See otherwise than as it loves you. Whence it must needs be 
that we should more peculiarly commend those whom we know to be, as they should be, devoted in the 
Church of the blessed Peter, Prince of the apostles, to you whose life the action as well as the dignity of a 
priest adorns, and of whose sincerity we already hold proof from past experience. 
As to our brother, therefore, and fellow-bishop Paul[3], the bearer of these presents, with what billows and 
adversities he is tossed in your parts he tells us is not unknown to your Holiness. And seeing that he asserts 
that the complaints against him which you have told us have come to your ears are not true, but raised 
against him at the instigation of his adversaries, and that he trusts to be able by the help of the Lord to 
surmount them all, with the truth to support him and with you to take cognizance, we exhort you, most beloved 
brother, that, in whatever points considerations of justice are clearly on his side, you afford him becomingly 
the hand of succour, and aid him with priestly sympathy. Let, then, no circumstance, no influence of any 
persons, deflect you from studious regard to equity. But, leaning on the Lord's precepts, set at naught 
whatever is opposed to rectitude. In defending one party or the other insist constantly on justice. Shrink not 
from incurring ill-will, if such there be, in behalf of truth; that thou mayest find in the advent of our Redeemer b 
so much the greater fruit of reward as, not neglecting His commands, thou shalt have devoted thyself to the 
countenance and defence of justice. 
In the month of March, first Indiction. 

EPISTLE XIV. 

TO BONIFACE, FIRST GUARDIAN (Defensorem). 

Gregory to Boniface concerning the privileges of Guardians [4]. 

Those who labour faithfully in the interests of the Church should receive the benefit of suitable remuneration, 

so that both we may be seen to have made a worthy return for their services, and they may shew 

themselves the more useful for the favour of the solace granted them. Seeing, then, that those who hold the 
office of Guardians are known to labour in the causes of the Church and in the service of the pontiffs, we 
have thought fit that they should enjoy the following prerogatives, granted to them for recompense; - 
appointing that, as in the school (schola) of notaries and subdeacons, through the indulgence of pontiffs 
long ago, there have been constituted regionarii, so also among the Guardians seven who may have 
commended themselves by proved utility shall be distinguished by the dignity of regionarii. And we appoint 
that these, in the absence of the pontiff, shall have leave to sit anywhere in any assembly of clergy, and 
enjoy in all respects the privileges of their dignity. Furthermore, if any one, attaining to this position of priority, 
should by any chance live in another province for his own advantage, he must needs still occupy in all 
respects his place of priority, so that he may be the chief of all the guardians, as being one who, even 
before he obtained his position of priority, had not ceased by assiduous personal attention to devote 
himself to the interests of the Church and the service of the pontiff. These decrees, then, by us constituted, 
which have been ordained for the privileges and constitution of Guardians, we appoint to be kept in 
perpetual force and irrefragably; - whether such things as we have decreed in writing, or such as are seen 
to have been ordained in our presence: and we decree also that they shall not be upset or changed in 
whole or in part on any occasion whatever by any of the pontiffs. For it is a very harsh proceeding, and 
especially contrary to good conduct in priests, that any one should endeavour, under any manner of 
excuse, to rescind what has been well ordained, and also by his example to teach others to dissolve his 
own constitutions after his own time The mouth of April, first Indiction. 

EPISTLE XV. 

TO MARINIANUS, BISHOP OF RAVENNA. 

Gregory to Marinianus, &c. 

How necessary it is to provide for the quiet of monasteries [5], and to take measures for their perpetual 
security, you are aware from the office you formerly filled in government of a monastery. And so, seeing that 
we have learnt how the monastery of the blessed John and Stephen in the city of Classis, over which our 
common son, the abbot Claudius, is known to preside, has suffered many prejudices and grievances from 
your predecessors, it is right that the provision of your Fraternity should make salutary arrangements for the 
quiet of its inmates in future; to the end that living there in the service of God, His grace also assisting them, 
they may persevere with free mind. But lest, owing to the custom which ought rather to be amended, any one 
at any time should presume to cause any annoyance there, it is necessary that the points which we have 
taken care to enumerate below be so guarded by the careful attention of your Fraternity that no occasion of 
causing them disquiet may possibly be found in future. Let no one, then, any more dare, by any kind of 
inquisition whatever, to diminish anything from the revenues or charters of the aforesaid monastery, or of any 
place that in any manner whatever pertains to it, or to attempt any kind of usurpations or stratagems. But if 
perchance any matter of dispute should arise between the Church of Ravenna and the aforesaid 
monastery, and it cannot be settled amicably, let it be concluded without voluntary delay before men who 
fear God chosen by the parties, oath being made upon the most holy Gospels. Further, on the death of an 
abbot, let not a stranger be ordained, but one whom the congregation may choose of its own free will for 
itself from the same congregation, and who shall have been chosen without any fraud or venality. But, if they 
should be unable to find a suitable person among themselves, let them in like manner wisely choose for 
themselves for ordination one from some other monastery. And, when an abbot comes, let no person 
whatever on any occasion whatever be put over him in his own monastery, unless perchance in the case 
(which God forbid) of crimes which are shewn to be punishable by the sacred canons. This rule also must 
be no, less carefully observed; that against the will of the abbot of such monastery monks be not removed 
thence for furnishing other monasteries, or for sacred orders, or for any clerical office. But in cases of there 
being monks in abundance, sufficient for celebrating praises to God and for satisfying the requirements of 
monasteries, let the abbot offer with devotion of those who are to spare, such as he may be able to find 
worthy in the sight of God. But if, while having a sufficient number he should refuse to give any, then let the 
bishop of Ravenna take of such as are to spare for furnishing other monasteries. Nevertheless, let no one 
be taken out thence for an ecclesiastical office, except such as the abbot of the place, on having notice 
given him, may offer of his own accord. Whosoever also from the aforesaid monastery shall have attained 
to any ecclesiastical order, let him thenceforth have neither any power there nor leave to dwell there [6]. 
It is to be observed also that no schedule of the property and charters of this monastery must be made by 
ecclesiastics, if ever circumstances require one: but let the abbot of the place with other abbots make an 
inventory of the property. 

Further, as often as the abbot may perchance wish to go or send to the Roman pontiff in the interest of his 
monastery, let him have entire liberty to do so. 

Furthermore, though the visits of bishops should be lool<ed for with desire by monasteries, yet, seeing that it 
has been reported to us that the aforesaid monastery in the times of your predecessor was burdened by 
occasion of entertainment, it is right that your Holiness should regulate this in a becoming manner, so that 
the prelate of the city may have access to the monastery as often as he pleases for the sake of visiting and 
exhorting. But let the bishop so fulfil the office of charity there that the monastery incur not any burden. Now 
the aforesaid abbot not only does not fear your Fraternity's frequent access to the monastery, but even 
longingly desires it, knowing that it is quite impossible that the substance of the monastery should be 
burdened through you. Given in the month of April, first Indiction. 

EPISTLE XVII. 

TO MAURENTIUS. 

Gregory to Maurentius, magister militum [7]. 

My most beloved son, Cyprian the deacon, had pleased me much by his return to me, if his whole self had 
returned to me. But now that your Glory bus stayed in Sicily, I know most certainly that he has returned 
indeed in body, but in mind has remained in Sicily. Yet, in saying this, I rejoice with you for your quiet as 
much as I groan for my own occupations. And to this I earnestly exhort you, that, if the pleasant savour of 
inward sweetness has touched the palate of your heart, your mind be so rapt within itself that all which 
sounds without, all that delights without, may be distasteful. Moreover I commend you for avoiding 
concourses of men, seeing that a mind which desires to be renewed in God through the grace of 
compunction often relapses into its old state through evil conversation and words. I have sought for some to 
join you in a society for sacred reading, but have found no one, and I exceedingly lament the scarcity of 
what is good. And though I, a sinner, am very much occupied, yet, if you should wish to come to the 
threshold of the blessed apostle Peter, you will be able to have me as a close associate in the study of 
Holy Writ. May Almighty God keep you under His heavenly protection, and grant you to remain defended 
against the snares of the ancient foe. 

EPISTLE XVIII. 

TO AGNELLUS, BISHOP OF TERRACINA. 

Gregory to Agnellus, &c. 

It has come to our ears - a thing shocking to be told - that some in your parts worship trees, and perpetrate 
many other unlawful things contrary to the Christian faith. And we wonder why your Fraternity has delayed 
correcting this by strict punishment. On this account we exhort you by this present writing to cause these 
persons to be sought out by diligent enquiry, and such vengeance to be executed on them that both God 
may be pacified and their punishment may be an example of rebuke to others. 

We have written also to Mourns the Viscount that he should afford aid to your Fraternity in this matter, that so 
you may be unable to find any excuse for nor apprehending them. Further, as we find that many excuse 
themselves from keeping watch over the walls, let your Fraternity be careful to suffer no man, either under 
the name of our or your Church, or under any other pretext, to be exempted from keeping watch: but let all 
generally be compelled, to the end that, while all keep watch, the custody of the city may, by the help of the 
Lord, be the better provided for. 

EPISTLE XX. 

TO MARINIANUS, BISHOP OF RAVENNA. 

Gregory to Marinianus, &c. 

John, the bearer of these presents, complains that his wife, flying from the molestations of one George, has 
long been residing within venerable precincts [8], and has so far met with no assistance. Since she asserts 
that there is a dispute about her condition [9], and has asked that it should be commended to your 
Fraternity, we hereby exhort you that you afford your protection to this woman, and permit her not to be in any 
way aggrieved by any one unreasonably. But if the question about her station still continues, let it be your 
care that, without any oppression, and in a legal manner, it may be submitted for judgment; so that when, 
after ascertainment of the truth, what is agreeable to the order of law has been determined, neither party 
may complain of having suffered wrong. The month of May, first Indiction. 

EPISTLE XXI. 

TO JOHN, BISHOP OF SYRACUSE. 

Gregory to John, &c. 

Felix, the bearer of these presents, has complained to us that, being born of Christian parents, he was given 
(i.e. as a slave) by a certain Christian to a Samaraean [1], which is an atrocious thing to be said. And, though 
neither order of law nor reverence for religion allow men of such like superstition in any way whatever to 
possess Christian slaves, yet he asserts that he remained for eighteen years in that man's service. But he 
says that, when your predecessor Maximianus of holy memory became aware of the fact, he was freed by 
him, moved, as was becoming, by priestly zeal, from the service of that Samaraean. But, inasmuch as the 
son of the said Samaraean is said after five years to have become a Christian, and certain persons are 
trying to reclaim the aforesaid Felix, according to his own account, to his service, let your Holiness enquire 
diligently into the facts that we have been informed of, and, if they should be found true, study to protect him, 
and allow him on no pretext whatever to be aggrieved by any one, seeing that, while the laws plainly forbid 
slaves of that superstitious sect who are before their masters in coming to the faith being reclaimed to their 
service, how much more ought not this man - born of Christian parents, and a Christian from his childhood - 
to be subjected m any wise to this contention; especially as neither could be the slave of that other man's 
father, who it is clear was rather liable to punishment by law for his wicked presumption? And so, as we have 
said, let the defence of your Holiness so protect him reasonably that no one may be at liberty, under any 
pretence whatever, in any degree to afflict him. 

EPISTLE XXII. 

TO RUSTICIANA, PATRICIAN [2]. 

Gregory to Rusticiana, &c. 

I remember having before now written to your Excellency, and repeatedly urged you to lose no time in 
revisiting the thresholds of the blessed Peter, Prince of the apostles. And what means your so great delight 
in the city of Constantinople, and your oblivion of the city of Rome, I know not. I have not so far been thought 
worthy of getting any information from you on this head. For how far it might be of advantage to your soul for 
reaping the rewards of eternal life, and how far it would suit also in all respects your glorious daughter, the 
lady Eusebia, this we fully give our attention to, and you may no less fully consider. But, if you enquire of my 
son Peter, your servant, whom I have found to be wise beyond his age and to be studying to attain ripeness, 
you will find how great is the love towards your Excellency of air who dwell here, and how great their desire 
to be thought worthy of seeing you again. And if, the Lord teaching us, we are admonished in Holy Writ that 
we should love even our enemies, we ought to consider how wrong it is to shew no love even to those who 
love us. But, if haply we are said to be loved, we know most certainly that no one can have affection for 
those whom he does not wish to see. If, however, you are afraid of the swords and wars of Italy, you should 
attentively observe how great is the protection of the blessed Peter, Prince of the apostles, in this city, 
wherein, without a large force of people, and without military aid, we are preserved under God for so many 
years among swords. This we say, because we love. But may Almighty God grant whatever He sees to be 
of advantage to your soul for ever, and to the renown of your house at the present time. 
The ten pounds of gold which your Excellency has sent for the redemption of captives I have received at the 
hands of my aforesaid son. But I pray that the heavenly grace which granted to you that you should give 
them for your soul's reward may also grant to me to dispense them without any contagion of sin; lest we 
should be stained by that whereby you wipe away sins. May Almighty God, who looks upon the weakness 
of your body and your pilgrimage, comfort you ever by His grace, and by the life and health of my most 
sweet son the lord Strategius [3]; that so He may nurture him both for you through many years and for 
Himself through eternity, and may both replenish you and all your house with present good and grant you to 
have grace from above. We further beg that the glorious lord Eudoxius may be greeted in our behalf. 

EPISTLE XXIII. 

TO FANTINUS, GUARDIAN (Defensorem). 

Gregory to Fantinus, &c. 

From the information of the lady abbess of the monastery of Saint Stephen in the territory of Agrigentum we 
find that many of the Jews, divine grace inspiring them, wish to be converted to the Christian faith; but that it is 
necessary for some one to go thither by our command. Accordingly we enjoin thee, in virtue of the authority 
hereby given thee, that, putting aside every excuse, thou make haste to go to the aforesaid place, and with 

the favour of God aid their desire by thy exhortations. If, however, it seems long and dreary for them to look 
forward to the Paschal solemnity, and thou findestthem anxious for baptism now, then lest long delay should 
possibly change their minds (which God forbid), speak thou with our brother the bishop of that place, that, 
penitence and abstinence having been prescribed them for forty days, he may baptize them under the 
protection of the mercy of Almighty God on a Lord's day, or on any very noted festival that may chance to 
occur; since the character of the present time too, on account of impending calamity, impels us not to defer 
the fulfilment of their desires by any procrastination. Further, whomsoever of them thou ascertainest to be 
poor and without sufficient means for buying vestments for themselves, we desire thee to supply with 
vestments for their baptism; and know that the price that thou mayest give for them is to be charged in thy 
accounts. But, if they should choose to wait for the holy season of Easter, speak again with the bishop, that 
they may for the present become catechumens, and that he may go to them frequently, and pay careful 
attention to them, and kindle their minds by the admonition of his exhortations, so that the more distant the 
expected festival is, the more may they prepare themselves and with fervent desire look forward to it. 
Furthermore, let it be thy care to enquire with all zeal and diligence whether the above-named monastery 
over which the aforesaid lady presides has sufficient means, or whether it suffers any need. And whatever 
thou mayest truly ascertain, as well as what is done with respect to those who desire to be baptized, make 
haste to inform us in full. The Month of June, first Indiction. 

EPISTLE XXIV. 

TO SABINIANUS, BISHOP OF JADERA [4]. 

Gregory to Sabinianus, &c. 

I am well delighted in thy sincerity, dearest brother, knowing how, with the discrimination of a careful 
judgment, it both obeys where obedience is due and resists where resistance is due with priestly zeal. For 
with what alacrity of devotion thou hast submitted to what we enjoined for the fault of thy past transgression is 
disclosed to us by the contents of the letters which thou hast sent to us by the bearer of these presents. For 
indeed my beloved brother could not take it otherwise than as it was enjoined by one who loves him. Hence 
I trust in the compassion of Almighty God that His grace so protects thee that, having been thus absolved 
also from other sins, thou mayest rejoice in having wholesomely obeyed. But as to what thy Charity has 
signified about being distressed by the jealousy of the excommunicated prevaricator Maximus, thou 
oughtest not to be disturbed; but it becomes thee by patiently enduring to bear up against the billows that 
swell vainly to some small degree, and by the virtue of perseverence to subdue the foaming of the waves. 
For patience knows how to smooth what is rough, and constancy to overcome fierceness. Let not, then, 
adversity deject your spirits, but inflame them. Let priestly vigour shew thee in all things the more bold. For 
this is a true evidence of truth, for one to exhibit himself as all the readier in hard circumstances, and all the 
braver in such as are adverse. Wherefore, that no blow may avail to upset the firmness of thy rectitude from 
its good determination, plant, as thou hast begun to do, the steps of thy soul on the solidity of that rock on 
which thou knowest that our Redeemer has rounded the Church throughout the world, that so the right 
footsteps of a sincere heart may not stumble on a devious way. 

As to the things about which thou hast written, or which the bearer of these presents has explained in our 
presence, do not suppose that we are neglecting them: we are very carefully considering them. 
Further, we have already, both before and now, given accurate information about everything to our most 
beloved son the deacon Anatolius [5]; exhorting him to lose no time, with the aid of our Creator, in acting 
strictly and zealously in whatever pertains to the advantage and quiet of your Charity and of your sons. And 
so let not sorrow affect your Fraternity, nor the enmity of any one whatever afflict you. For, with the assistance 
of Divine Grace, we trust that it will not be long before the presumption of the aforesaid excommunicated 
prevaricator will be more strictly repressed, and your quiet, as you desire, arrive. We have also by no 
means omitted to write about his perverseness to our most excellent son the Exarch [6], who is anxious to 
commend him to us. 

As to the presbyter about whom thy Fraternity has consulted us through the representation of the bearer of 
these presents, know that after his lapse be cannot by any means remain in, or be restored to, his sacred 
order. Still be ought to be somewhat mildly dealt with, inasmuch as he is said to have readily confessed his 
fault. Furthermore, this same bearer spoke at the same time of certain privileges of your Church granted by 
our predecessors. 

About the writings thus referred to by your Charity we wish to be more accurately informed. Or, if any of them 
are lying in the registry of your Church, it is necessary that copies of them be transmitted hither; that we may 
be able with willing mind to renew whatever concerns reverence for your dignity or the genius of the 
aforesaid Church. 
If our common son, the glorious lord Marcellus [7], should be minded to come hither, urgently persuade him 

to do so; for on all accounts I desire to see him. But, if he should choose to remain where he is, do you so 
exhibit yourselves to him in beseeming charity that you may be able to respond, as becomes you, to the 
affection which he has towards you. May Almighty God keep and protect you with the gift of His grace, and 
enflame your heart to do the things that are well pleasing to Him. 

EPISTLE XXIX. 

TO EULOGIUS, BISHOP OF ALEXANDRIA. 

Gregory to Eulogius, &c. 

An address from a learned man is always profitable, because the hearer either learns what he had known 
himself to be ignorant of, or, what is more, comes to know what he did not know he had been ignorant of. A 
hearer of the latter kind I have now become, your most holy Blessedness having been minded to write to 
me, asking me to send you the acts of all the martyrs, which were collected in the times of Constantino, of 
pious memory, by Eusebius of Caesarea. But before receiving the letter of your Blessedness I did not know 
of these acts, whether they had been collected, or whether not. I therefore give thanks that, instructed by your 
most holy teaching, I have begun to know what I was ignorant of. For beside what is contained about the 
acts of the holy martyrs in the books of the same Eusebius, I am not aware of any collections in the archives 
of this our Church, or in the libraries of the city of Rome, unless it be some few things collected in one single 
volume. We bare indeed the names of almost all the martyrs, with their passions assigned to particular 
days, collected in one volume; and we celebrate the solemnities of mass on such days in commemoration 
of them. Yet it is not indicated in this volume who each was, and how he suffered; but only his name, the 
place, and day, of his passion are put down. Hence it results that many of divers countries and provinces 
are known to have been crowned with martyrdom, as I have said, through their several days. But these we 
believe you have. That, however, which you wish to have sent to you we have sought for, but have not found; 
but, though we have not found it, we will still search, and, if it can be found, will send it. 
With regard to what you write about the timber being short in length, the cause was in the kind of ship by 
which it was sent; for, if a larger ship had come, we could have sent larger pieces of timber. But as to your 
saying that, if we send larger pieces, you will pay for them, we thank you indeed for your liberality, but we are 
precluded from accepting a price, since the Gospel forbids it. For we do not buy the timber which we send; 
and how can we accept a price, when it is written. Freely ye have received, freely give (Matth. x. 8)? We 
have therefore sent now through the shipmaster timber of short length in accordance with the size of the ship, 
whereof a notice is subjoined. Next year, however, should it please Almighty God, we will prepare larger 
pieces. 

We have received with the kindliness wherewith it was sent the blessing of Saint Mark the Evangelist, nay, it 
may be said more truly, of Saint Peter the Apostle [8]; and, greeting you well, we beg your Blessedness to 
deign to pray for us, that so we may be counted worthy to be soon delivered from present evils, and not to 
be excluded from future joys. 

EPISTLE XXX. 

TO EULOGIUS, BISHOP OF ALEXANDRIA. 

Gregory to Eulogius, &c. 

Our common son, the bearer of these presents, when he brought the letters of your Holiness found me sick, 
and has left me sick; whence it has ensued that the scanty water of my brief epistle has been hardly able to 
exude to the large fountain of your Blessedness. But it was a heavenly boon that, while in a state of bodily 
pain, I received the letter of your Holiness to lift me up with joy for the instruction of the heretics of the city of 
Alexandria, and the concord of the faithful, to such an extent that the very joy of my mind moderated the 
severity of my suffering. And indeed we rejoice with new exultation to hear of your good doings, though at 
the same time we by no means suppose that it is a new thing for you to act thus perfectly. For that the people 
of holy Church increases, that spiritual crops of corn for the heavenly garner are multiplied, we never 
doubted that this was from the grace of Almighty God which flowed largely to you, most blessed ones. We 
therefore render thanks to Almighty God, that we see fulfilled in you what is written. Where there is much 
increase, there the strength of the oxen is manifest (Prov. xiv. 4). For, if a strong ox had not drawn the plough 
of the tongue over the ground of the hearts of hearers, so great an increase of the faithful would by no means 
have sprung up. 

But, since in the good things you do I know that you also rejoice with others, I make you a return for your 
favour, and announce things not unlike yours; for while the nation of the Angli, placed in a corner of the world, 
remained up to this time misbelieving in the worship of stocks and stones, I determined, through the aid of 

your prayers for me, to send to it, God granting it, a monl< of my monastery for tiie purpose of preaciiing. And 
lie, iiaving witii my leave been made bisiiop by tiie bisiiops of Germany, proceeded, witii tiieir aid also, to 
the end of the world to the aforesaid nation; and already letters have reached us telling us of his safety and 
his work; to the effect that he and those that have been sent with him are resplendent with such great 
miracles in the said nation that they seem to imitate the powers of the apostles in the signs which they 
display. Moreover, at the solemnity of the Lord's Nativity which occurred in this first indiction, more than ten 
thousand Angli are reported to have been baptized by the same our brother and fellow-bishop. This have I 
told you, that you may know what you are effecting among the people of Alexandria by speaking, and what 
in the ends of the world by praying. For your prayers are in the place where you are not, while your holy 
operations are shewn in the place where you are. 

In the next place, as to the person of Eudoxius the heretic [9], about whose error I have discovered nothing 
in the Latin language, I rejoice that I have been most abundantly satisfied by your Blessedness. For you 
have adduced the testimonies of the strong men, Basil, Gregory, and Epiphanius; and we acknowledge him 
to be manifestly slain, at whom our heroes have cast so many darts. But with regard to these errors which 
are proved to have arisen in the Church of Constantinople, you have replied on all heads most learnedly, 
and as it became you to utter the judgment of so great a see. Whence we give thanks to Almighty God, that 
the tables of the covenant are still in the ark of God. For what is the priestly heart but the ark of the covenant? 
And since spiritual doctrine retains its vigour therein, without doubt the tables of the law are lying in it. 
Your Blessedness has also been careful to declare that you do not now make use of proud titles, which 
have sprung from a root of vanity, in writing to certain persons, and you address me saying. As you have 
commanded. This word, command, I beg you to remove from my hearing, since I know who I am, and who 
you are. For in position you are my brethren, in character my fathers. I did not, then, command, but was 
desirous of indicating what seemed to be profitable. Yet I do not find that your Blessedness has been willing 
to remember perfectly this very thing that I brought to your recollection. For I said that neither to me nor to any 
one else ought you to write anything of the kind; and lo, in the preface of the epistle which you have 
addressed to myself who forbade it, you have thought fit to make use of a proud appellation, calling me 
Universal Pope. But I beg your most sweet Holiness to do this no more, since what is given to another 
beyond what reason demands is subtracted from yourself. For as for me, I do not seek to be prospered by 
words but by my conduct. Nor do I regard that as an honour whereby I know that my brethren lose their 
honour. For my honour is the honour of the universal Church: my honour is the solid vigour of my brethren. 
Then am I truly honoured when the honour due to all and each is not denied them. For if your Holiness calls 
me Universal Pope, you deny that you are yourself what you call me universally. But far be this from us. 
Away with words that inflate vanity and wound charity. 

And, indeed, in the synod of Chalcedon and afterwards by subsequent Fathers, your Holiness knows that 
this was offered to my predecessors(l). And yet not one of them would ever use this title, that, while 
regarding the honour of all priests in this world, they might keep their own before Almighty God. Lastly, while 
addressing to you the greeting which is due, I beg you to deign to remember me in your holy prayers, to the 
end that the Lord for your intercessions may absolve me from the bands of my sins, since my own merits 
may not avail me. 

EPISTLE XXXIII. 

TO DOMINICUS. 

Gregory to Dominicus, Bishop of Carthage. 

The letter of your Holiness, which we received at the hands of the bearer of these presents, so expressed 
priestly moderation as to soothe us, in a manner, with the bodily presence of its author. Nor indeed does 
infrequency of communication cause any harm where the affection of love remains uninterrupted in one's 
mind. Great, moreover, is the power of charity, beloved brother, which binds hearts one to another in mutual 
affection with the chain of its sincerity, and suffers them not to be loosened from the cohesion of grace, which 
conjoins things disjoined, keeps together things united, and causes persons who are unknown by sight to 
be known through love. Whosoever therefore fixes his heart on the hinge of charity, him no impulse of any 
adversity whatever tears from the habitation of the heavenly country, since, in whatever direction he may turn 
himself, he parts not from the threshold of the commandments. Hence also it is said by the excellent 
preacher in praise of this same charity. Which is the band of perfectness (Coloss. ill. 14). We see, then, what 
great praise is due to that which not only engenders perfectness in the soul, but also binds it. 
Wherefore, since the language of thy letters shews thee to be inflamed with the fire of this virtue, I rejoice in 
the Lord with abundant exultation, and hope that it may shine forth in thee more and more, seeing that the 
flame of the shepherd is the light of the flock. For it becomes the Lord's priest(2) to shine in manners and life, 
to the end that the people committed to him may be able, as it were in the mirror of his life, both to choose 

what to follow, and to see what to correct. 

Knowing, furthermore, whence priestly ordination took its beginning in the African parts, you act laudably in 

recurring with wise recollection, in your love of the Apostolic See, to the origin of your office, and in 

continuing with commendable constancy in your affection towards it(3). For indeed it is certain that whatever 

reverence and devotion in priestly wise you shew to it, this you add to your own honour; seeing that you 

hereby invite it to be bound with answering love to you. 

It remains, most dear brother, that we beseech Almighty God with continual prayer that He would direct the 

steps of our hearts into the pathway of His truth, and bring us to the heavenly kingdoms, granting us by the 

grace of His protection to exhibit in our works the office which we bear in name. The Month of August, first 

lndiction(4). 

EPISTLE XXXIV. 

TO JOHN BISHOP OF SCYLLACIUM(5). 

Gregory to John, &c. 

It is evidently a very serious thing, and contrary to what a priest should aim at, to wish to disturb privileges 
formerly granted to any monastery, and to endeavour to bring to naught what has been arranged for quiet. 
Now the monks of the Castilliensian monastery in your Fraternity's city have complained to us that you are 
taking steps to impose upon the said monastery certain things contrary to what had been allowed by your 
predecessors and sanctioned by long custom, and to disturb ancient arrangements by a certain injurious 
novelty. Wherefore we hereby exhort your Fraternity that, if this is so, you refrain from troubling this 
monastery under any excuse, and that you try not, through any opportunity of usurpation, to upset what has 
been long secured to it, but that you study, without any gainsaying, to preserve all its privileges inviolate, 
and know that no more is lawful to you with regard to the said monastery than was lawful to your 
predecessors. 

Further, inasmuch as they have likewise complained that thy Fraternity has taken certain things from the 
monastery under the guise of their being, as it were, an offering(6), it is necessary that, if thou recollectest 
having received anything unbecomingly, thou restore it without delay, lest the sin of avarice seriously 
convict thee, whom priestly munificence ought to have shewn liberal towards monasteries. Therefore, while 
thou preservest all things which, as we have said, have been allowed and preserved by thy predecessors, 
let it be thy care to keep careful watch over the acts and lives of the monks residing there, and, if thou 
shouldest find any one living amiss, or (which God forbid) guilty of any sin of uncleanness, to correct such by 
strict and regular emendation. For, as we desire your Fraternity to abstain from incongruous usurpations, so 
we admonish you to be in all ways solicitous in what pertains to rectitude of discipline and the guardianship 
of souls. 

The monks of the aforesaid monastery have also informed us that the camp which is called Scillacium is 
built on ground belonging to their monastery, and that on this account those who live there pledged 
themselves in writing(7) to pay a solatium(8) every year; but that they afterwards thought scorn of it, and idly 
withheld their stipulated payment. Let then your Fraternity take care to learn the truth accurately; and, if you 
should find it so, urgently see to their not delaying to give what they promised, and what also reason 
requires; that so both they may possess quietly what they hold, and the rights of the monastery may incur no 
damage. 

Furthermore, the monks of the aforesaid monastery have complained to us that their abbot has granted to 
thy Fraternity by title of gift land within the camp of Scillacium, to the extent of six hundred feet, under pretext 
of building a church: and accordingly it is our will that as much land as the walls of the church, when built, can 
surround shall be claimed as belonging to the church. But let whatever may be outside the walls of the said 
church revert without dispute to the possession of the monastery. For the ordinances neither of worldly laws 
nor of the sacred canons permit the property of a monastery to be segregated by any title from its 
ownership. On this account restore thou this gift of land which has been granted against reason. 

EPISTLE XXXV. 

TO LEONTIUS, EX-CONSUL. 

Gregory to Leontius, &c. 

Since in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and of silver, but also of wood and of earth, and 
some indeed to honour but some to dishonour (2 Tim. ii. 20), who can be ignorant that in the bosom of the 
Universal Church some as vessels of dishonour are deputed to the lowest uses, but others, as vessels of 
honour, are fitted for clean uses. And yet it commonly comes to pass that the citizens of Babylon serve in 

task-work for Jerusalem, while the citizens of Jerusalem, that is of the heavenly country, are deputed to the 
task-work of Babylon. For when the elect of God, endowed with moral excellence, distinguished for 
moderation, seeking not their own gain, are deputed to earthly business, what else is it but that the citizens of 
holy Jerusalem serve in the work of Babylon? And when some, unbridled in immorality, hold places of holy 
dignity, and in the very things which they seem to do well seek praise to themselves, what else is it but that 
the citizens of Babylon execute the task-work of the heavenly Jerusalem? For so Judas, mixed with the 
apostles, long preached the Redeemer of the human race, and did signs with the rest; but, because he had 
been a citizen of Babylon, he executed his work as task-work for the heavenly Jerusalem. But on the other 
hand Joseph, being carried into Egypt, served an earthly court, bore the charge of administration in 
temporal things, exhibited whatever was justly due to a transitory kingdom; but, because he was still a 
citizen of holy Jerusalem, he administered the service of Babylon, as has been seen above, in the way of 
task-work only. A follower of him, good man, I believe thee to be, knowing thee, though involved in earthly 
action, to act with a gentle spirit, to keep in all respects the citadel of humility, and to give to every one what 
is just. For such good things are reported by many of your Glory that I would fain not hear of such things, but 
see them: yet still I am fed by the good renown of him whom I am not allowed to see. But the woman who 
poured from the alabaster box, exhibiting a type of the Holy Church, that is of all the elect, filled the house 
with the ointment (Luke vii.). And we, as often as we hear anything of good people, draw in as it were through 
our nostrils a breath of sweetness. And when Paul the Apostle said. We are a good odour of Christ unto God 
(2 Cor. ii. 15), it is plainly given to be understood that he exhibited himself as a savour indeed to the present, 
but as an odour to the absent. We therefore, while we cannot be nourished by the savour of your presence, 
are so by the odour of your absence. 

For this also we greatly rejoice, that the gifts which you sent us were not unlike your character. For indeed we 
received oil of the holy cross(9), and wood of aloes; one to bless by the touch, the other to give a sweet 
smell when kindled. For it was becoming that a good man should send us things that might appease the 
wrath of God against us. 

Many other things also you have sent for our store-houses, since, as we subsist both in soul and in flesh, it 
was needful that we should be sustained in both. And yet in transmitting these things your most sweet soul 
declares that it blushes much for shame, and holds out the shield of charity before this same 
shame-facedness. But I altogether rejoice in these words, since from this attestation of the soul I know that 
he can never take away what is another's who blushes even in bestowing what is his own. Your gifts 
however, which you call small, are great: but I think that your Glory's very humility enhances them yet the 
more. And you beg me to receive them kindly. But meanwhile recall to your memory the two mites of a 
certain widow (Luke xxvii.). For, if she pleased God who offered a little with a good will, why should not he 
please men who with a humble mind has given much? Furthermore we send you, as a blessing from Saint 
Peter, Prince of the apostles, a key of his most sacred sepulchre, in which is inserted a blessing from his 
chains(1), that what bound his neck for martyrdom may loose yours from all sins.
