Gregory of Nyssa, On Virginity
Translation: Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Schaff et al. (1886-1900), Public Domain
Source: https://archive.org/details/EarlyChurchFathers38Volumes

ON VIRGINITY 

INTRODUCTION. 

THE object of this treatise is to create in its readers a passion for the life according to excellence. There are 
many distractions(l), to use the word of the Divine Apostle, incident to the secular life; and so this treatise 
would suggest, as a necessary door of entrance to the holier life, the calling of Virginity; seeing that, while it 
is not easy in the entanglements of this secular life to find quietforthat of Divine contemplation, those on the 
other hand who have bid farewell to its troubles can with promptitude, and without distraction, pursue. 

assiduously their iiigiier studies. Now, wiiereas all advice is in itself weak, and mere words of exhortation 
will not make the task of recommending what is beneficial easier to any one, unless he has first given a 
noble aspect to that which he urges on his hearer, this discourse will accordingly begin with the praises of 
Virginity; the exhortation will come at the end; moreover, as the beauty in anything gains lustre by the 
contrast with its opposite, it is requisite that some mention should be made of the vexations of everyday life. 
Then it will be quite in the plan of this work to introduce a sketch of the contemplative life, and to prove the 
impossibility of any one attaining it who feel's the world's anxieties. In the devotee bodily desire has 
become weak; and so there will follow an inquiry as to the true object of desire, for which (and which only) we 
have received from our Maker our power of desiring. When this has received all possible illustration, it will 
seem to follow naturally that we should consider some method to attain it; and the true, virginity, which is free 
from any stain of sin, will be found to fit such a purpose. So all the intermediate part of the discourse, while it 
seems to look elsewhere, will be really tending to the praises of this virginity. All the particular rules obeyed 
by the followers of this high calling will, to avoid prolixity, be omitted here; the exhortation in the discourse will 
be introduced only in general terms, and for cases of wide application; but, in a way, particulars will be here 
included, and so nothing important will be overlooked, while prolixity is avoided. Each of us, too, is inclined 
to embrace some course of life with the greater enthusiasm, when he sees personalities who have already 
gained distinction in it; we have therefore made the requisite mention of saints who have gained their glory 
in celibacy. But further than this; the examples we have in biographies cannot stimulate to the attainment of 
excellence, so much as a living voice and an example which is still working for good; and so we have 
alluded to that most godly bishop(2), our father in God, who himself alone could be the master in such 
instructions. He will not indeed be mentioned by name, but by certain indications we shall say in cipher that 
he is meant. Thus, too, future readers will not think our advice unmeaning, when the candidate for this life is 
told to school himself by recent masters. But let them first fix their attention only on this: what such a master 
ought to be; then let them choose for their guidance those who have at any time by God's grace been 
raised up to be champions of this system of excellence; for either they will find what they seek, or at all 
events will be no longer ignorant what it ought to be. 

CHAPTER I. 

THE holy look of virginity is precious indeed in the judgment of all who make purity the test of beauty; but it 
belongs to those alone whose struggles to gain this object of a noble love are favoured and helped by the 
grace of God. Its praise is heard at once in the very name which goes with it; "Uncorrupted(3)" is the word 
commonly said of it, and this shows the kind of purity that is in it; thus we can measure by its equivalent term 
the height of this gift, seeing that amongst the many results of virtuous endeavour this alone has been 
honoured with the title of the thing that is uncorrupted. And if we must extol with laudations this gift from the 
great God, the words of His Apostle are sufficient in its praise; they are few, but they throw into the 
background all extravagant laudations; he only styles as "holy and without blemish(4)" her who has this 
grace for her ornament. Now if the achievement of this saintly virtue consists in making one "without blemish 
and holy," and these epithets are adopted in their first and fullest force to glorify the incorruptible Deity, what 
greater praise of virginity can there be than thus to be shown in a manner deifying those who share in her 
pure mysteries, so that they become partakers of His glory Who is in actual truth the only Holy and 
Blameless One; their purity and their incorruptibility being the means of bringing them into relationship with 
Him ? Many who write lengthy laudations in detailed treatises, with the view of adding something to the 
wonder of this grace, unconsciously defeat, in my opinion, their own end; the fulsome manner in which they 
amplify their subject brings its credit into suspicion. Nature's greatnesses have their own way of striking with 
admiration; they do not need the pleading of words: the sky, for instance, or the sun, or any other wonder of 
the universe. In the business of this lower world words certainly act as a basement, and the skill of praise 
does impart a look of magnificence; so much so, that mankind are apt to suspect as the result of mere art 
the wonder produced by panegyric. So the one sufficient way of praising virginity will be to show that that 
virtue is above praise, and to evince our admiration of it by our lives rather than by our words. A man who 
takes this theme for ambitious praise has the appearance of supposing that one drop of his own 
perspiration will make an appreciable increase of the boundless ocean, if indeed he believes, as he does, 
that any human words can give more dignity to so rare a grace; he must be ignorant either of his own 
powers or of that which he attempts to praise. 

CHAPTER II. 

DEEP indeed will be the thought necessary to understand the surpassing excellence of this grace. It is 
comprehended in the idea of the Father incorrupt; and here at the outset is a paradox, viz. that virginity is 

found in Him, Wiio lias a Son and yet witiiout passion lias begotten Him. It is included too in the nature of this 
Only-begotten God, Who struck the first note of all this moral innocence; it shines forth equally in His pure 
and passionless generation. Again a paradox; that the Son should be known to us by virginity. It is seen, 
too, in the inherent and incorruptible purity of the Holy Spirit; for when you have named the pure and 
incorruptible you have named virginity. It accompanies the whole supramundane existence; because of its 
passionlessness it is always present with the powers above; never separated from aught that is Divine, it 
never touches the opposite of this. All whose instinct and will have found their level in virtue are beautified 
with this perfect purity of the uncorrupted state; all who are ranked in the opposite class of character are what 
they are, and are called so, by reason of their fall from purity. What force of expression, then, will be 
adequate to such a grace? How can there be no cause to fear lest the greatness of its intrinsic value should 
be impaired by the efforts of any one's eloquence? The estimate of it which he will create will be less than 
that which his hearers had before. It will be well, then, to omit all laudation in this case; we cannot lift words to 
the height of our theme. On the contrary, it is possible to be ever mindful of this gift of God; and our lips may 
always speak of this blessing; that, though it is the property of spiritual existence and of such singular 
excellence, yet by the love of God it has been bestowed on those who have received their life from the will 
of the flesh and from blood; that, when human nature has been based by passionate inclinations, it stretches 
out its offer of purity like a hand to raise it up again and make it look above. This, I think, was the reason why 
our Master, Jesus Christ Himself, the Fountain of all innocence, did not come into the world by wedlock. It 
was, to divulge by the manner of His Incarnation this great secret; that purity is the only complete 
indication(5) of the presence of God and of His coming, and that no one can in reality secure this for himself, 
unless he has altogether estranged himself from the passions of the flesh. What happened in the stainless 
Mary when the fulness of the Godhead which was in Christ shone out through her, that happens in every soul 
that leads by rule the virgin life. No longer indeed does the Master come with bodily presence; "we know 
Christ no longer according to the flesh 6"; but, spiritually. He dwells in us and brings His Father with Him, as 
the Gospel somewhere(7) tells. Seeing, then, that virginity means so much as this, that while it remains m 
Heaven with the Father of spirits, and moves in the dance of the celestial powers, it nevertheless stretches 
out hands for man's salvation; that while it is the channel which draws down the Deity to share man's estate, 
it keeps wings for man's desires to rise to heavenly things, and is a bond of union between the Divine and 
human, by its mediation bringing into harmony these existences so widely divided-what words could be 
discovered powerful enough to reach this wondrous height? But still, it is monstrous to seem like creatures 
without expression and without feeling; and we must choose (if we are silent) one of two things; either to 
appear never to have felt the special beauty of virginity, or to exhibit ourselves as obstinately blind to all 
beauty: we have consented therefore to speak briefly about this virtue, according to the wish of him who has 
assigned us this task, and whom in all things we must obey. But let no one expect from us any display of 
style; even if we wished it, perhaps we could not produce it, for we are quite unversed in that kind of writing. 
Even if we possessed such power, we would not prefer the favour of the few to the edification of the many. A 
writer of sense should have, I take it, for his chiefest object not to be admired above all other writers, but to 
profit both himself and them, the many. 

CHAPTER III. 

WOULD indeed that some profit might come to myself from this effort! I should have undertaken this labour 
with the greater readiness, if I could have hope of sharing, according to the Scripture, in the fruits of the 
plough and the threshing-floor; the toil would then have been a pleasure. As it is, this my knowledge of the 
beauty of virginity is in some sort vain and useless to me, just as the corn is to the muzzled ox that treads(8) 
the floor, or the water that streams from the precipice to a thirsty man when he cannot reach it. Happy they 
who have still the power of choosing the better way, and have not debarred themselves from it by 
engagements of the secular life, as we have, whom a gulf now divides from glorious virginity: no one can 
climb up to that who has once planted his foot upon the secular life. We are but spectators of others' 
blessings and witnesses to the happiness of another(9) class. Even if we strike out some fitting thoughts 
about virginity, we shall not be better than the cooks and scullions who provide sweet luxuries for the tables 
of the rich, without having any portion themselves in What they prepare. What a blessing if it had been 
otherwise, if we had not to learn the good by after-regrets! Now they are the enviable ones, they succeed 
even beyond their prayers and their desires, who have not put out of their power the enjoyment of these 
delights. We are like those who have a wealthy society with which to compare their own poverty, and so are 
all the more vexed and discontented with their present lot. The more exactly we understand the riches of 
virginity, the more we must bewail the other life; for we realize by this contrast with better things, how poor it is. 
I do not speak only of the future rewards in store for those who have lived thus excellently, but those rewards 
also which they have while alive here; for if any one would make up his mind to measure exactly the 
difference between the two courses, he would find it well-nigh as great as that between heaven and earth. 

The truth of this statement may be known by looking at actual facts. 

But in writing this sad tragedy what will be a fit beginning? How shall we really bring to view the evils 
common to life? All men know them by experience, but somehow nature has contrived to blind the actual 
sufferers so that they willingly ignore their condition. Shall we begin with its choicest sweets? Well then, is not 
the sum total of all that is hoped for in marriage to get delightful companionship? Grant this obtained; let us 
sketch a marriage in every way most happy; illustrious birth, competent means, suitable ages, the very 
flower of the prime of life, deep affection, the very best that each can think of the other(1), that sweet rivalry of 
each wishing to surpass the other in loving; in addition, popularity, power, wide reputation, and everything 
else. But observe that even beneath this array of blessings the fire of an inevitable pain is smouldering. I do 
not speak of the envy that is always springing up against those of distinguished rank, and the liability to 
attack which hangs over those who seem prosperous, and that natural hatred of superiors shown by those 
who do not share equally in the good fortune, which make these seemingly favoured ones pass an anxious 
time more full of pain than pleasure. I omit that from the picture, and will suppose that envy against them is 
asleep; although it would not be easy to find a single life in which both these blessings were joined, i.e. 
happiness above the common, and escape from envy. However, let us, if so it is to be, suppose a married 
life free from all such trials; and let us see if it is possible for those who live with such an amount of good 
fortune to enjoy it. Why, what kind of vexation is left, you will ask, when even envy of their happiness does 
not reach them? I affirm that this very, thing, this sweetness that surrounds their lives is the spark which 
kindles pain. They are human all the time, things weak and perishing they have to look upon the tombs of 
their progenitors; and so pain is inseparably bound up with their existence, if they have the least power of 
reflection. This continued expectancy of death, realized by no sure tokens, but hanging over them the 
terrible uncertainty of the future, disturbs their present joy, clouding it over with the fear of what is coming. If 
only, before experience comes, the results of experience could be learnt, or if, when one has entered on this 
course, it were possible by some other means of conjecture to survey the reality, then what a crowd of 
deserters would run from marriage into the virgin life; what care and eagerness never to be entangled in that 
retentive snare, where no one knows for certain how the net galls till they have actually entered it! You would 
see there, if only you could do it without danger, many contraries uniting; smiles melting into tears, pain 
mingled with pleasure, death always hanging by expectation over the children that are born, and putting a 
finger upon each of the sweetest joys. Whenever the husband looks at the beloved face, that moment the 
fear of separation accompanies the look. If he listens to the sweet voice, the thought comes into his mind 
that some day he will not hear it. Whenever he is glad with gazing on her beauty, then he shudders most with 
the presentiment of mourning her loss. When he marks all those charms which to youth are so precious and 
which the thoughtless seek for, the bright eyes beneath the lids, the arching eyebrows, the cheek with its 
sweet and dimpling smile, the natural red that blooms upon the lips, the gold-bound hair shining in 
many-twisted masses on the head, and all that transient grace, then, though he may be little given to 
reflection, he must have this thought also in his inmost soul that some day all this beauty will melt away and 
become as nothing, turned after all this show into noisome and unsightly bones, which wear no trace, no 
memorial, no remnant of that living bloom. Can he live delighted when he thinks of that? Can he trust in these 
treasures which he holds as if they would be always his? Nay, it is plain that he will stagger as if he were 
mocked by a dream, and will have his faith in life shaken, and will look upon what he sees as no longer his. 
You will understand, if you have a comprehensive view of things as they are, that nothing in this life looks 
that which it is. It shows to us by the illusions of our imagination one thing, instead of something else. Men 
gaze open-mouthed at it, and it mocks them with hopes; for a while it hides itself beneath this deceitful show; 
then all of a sudden in the reverses of life it is revealed as something different from that which men's hopes, 
conceived by its fraud in foolish hearts, had pictured. Will life's sweetness seem worth taking delight in to 
him who reflects on this? Will he ever be able really to feel it, so as to have joy in the goods he holds? Will 
he not, disturbed by the constant fear of some reverse, have the use without the enjoyment? I will but 
mention the portents, dreams, omens, and such-like things which by a foolish habit of thought are taken 
notice of, and always make men fear the worst. But her time of labour comes upon the young wife; and the 
occasion is regarded not as the bringing of a child into the world, but as the approach of death; in bearing it 
is expected that she will die; and, indeed, often this sad presentiment is true, and before they spread the 
birthday feast, before they taste any of their expected joys, they have to change their rejoicing into 
lamentation. Still in love's fever, still at the height of their passionate affection, not yet having grasped life's 
sweetest gifts, as in the vision of a dream, they are suddenly torn away from all they possessed. But what 
comes next? Domestics, like: conquering foes, dismantle the bridal chamber; they deck it for the funeral, but 
it is death's(2) room now; they make the useless wailings(3) and beatings of the hands. Then there is the 
memory of former days, curses on those who advised the marriage, recriminations against friends who did 
not stop it; blame thrown on parents whether they be alive or dead, bitter outbursts against human destiny, 
arraigning of the whole course of nature, complaints and accusations even against the Divine government; 
war within the man himself, and fighting with those who would admonish; no repugnance to the most 

shocking words and acts. In some this state of mind continues, and their reason is more completely 
swallowed up by grief; and their tragedy has a sadder ending, the victim not enduring to survive the 
calamity. But rather than this let us suppose a happier case. The danger of childbirth is past; a child is born 
to them, the very image of its parents' beauty. Are the occasions for grief at all lessened thereby? Rather 
they are increased; for the parents retain all their former fears, and feel in addition those on behalf of the 
child, lest anything should happen to it in its bringing up; for instance a bad accident, or by some turn of 
misfortunes a sickness, a fever(4), any dangerous disease. Both parents share alike in these; but who could 
recount the special anxieties of the wife? We omit the most obvious, which all can understand, the weariness 
of pregnancy, the danger in childbirth, the cares of nursing, the tearing of her heart in two for her offspring, 
and, if she is the mother of many, the dividing of her soul into as many parts as she has children; the 
tenderness with which she herself feels all that is happening to them. That is well understood by every one. 
But the oracle of God tells us that she is not her own mistress, but finds her resources only in him whom 
wedlock has made her lord; and so, if she be for ever so short a time left alone, she feels as if she were 
separated from her head and can ill bear it; she even takes this short absence of her husband to be the 
prelude to her widowhood; her fear makes her at once give up all hope; accordingly her eyes, filled with 
terrified suspense, are always fixed upon the door; her ears are always busied with what others are 
whispering; her heart, stung with her fears, is well-nigh bursting even before any bad(5) news has arrived; a 
noise in the doorway, whether fancied or real, acts as a messenger of ill, and on a sudden shakes her very 
soul; most likely all outside is well, and there is no cause to fear at all; but her fainting spirit is quicker than 
any message, and turns her fancy from good tidings to despair. Thus even the most favoured live, and they 
are not altogether to be envied; their life is not to be compared to the freedom of virginity. Yet this hasty 
sketch has omitted many of the more distressing details. Often this young wife too, just wedded, still brilliant 
in bridal grace, still perhaps blushing when her bridegroom enters, and shyly stealing furtive glances at him, 
when passion is all the more intense because modesty prevents it being shown, suddenly has to take the 
name of a poor lonely widow and be called all that is pitiable. Death comes in an instant and changes that 
bright creature in her white and rich attire into a black-robed mourner. He takes off the bridal ornaments and 
clothes her with the colours of bereavement. There is darkness in the once cheerful room, and the 
waitingwomen sing their long dirges. She hates her friends when they try to soften her grief; she will not take 
food, she wastes away, and her soul's deep dejection has a strong longing only for her death, a longing 
which often lasts till it comes. Even supposing that time puts an end to this sorrow, still another comes, 
whether she has children or not. If she has, they are fatherless, and, as objects of pity themselves, renew the 
memory of her loss. If she is childless, then the name of her lost husband is rooted up, and this grief is 
greater than the seeming consolation. I will say little of the other special sorrows of widowhood; for who 
could enumerate them all exactly? She finds her enemies in her relatives. Some actually take advantage of 
her affliction. Others exult over her loss, and see with malignant joy the home failing to pieces, the insolence 
of the servants, and the other distresses visible in such a case, of which there are plenty. In consequence of 
these, many women are compelled to risk once more the trial of the same things, not being able to endure 
this bitter derision. As if they could revenge insults by increasing their own sufferings! Others, remembering 
the past, will put up with anything rather than plunge a second time into the like troubles. If you wish to learn 
all the trials of this married life, listen to those women who actually know it. How they congratulate those who 
have chosen from the first the virgin life, and have not had to learn by experience about the better way, that 
virginity is fortified against all these ills, that it has no orphan state, no widowhood to mourn; it is always in the 
presence of the undying Bridegroom; it has the offspring of devotion always to rejoice in; it sees continually 
a home that is truly its own, furnished with every treasure because the Master always dwells there; in this 
case death does not bring separation, but union with Him Who is longed for; for when (a soul) departs(6), 
then it is with Christ, as the Apostle says. But it is time, now that we have examined on the one side the 
feelings of those whose lot is happy, to make a revelation of other lives, where poverty and adversity and 
all the other evils which men have to suffer are a fixed condition; deformities, I mean, and diseases, and all 
other lifelong afflictions. He whose life is contained in himself either escapes them altogether or can bear 
them easily, possessing a collected mind which is not distracted from itself; while he who shares himself with 
wife and child often has not a moment to bestow even upon regrets for his own condition, because anxiety 
for his dear ones fills his heart. But it is superfluous to dwell upon that which every one knows. If to What 
seems prosperity such pain and weariness is bound, what may we not expect of the opposite condition? 
Every description which attempts to represent it to our view will fall short of the reality. Yet perhaps we may in 
a very few words declare the depths of its misery. Those whose lot is contrary to that which passes as 
prosperous receive their sorrows as well from causes contrary to that. Prosperous lives are marred by the 
expectancy, or the presence, of death; but the misery of these is that death delays his coming. These lives 
then are widely divided by opposite feelings; although equally without hope, they converge to the same 
end. So many-sided, then, so strangely different are the ills with which marriage supplies the world. There is 
pain always, whether children are born, or can never be expected, whether they live, or die. One abounds in 

them but has not enough means for their support; another feels the want of an heir to the great fortune he has 
toiled for, and regards as a blessing the other's misfortune each of them, in fact, wishes for that very thing 
which he sees the other regretting. Again, one man loses by death a much-loved(7) son; another has a 
reprobate son alive; both equally to be pitied, though the one mourns over the death, the other over the life, 
of his boy. Neither will I do more than mention how sadly and disastrously family jealousies and quarrels, 
arising from real or fancied causes, end. Who could go completely into all those details? If you would know 
what a network of these evils human life is, you need not go back again to those old stories which have 
furnished subjects to dramatic poets. They are regarded as myths on account of their shocking 
extravagance there are in them murders and eating of children husband-murders, murders of mothers and 
brothers, incestuous unions, and every sort of disturbance of nature; and yet the old chronicler begins the 
story which ends in such horrors with marriage. But turning from all that, gaze only upon the tragedies that are 
being enacted on this life's stage; it is marriage that supplies mankind with actors there. Go to the lawcourts 
and read through the laws there; then you will know the shameful secrets of marriage. Just as when you hear 
a physician explaining various diseases, you understand the misery of the human frame by learning the 
number and the kind of sufferings it is liable to, so when you peruse the laws and read there the strange 
variety of crimes in marriage to which their penalties are attached, you will have a pretty accurate idea of its 
properties; for the law does not provide remedies for evils which do not exist, any more than a physician has 
a treatment for diseases which are never known. 

CHAPTER IV. 

BUT we need no lodger show in this narrow way the drawback of this life, as if the number of its ills was 
limited to adulteries, dissensions, and plots. I think we should take the higher and truer view, and say at 
once that none of that evil in life, which is visible in all its business and in all its pursuits, can have any hold 
over a man, if he will not put himself in the fetters of this course. The truth of what we say will be clear thus. A 
man who, seeing through the illusion with the eye of his spirit purged, lifts himself above the struggling world, 
and, to use the words of the Apostle, slights it all as but dung, in away exiling himself altogether from human 
life by his abstinence from marriage,-that man has no fellowship whatever with the sins of mankind, such as 
avarice, envy, anger, hatred, and everything of the kind. He has an exemption from all this, and is in every 
way free and at peace; there is nothing in him to provoke his neighbours' envy, because he clutches none 
of those objects round which envy in this life gathers. He has raised his own life above the world, and prizing 
virtue as his only precious possession he will pass his days in painless peace and quiet. For virtue is a 
possession which, though all according to their capacity should share it, yet will be always in abundance for 
those who thirst after it; unlike the occupation of the lands on this earth, which men divide into sections, and 
the more they add to the one the more they take from the other, so that the one person's gain is his fellow's 
loss; whence arise the fights for the lion's share, from men's hatred of being cheated. But the larger owner of 
this possession is never envied; he who snatches the lion's share does no damage to him who claims 
equal participation; as each is capable each has this noble longing satisfied, while the wealth of virtues in 
those who are already occupiers(8) is not exhausted. The man, then, who, with his eyes only on such a life, 
makes virtue, which has no limit that man can devise, his only treasure, will surely never brook to bend his 
soul to any of those low courses which multitudes tread. He will not admire earthly riches, or human power, 
or any of those things which folly seeks. If, indeed, his mind is still pitched so low, he is outside our band of 
novices, and our words do not apply to him. But if his thoughts are above, walking as it were with God, he will 
be lifted out of the maze of all these errors; for the predisposing cause of them all, marriage, has not touched 
him. Now the wish to be before others is the deadly sin of pride, and one would not be far wrong in saying 
that this is the seed-root of all the thorns of sin; but it is from reasons connected with marriage that this pride 
mostly begins. To show what I mean, we generally find the grasping man throwing the blame on his nearest 
kin; the man mad after notoriety and ambition generally makes his family responsible for this sin: "he must 
not be thought inferior to his forefathers; he must be deemed a great man by the generation to come by 
leaving his children historic records of himself : so also the other maladies of the soul, envy, spite, hatred 
and such-like, are connected with this cause; they are to be found amongst those who are eager about the 
things of this life. He who has fled from it gazes as from some high watch-tower on the prospect of humanity, 
and pities these slaves of vanity for their blindness in setting such a value on bodily well-being. He sees 
some distinguished person giving himself airs because of his public honours, and wealth, and power, and 
only laughs at the folly of being so puffed up. He gives to the years of human life the longest number, 
according to the Psalmist's computation, and then compares this atom-interval with the endless ages, and 
pities the vain glory of those who excite themselves for such low and petty and perishable things. What, 
indeed, amongst the things here is there enviable in that which so many strive for,-honour? What is gained 
by those who win it? The mortal remains mortal whether he is honoured or not. What good does the 
possessor of many acres gain in the end? Except that the foolish man thinks his own that which never 

belongs to him, ignorant seemingly in his greed that "the earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof(9)," for 
"God is king of all the earth(9)." It is the passion of having which gives men a false title of lordship over that 
which can never belong to them. "The earth," says the wise Preacher, "abideth for ever(1)," ministering to 
every generation, first one, then another, that is born upon it; but men, though they are so little even their own 
masters, that they are brought into life without knowing it by their Maker's will, and before they wish are 
withdrawn from it, nevertheless in their excessive vanity think that they are her lords; that they, now born, now 
dying, rule that which remains continually. One who reflecting on this holds cheaply all that mankind prizes, 
whose only love is the divine life, because "all flesh is grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of 
grass(2)," can never care for this grass which "to-day is and to-morrow is not"; studying the divine ways, he 
knows not only that human life has no fixity, but that the entire universe will not keep on its quiet course for 
ever; he neglects his existence here as an alien and a passing thing; for the Saviour said, "Heaven and 
earth shall, pass away(3)," the whole of necessity awaits its refashioning. As long as he is "in this 
tabernacle(4)." exhibiting mortality, weighed down with this existence, he laments the lengthening of his 
sojourn in it; as the Psalmist-poet says in his heavenly songs. Truly, they live in darkness who sojourn in 
these living tabernacles; wherefore that preacher, groaning at the continuance of this sojourn, says, "Woe is 
me that my sojourn is prolonged(5)," and he attributes the cause of his dejection to "darkness"; for we know 
that darkness is called in the Hebrew language "kedar." It is indeed a darkness as of the night which 
envelops mankind, and prevents them seeing this deceit and knowing that all which is most prized by the 
living, and moreover all which is the reverse, exists only in the conception of the unreflecting, and is in itself 
nothing; there is no such reality anywhere as obscurity of birth, or illustrious birth, or glory, or splendour, or 
ancient renown, or present elevation, or power over others, or subjection. Wealth and comfort, poverty and 
distress, and all the other inequalities of life, seem to the ignorant, applying the test of pleasure, vastly 
different from each other. But to the higher understanding they are all alike; one is not of greater value than 
the other; because life runs on to the finish with the same speed through all these opposites, and in the lots 
of either class there remains the same power of choice to live welt or ill, "through armour on the right hand 
and on the left, through evil report and good report(6)." Therefore the clearseeing mind which measures 
reality will journey on its path without turning, accomplishing its appointed time from its birth to its exit; it is 
neither softened by the pleasures nor beaten down by the hardships; but, as is the way with travellers, it 
keeps advancing always, and takes but little notice of the views presented. It is the travellers' way to press 
on to their journey's end', no matter whether they are passing through meadows and cultivated farms, or 
through wilder and more rugged spots; a smiling landscape does not detain them; nor a gloomy one check 
their speed. So, too, that lofty mind will press straight on to its self-imposed end, not turning aside to see 
anything on the way. It passes through life, but its gaze is fixed on heaven; it is the good steersman directing 
the bark to some landmark there. But the grosser mind looks down; it bends its energies to bodily pleasures 
as surely as the sheep stoop to their pasture; it lives for gorging and still lower pleasures(7); it is alienated 
from the life of God(8), and a stranger to the promise of the Covenants; it recognizes no good but the 
gratification of the body. It is a mind such as this that "walks in darkness(9)," and invents all the evil in this life 
of ours; avarice, passions unchecked, unbounded luxury, lust of power, vain-glory, the whole mob of moral 
diseases that invade men's homes. In these vices, one somehow holds closely to another; where one has 
entered all the rest seem to follow, dragging each other in a natural order, just as in a chain, when you have 
jerked the first link, the others cannot rest, and even the link at the other end feels the motion of the first, which 
passes thence by virtue of their contiguity through the intervening links; so firmly are men's vices linked 
together by their very nature; when one of them has gained the mastery of a soul, the rest of the train follow. If 
you want a graphic picture of this accursed chain, suppose a man who because of some special pleasure it 
gives him is a victim to his thirst for fame; then a desire to increase his fortune follows close upon this thirst 
for fame; he becomes grasping; but only because the first vice leads him on to this. Then this grasping after 
money and superiority engenders either anger with his kith and kin, or pride towards his inferiors, or envy of 
those above him; then hypocrisy comes in after this envy; a soured temper after that; a misanthropical spirit 
after that; and behind them all a state of condemnation which ends in the dark fires of hell. You see the chain; 
how all follows from one cherished passion. Seeing, then, that this inseparable train of moral diseases has 
entered once for all into the world, one single way of escape is pointed out to us in the exhortations of the 
inspired writings; and that is to separate ourselves from the life which involves this sequence of sufferings. If 
we haunt Sodom, we cannot escape the rain of fire; nor if one who has fled out of her looks back upon her 
desolation, can he fail to become a pillar of salt rooted to the spot. We cannot be rid of the Egyptian 
bondage, unless we leave Egypt, that is, this life that lies under water(1), and pass, not that Red Sea, but this 
black and gloomy Sea of life. But suppose we remain in this evil bondage, and, to use the Master's words, 
"the truth shall not have made us free;" how can one who seeks a lie and wanders in the maze of this world 
ever come to the truth? How can one who has surrendered his existence to be chained by nature run away 
from this captivity? An illustration will make our meaning, clearer. A winter torrent(2), which, impetuous in 
itself, becomes swollen and carries down beneath its stream trees and boulders and anything that comes in 

its way, is deatii and danger to tiiose alone wiio live along its course; for those who have got well out of its 
way it rages in vain. Just so, only the man who lives in the turmoil of life has to feel its force; only he has to 
receive those sufferings which nature's stream, descending in a flood of troubles, must, to be true to its kind, 
bring to those who journey on its banks. But if a man leaves this torrent, and these "proud waters(3)," he will 
escape from being "a prey to the teeth" of this life, as the Psalm goes on to say, and, as "a bird from the 
snare," on virtue's wings. This simile, then, of the torrent holds; human life is a tossing and tumultuous stream 
sweeping down to find its natural level; none of the objects sought for in it last till the seekers are satisfied; all 
that is carried to them by this stream comes near, just touches them, and passes on; so that the present 
moment in this impetuous flow eludes enjoyment, for the after-current snatches it from their view. It would be 
our interest therefore to keep far away from such a stream, lest, engaged on temporal things, we should 
neglect eternity. How can a man keep for ever anything here, be his love for it never so passionate? Which 
of life's most cherished objects endures always? What flower of prime? What gift of strength and beauty? 
What wealth, or fame, or power? They all have their transient bloom, and then melt away into their 
opposites. Who can continue in life's prime? Whose strength lasts for ever? Has not Nature made the 
bloom of beauty even more shortlived than the shows of spring? For they blossom in their season, and after 
withering for a while again revive: after another shedding they are again in leaf, and retain their beauty of 
to-day to a late prime. But Nature exhibits the human bloom only in the spring of early life; then she kills it; it is 
vanished in the frosts of age. All other delights also deceive the bodily eye for a time, and then pass behind 
the veil of oblivion. Nature's inevitable changes are many; they agonize him whose love is passionate. One 
way of escape is open: it is, to be attached to none of these things, and to get as far away as possible from 
the society of this emotional and sensual world; or rather, for a man to go outside the feelings which his own 
body gives rise to. Then, as he does not live for the flesh, he will not be subject to the troubles of the flesh. 
But this amounts to living for the spirit only, and imitating all we can the employment of the world of spirits. 
There they neither marry, nor are given in marriage. Their work and their excellence is to contemplate the 
Father of all purity, and to beautify the lines of their own character from the Source of all beauty, so far as 
imitation of It is possible. 

CHAPTER V. 

Now we declare that Virginity is man's "fellow-worker" and helper in achieving the aim of this lofty passion. In 
other sciences men have devised certain practical methods for cultivating the particular subject; and so, I 
take it, virginity is the practical method in the science of the Divine life, furnishing men with the power of 
assimilating themselves with spiritual natures. The constant endeavour in such a course is to prevent the 
nobility of the soul from being lowered by those sensual outbreaks, in which the mind no longer maintains its 
heavenly thoughts and upward gaze, but sinks down to the emotions belonging to the flesh and blood. How 
can the soul which is riveted(4) to the pleasures of the flesh and busied with merely human longings turn a 
disengaged eye upon its kindred intellectual light? This evil, ignorant, and prejudiced bias towards material 
things will prevent it. The eyes of swine, turning naturally downward, have no glimpse of the wonders of the 
sky; no more can the soul whose body drags it down look any longer upon the beauty above; it must pore 
perforce upon things which though natural are low and animal. To look with a free devoted gaze upon 
heavenly delights, the soul will turn itself from earth; it will not even partake of the recognized indulgences of 
the secular life; it will transfer all its powers of affection from material objects to the intellectual contemplation 
of immaterial beauty. Virginity of the body is devised to further such a disposition of the soul; it aims at 
creating in it a complete forgetfulness of natural emotions; it would prevent the necessity of ever descending 
to the call of fleshly needs. Once freed from such, the soul runs no risk of becoming, through a growing habit 
of indulging in that which seems to a certain extent conceded by nature's law, inattentive and ignorant of 
Divine and undefiled delights. Purity of the heart, that master of our lives, alone can capture them. 

CHAPTER VI. 

THIS, I believe, makes the greatness of the prophet Ellas, and of him who afterwards appeared in the spirit 
and power of Ellas, than whom "of those that are born of women there was none greater(5)." If their history 
conveys any other mystic lesson, surely this above all is taught by their special mode of life, that the man 
whose thoughts are fixed upon the invisible is necessarily separated from all the ordinary events of life; his 
judgments as to the True Good cannot be confused and led astray by the deceits arising from the senses. 
Both, from their youth upwards, exiled themselves from human society, and in a way from human nature, in 
their neglect of the usual kinds of meat and drink, and their sojourn in the desert. The wants of each were 
satisfied by the nourishment that came in their way, so that their taste might remain simple and unspoilt, as 
their ears were free from any distracting noise, and their eyes from any wandering look. Thus they attained a 
cloudless calm of soul, and were raised to that height of Divine favour which Scripture records of each. 

Elias, for instance; became the dispenser of God's eartiily gifts; lie iiad autiiority to close at will the uses of 
the sky against the sinners and to open them to the penitent. John is not said indeed to have done any 
miracle; but the gift in him was pronounced by Him Who sees the secrets of a man greater than any 
prophet's. This was so, we may presume, because both, from beginning to end, so dedicated their hearts to 
the Lord that they were unsullied by any earthly passion; because the love of wife or child, or any other 
human call, did not intrude upon them, and they did not even think their daily sustenance worthy of anxious 
thought; because they showed themselves to be above any magnificence (6) of dress, arid made shift with 
that which chance offered them, one clothing himself in goat-skins, the other with camel's hair. It is my belief 
that they would not have reached to this loftiness of spirit, if marriage had softened them. This is not simple 
history only; it is "written for our admonition(7)," that we might direct our lives by theirs. What, then, do we 
learn thereby? This: that the man who longs for union with God must, like those saints, detach his mind from 
all worldly business. It is impossible for the mind which is poured into many channels to win its way to the 
knowledge and the love of God. 

CHAPTER VII. 

AN illustration will make our teaching on this subject clearer. Imagine a stream flowing from a spring and 
dividing itself off into a number of accidental channels. As long as it proceeds so it will be useless for any 
purpose of agriculture, the dissipation of its waters making each particular current small and feeble, and 
therefore slow. But if one were to mass these wandering and widely dispersed rivulets again into one single 
channel, he would have a full and collected stream for the supplies which life demands. Just so the human 
mind(so it seems to me), as long as its current spreads itself in all directions over the pleasures of the 
sense, has no power that is worth the naming of making its way towards the Real Good; but once call it back 
and collect it upon itself, so that it may begin to move without scattering and wandering towards the activity 
which is congenital and natural to it, it will find no obstacle in mounting to higher things, and in grasping 
realities. We often see water contained in a pipe bursting upwards through this constraining force, which will 
not let it leak; and this, in spite of its natural gravitation: in the same way, the mind of man, enclosed in the 
compact channel of an habitual continence, and not having any side issues, will be raised by virtue of its 
natural powers of motion to an exalted love. In fact, its Maker ordained that it should always move, and to 
stop is impossible to it; when therefore it is prevented employing this power upon trifles, it cannot be but that 
it will speed toward the truth, all improper exits being closed. In the case of many turnings we see travellers 
can keep to the direct route, when they have learnt that the other roads are wrong, and so avoid them; the 
more they keep out of these wrong directions, the more they will preserve the straight course; in like manner 
the mind in turning from vanities will recognize the truth. The great prophets, then, whom we have mentioned 
seem to teach this lesson, viz. to entangle ourselves with none of the objects of this world's effort; marriage 
is one of these, or rather it is the primal root of all striving after vanities. 

CHAPTER VIM. 

LET no one think however that herein we depreciate marriage as an institution. We are well aware that it is 
not a stranger to God's blessing. But since the common instincts of mankind can plead sufficiently on its 
behalf, instincts which prompt by a spontaneous bias to take the high road of marriage for the procreation of 
children, whereas Virginity in a way thwarts this natural impulse, it is a superfluous task to compose formally 
an Exhortation to marriage. We put forward the pleasure of it instead, as a most doughty champion on its 
behalf. It may be however, notwithstanding this, that there is some need of such a treatise, occasioned by 
those who travesty the teaching of the Church. Such persons(8) "have their conscience seared with a hot 
iron," as the Apostle expresses it; and very truly too, considering that, deserting the guidance of the Holy 
Spirit for the "doctrines of devils," they have some ulcers and blisters stamped upon their hearts, 
abominating God's creatures, and calling them "foul," "seducing," "mischievous," and so on. "But what have 
I to do to judge them that are without(9)?" asks the Apostle. Truly those persons are outside the Court in 
which the words of our mysteries are spoken; they are not installed under God's roof, but in the monastery of 
the Evil One. They "are taken captive by him at his will(1)." They therefore do not understand that all virtue is 
found in moderation, and that any declension to either side(2) of it becomes a vice. He, in fact, who grasps 
the middle point between doing too little and doing too much has hit the distinction between vice and virtue. 
Instances will make this clearer. Cowardice and audacity are two recognized vices opposed to each other; 
the one the defect, the other the excess of confidence; between them lies courage. Again, piety is neither 
atheism nor superstition; it is equally impious to deny a God and to believe in many gods. Is there need of 
more eXamples to bring this principle home? The man who avoids both meanness and prodigality will by 
this shunning of extremes form the moral habit of liberality; for liberality is the thing which is neither inclined to 
spend at random vast and useless sums, nor yet to be closely calculating in necessary expenses. We 

need not go into details in tiie case of all good qualities. Reason, in all of them, has established virtue to be 
a middle state between two extremes. Sobriety itself therefore is a middle state, and manifestly involves the 
two declensions on either side towards vice; he, that is, who is wanting in firmness of soul, and is so easily 
worsted in the combat with pleasure as never even to have approached the path of a virtuous and sober 
life, slides into shameful indulgence; while he who goes beyond the safe ground of sobriety and overshoots 
the moderation of this virtue, falls as it were from a precipice into the "doctrines of devils," "having his 
conscience seared with a hot iron." In declaring marriage abominable he brands himself with such 
reproaches; for "if the tree is corrupt" (as the Gospel says), "the fruit also of the tree will be like it(3)"; if a man 
is the shoot and fruitage of the tree of marriage, reproaches cast on that turn upon him who casts them(4). 
These persons, then, are like branded criminals already; their conscience is covered with the stripes of this 
unnatural teaching. But our view of marriage is this; that, while the pursuit of heavenly things should be a 
man's first care, yet if he can use the advantages of marriage with sobriety and moderation, he need not 
despise this way of serving the state. An example might be found in the patriarch Isaac. He married 
Rebecca when he was past the flower of his age and his prime was well-nigh spent, so that his marriage 
was not the deed of passion, but because of God's blessing that should be upon his seed. He cohabited 
with her till the birth of her only children(5), and then, closing the channels of the senses, lived wholly for the 
Unseen; for this is what seems to be meant by the mention in his history of the dimness of the Patriarch's 
eyes. But let that be as those think who are skilled in reading these meanings, and let us proceed with the 
continuity of our discourse. What then, were we saying? That in the cases where it is possible at once to be 
true to the diviner love, and to embrace wedlock, there is no reason for setting aside this dispensation of 
nature and misrepresenting as abominable that which is honourable. Let us take again our illustration of the 
water and the spring. Whenever the husbandman, in order to irrigate a particular spot, is bringing the stream 
thither, but there is need before it gets there of a small outlet, he will allow only so much to escape into that 
outlet as is adequate to supply the demand, and can then easily be blended again with the main stream. If, 
as an inexperienced and easy-going steward, he opens too wide a channel, there will be danger of the 
whole stream quitting its direct bed and pouring itself sideways. In the same way, if (as life does need a 
mutual succession) a man so treats this need as to give spiritual things the first thought, and because of the 
shortness(6) of the time indulges but sparingly the sexual passion and keeps it under restraint, that man 
would realize the character of the prudent husband man to which the Apostle exhorts us. About the details of 
paying these trifling debts of nature he will not be over-calculating, but the long hours of his prayers(7) will 
secure the purity which is the key-note of his life. He will always fear lest by this kind of indulgence he may 
become nothing but flesh and blood; for in them God's Spirit does not dwell. He who is of so weak a 
character that he cannot make a manful stand against nature's impulse had better(8) keep himself very far 
away from such temptations, rather than descend into a combat which is above his strength. There is no 
small danger for him lest, cajoled in the valuation of pleasure, he should think that there exists no other good 
but that which is enjoyed along with some sensual emotion, and, turning altogether from the love of 
immaterial delights, should become entirely of the flesh, seeking always his pleasure only there, so that his 
character will be a Pleasure-lover, not a God-lover. It is not every man's gift, owing to weakness of nature, to 
hit the due proportion in these matters; there is a danger of being carried far beyond it, and "sticking fast in 
the deep mire(9)," to use the Psalmist's words. It would therefore be for our interest, as our discourse has 
been suggesting, to pass through life without a trial of these temptations, lest under cover of the excuse of 
lawful indulgence passion should gain an entrance into the citadel of the soul. 

CHAPTER IX. 

CUSTOM is indeed in everything hard to resist. It possesses an enormous power of attracting and seducing 
the soul. In the cases where a man has got into a fixed state of sentiment, a certain imagination of the good 
is created in him by this habit; and nothing is so naturally vile but it may come to be thought both desirable 
and laudable, once it has got into the fashion(1). Take mankind now living on the earth. There are many 
nations, and their ambitions are not all the same. The standard of beauty and of honour is different in each, 
the custom of each regulating their enthusiasm and their aims. This unlikeness is seen not only amongst 
nations where the pursuits of the one are in no repute with the other, but even in the same nation, and the 
same city, and the same family; we may see in those aggregates also much difference existing owing to 
customary feeling. Thus brothers born from the same throe are separated widely from each other in the 
aims of life. Nor is this to be wondered at, considering that each single man does not generally keep to the 
same opinion about the same thing, but alters it as fashion influences him. Not to go far from our present 
subject, we have known those who have shown themselves to be in love with chastity all through the early 
years of puberty; but in taking the pleasures which men think legitimate and allowable they make them the 
startingpoint of an impure life, and when once they have admitted these temptations, all the forces of their 
feeling are turned in that direction, and, to take again our illustration of the stream, they let it rush from the 

diviner ciiannel into low material channels, and make within themselves a broad path for passion; so that 
the stream of their love leaves dry the abandoned channel of the higher way(2) and flows abroad in 
indulgence. It would be well then, we take it, for the weaker brethren to fly to virginity as into an impregnable 
fortress, rather than to descend into the career of life's consequences and invite temptations to do their 
worst upon them, entangling themselves in those things which through the lusts of the flesh war against the 
law of our mind; it would be well for them to consider(3) that herein they risk not broad acres, or wealth, or 
any other of this life's prizes, but the hope which has been their guide. It is impossible that one who has 
turned to the world and feels its anxieties, and engages his heart in the wish to please men, can fulfil that first 
and great commandment of the Master, "Thou shall love God with all thy heart and with all thy strength(4)." 
How can he fulfil that, when he divides his heart between God and the world, and exhausts the love which he 
owes to Him alone in human affections? "He that is unmarried careth for the things of the Lord; but he that is 
married careth forthe things that are of the wo rid (5)." If the combat with pleasure seems wearisome, 
nevertheless let all take heart. Habit will not fail to produce, even in the seemingly most fretful(6), a feeling of 
pleasure through the very effort of their perseverance; and that pleasure will be of the noblest and purest 
kind; which the intelligent may well be enamoured of, rather than allow themselves, with aims narrowed by 
the lowness of their objects, to be estranged from the true greatness which goes beyond all thought. 

CHAPTER X. 

WHAT words indeed could possibly express the greatness of that loss in falling away from the possession 
of real goodness? What consummate power of thought would have to be employed! Who could produce 
even in outline that which speech cannot tell, nor the mind grasp? On the one hand, if a man has kept the 
eye of his heart so clear that he can in a way behold the promise of our Lord's Beatitudes realized, he will 
condemn all human utterance as powerless to represent that which he has apprehended. On the other 
hand, if a man from the atmosphere of material indulgences has the weakness of passion spreading like a 
film over the keen vision of his soul, all force of expression will be wasted upon him; for it is all one whether 
you understate or whether you magnify a miracle to those who have no power whatever of perceiving it(7). 
Just as, in the case of the sunlight, on one who has never from the day of his birth seen it, all efforts at 
translating it into words are quite thrown away; you cannot make the splendour of the ray shine(8) through his 
ears; in like manner, to see the beauty of the true and intellectual light, each man has need of eyes of his 
own; and he who by a gift of Divine inspiration can see it retains his ecstasy unexpressed in the depths of 
his consciousness; while he who sees it not cannot be made to know even the greatness of his loss. How 
should he? This good escapes his perception, and it cannot be represented to him; it is unspeakable, and 
cannot be delineated. We have not learnt the peculiar language expressive of this beauty. An example of 
what we want to say does not exist in the world; a comparison for it would at least be very difficult to find. 
Who compares the Sun to a little spark? or the vast Deep to a drop? And that tiny drop and that diminutive 
spark bear the same relation to the Deep and to the Sun, as any beautiful object of man's admiration does 
to that real beauty on the features of the First Good, of which we catch the glimpse beyond any other good. 
What words could be invented to show the greatness of this loss to him who suffers it? Well does the great 
David seem to me to express the impossibility of doing this. He has been lifted by the power of the Spirit out 
of himself, and sees in a blessed state of ecstacy the boundless and incomprehensible Beauty; he sees it 
as fully as a mortal can see who has quitted his fleshly envelopments and entered, by the mere power of 
thought, upon the contemplation of the spiritual and intellectual world, and in his longing to speak a word 
worthy of the spectacle he bursts forth with that cry, which all re-echo, "Every man a liar(9)!" I take that to 
mean that any man who entrusts to language the task of presenting the ineffable Light is really and truly a 
liar; not because of any hatred on his part of the truth, but because of the feebleness of his instrument for 
expressing the thing thought of(1). The visible beauty to be met with in this life of ours, showing glimpses of 
itself, whether in inanimate objects or in animate organisms in a certain choiceness of colour, can be 
adequately admired by our power of aesthetic feeling. It can be illustrated and made known to others by 
description; it can be seen drawn in the language as in a picture. Even a perfect type(2) of such beauty 
does not baffle our conception. But how can language illustrate when it finds no media for its sketch, no 
colour, no contour(3), no majestic size, no faultlessness of feature; nor any other commonplace of art? The 
Beauty which is invisible and formless, which is destitute of qualities and far removed from everything which 
we recognize in bodies by the eye, can never be made known by the traits which require nothing but the 
perceptions of our senses in order to be grasped. Not that we are to despair of winning this object of our 
love, though it does seem too high for our comprehension. The more reason shows the greatness of this 
thing which we are seeking, the higher we must lift our thoughts and excite them with the greatness of that 
object; and we must fear to lose our share in that transcendent Good. There is indeed no small amount of 
danger lest, as we can base the apprehension of it on no knowable qualities, we should slip away from it 
altogether because of its very height and mystery. We deem it necessary therefore, owing to this weakness 

of the thinking faculty, to lead it towards the Unseen by stages through the cognizances of the senses. Our 
conception of the case is as follows. 

CHAPTER XI. 

Now those who take a superficial and unreflecting view of things observe the outward appearance of 
anything they meet, e.g. of a man, and then trouble themselves no more about him. The view they have 
taken of the bulk of his body is enough to make them think that they know all about him. But the penetrating 
and scientific mind will not trust to the eyes alone the task of taking the measure of reality; it will not stop at 
appearances, nor count that which is not seen amongst unrealities. It inquires into the qualities of the man's 
soul. It takes those of its characteristics which have been developed by his bodily constitution, both in 
combination and singly; first singly, by analysis, and then in that living combination which makes the 
personality of the subject. As regards the inquiry into the nature of beauty, we see, again, that the man of 
half-grown intelligence, when he observes an object which is bathed in the glow of a seeming beauty, thinks 
that that object is in its essence beautiful, no matter what it is that so prepossesses him with the pleasure of 
the eye. He will not go deeper into the subject. But the other, whose mind's eye is clear, and who can 
inspect such appearances, will neglect those elements which are the material only upon which the Form of 
Beauty works; to him they will be but the ladder by which he climbs to the prospect of that Intellectual Beauty, 
in accordance with their share in which all other beauties get their existence and their name. But for the 
majority, I take it, who live all their lives with such obtuse faculties of thinking, it is a difficult thing to perform 
this feat of mental analysis and of discriminating the material vehicle from the immanent beauty, and thereby 
of grasping the actual nature of the Beautiful; and if any one wants to know the exact source of all the false 
and pernicious conceptions of it, he would find it in nothing else but this, viz. the absence, in the soul's 
faculties of feeling, of that exact training which would enable them to distinguish between true Beauty and the 
reverse. Owing to this men give up all search after the true Beauty. Some slide into mere sensuality. Others 
incline in their desires to dead metallic coin. Others limit their imagination of the beautiful to worldly honours, 
fame, and power. There is another class which is enthusiastic about art and science. The most debased 
make their gluttony the test of what is good. But he who turns from all grosser thoughts and all passionate 
longings after what is seeming, and explores the nature of the beauty which is simple, immaterial, formless, 
would never make a mistake like that when he has to choose between all the objects of desire; he would 
never be so misled by these attractions as not to see the transient character of their pleasures and not to 
win his way to an utter contempt for every one of them. This, then, is the path to lead us to the discovery of 
the Beautiful. All other objects that attract men's love, be they never so fashionable, be they prized never so 
much and embraced never so eagerly, must be left below us, as too low, too fleeting, to employ the powers 
of loving which we possess; not indeed that those powers are to be locked up within us unused and 
motionless; but only that they must first be cleansed from all lower longings; then we must lift them to that 
height to which sense can never reach. Admiration even of the beauty of the heavens, and of the dazzling 
sunbeams, and, indeed, of any fair phenomenon, will then cease. The beauty noticed there will be but as 
the hand to lead us to the love of the supernal Beauty whose glory the heavens and the firmament declare, 
and whose secret the whole creation sings. The climbing soul, leaving all that she has grasped already as 
too narrow for her needs, will thus grasp the idea of that magnificence which is exalted far above the 
heavens. But how can any one reach to this, whose ambitions creep below? How can any one fly up into the 
heavens, who has not the wings of heaven and is not already buoyant and lofty-minded by reason of a 
heavenly calling? Few can be such strangers to evangelic mysteries as not to know that there is but one 
vehicle on which man's soul can mount into the heavens, viz. the self-made likeness in himself to the 
descending Dove, whose wings(4) David the Prophet also longed for. This is the allegorical name used in 
Scripture for the power of the Holy Spirit; whether it be because not a drop of gall s is found in that bird, or 
because it cannot bear any noisome smell, as close observers tell us. He therefore who keeps away from 
all bitterness and all the noisome effluvia of the flesh, and raises himself on the aforesaid wings above all 
low earthly ambitions, or, more than that, above the whole universe itself, will be the man to find that which is 
alone worth loving, and to become himself as beautiful as the Beauty which he has touched and entered, 
and to be made bright and luminous himself in the communion of the real Light. We are told by those who 
have studied the subject, that those gleams which follow each other so fast through the air at night and which 
some call shooting stars(6), are nothing but the air itself streaming into the upper regions of the sky under 
stress of some particular blasts. They say that the fiery track is traced along the sky when those blasts ignite 
in the ether. In like manner, then, as this air round the earth is forced upwards by some blast and changes 
into the pure splendour of the ether, so the mind of man leaves this murky miry world, and under the stress of 
the spirit becomes pure and luminous in contact with the true and supernal Purity; in such an atmosphere it 
even itself emits light, and is so filled with radiance, that it becomes itself a Light, according to the promise of 
our Lord that "the righteous should shine forth as the sun(7)." We see this even here, in the case of a mirror. 

or a sheet of water, or any smooth surface that can reflect the light; when they receive the sunbeam they 
beam themselves; but they would not do this if any stain marred their pure and shining surface. We shall 
become then as the light, in our nearness to Christ's true light, if we leave this dark atmosphere of the earth 
and dwell above; and we shall be light, as our Lord says somewhere to His disciples(8), if the true Light that 
shineth in the dark comes down even to us; unless, that is, any foulness of sin spreading over our hearts 
should dim the brightness of our light. Perhaps these examples have led us gradually on to the discovery 
that we can be changed into something better than ourselves; and it has been proved as well that this union 
of the soul with the incorruptible Deity can be accomplished in no other way but by herself attaining by her 
virgin state to the utmost purity possible,-a state which, being like God, will enable her to grasp that to which 
it is like, while she places herself like a mirror beneath the purity of God, and moulds her own beauty at the 
touch and the sight of the Archetype of all beauty. Take a character strong enough to turn from all that is 
human, from persons, from wealth, from the pursuits of Art and Science, even from whatever in moral 
practice and in legislation is viewed as right (for still in all of them error in the apprehension of the Beautiful 
comes in, sense being the criterion); such a character will feel as a passionate lover only towards that 
Beauty which has no source but Itself, which is not such at one particular time or relatively only, which is 
Beautiful from, and through, and in itself, not such at one moment and in the next ceasing to be such, above 
all increase and addition, incapable of change and alteration. I venture to affirm that, to one who has 
cleansed all the powers of his being from every form of vice, the Beauty which is essential, the source of 
every beauty and every good, will become visible. The visual eye, purged from its blinding humour, can 
clearly discern objects even on the distant sky(9); so to the soul by virtue of her innocence there comes the 
power of taking in that Light; and the real Virginity, the real zeal for chastity, ends in no other goal than this, 
viz. the power thereby of seeing God. No one in fact is so mentally blind as not to understand that without 
telling; viz. that the God of the Universe is the only absolute, and primal, and unrivalled(l) Beauty and 
Goodness. All, maybe, know that; but there are those who, as might have been expected, wish besides this 
to discover, if possible, a process by which we may be actually guided to it. Well, the Divine books are full 
of such instruction for our guidance; and besides that many of the Saints cast the refulgence of their own 
lives, like lamps, upon the path for those who are "walking with God(2)." But each may gather in abundance 
for himself suggestions towards this end out of either Covenant in the inspired writings; the Prophets and the 
Law are full of them; and also the Gospel and the Traditions of the Apostles. What we ourselves have 
conjectured in following out the thoughts of those inspired utterances is this. 

CHAPTER XII. 

THIS reasoning and intelligent creature, man, at once the work and the likeness of the Divine and 
Imperishable Mind (for so in the Creation it is written of him that "God made man in His image(3)"), this 
creature, I say, did not in the course of his first production have united to the very essence of his nature the 
liability to passion and to death. Indeed, the truth about the image could never have been maintained if the 
beauty reflected in that image had been in the slightest degree opposed(4) to the Archetypal Beauty. 
Passion was introduced afterwards, subsequent to man's first organization; and it was in this way. Being the 
image and the likeness, as has been said, of the Power which rules all things, man kept also in the matter of 
a Free-Will this likeness to Him whose Will is over all. He was enslaved to no outward necessity whatever; 
his feeling towards that which pleased him depended only on his own private judgment; he was free to 
choose whatever he liked; and so he was a free agent, though circumvented with cunning, when he drew 
upon himself that disaster which now overwhelms humanity. He became himself the discoverer of evil, but 
he did not therein discover what God had made; for God did not make death. Man became, in fact, himself 
the fabricator, to a certain extent, and the craftsman of evil. All who have the faculty of sight may enjoy 
equally the sunlight; and any one can if he likes put this enjoyment from him by shutting his eyes: in that case 
it is not that the sun retires and produces that darkness, but the man himself puts a barrier between his eye 
and the sunshine; the faculty of vision cannot deed, even in the closing of the eyes, remain inactive(5), and 
so this operative sight necessarily becomes an operative darkness(6) rising up in the man from his own free 
act in ceasing to see. Again, a man in building a house for himself may omit to make in it any way of 
entrance for the light; he will necessarily be in darkness, though he cuts himself off from the light voluntarily. 
So the first man on the earth, or rather he who generated evil in man, had for choice the Good and the 
Beautiful lying all around him in the very nature of things; yet he wilfully cut out a new way for himself against 
this nature, and in the act of turning away from virtue, which was his own free act, he created the usage of 
evil. For, be it observed, there is no such thing in the world as evil irrespective of a will, and discoverable in 
a substance apart from that. Every creature of God is good, and nothing of His "to be rejected"; all that God 
made was "very good(7)." But the habit of sinning entered as we have described, and with fatal quickness, 
into the life of man; and from that small beginning spread into this infinitude of evil. Then that godly beauty of 
the soul which was an imitation of the Archetypal Beauty, like fine steel blackened(8) with the vicious rust. 

preserved no longer the glory of its familiar essence, but was disfigured with the ugliness of sin. This thing 
so great and precious(9), as the Scripture calls him, this being man, has fallen from his proud birthright. As 
those who have slipped and fallen heavily into mud, and have all their features so besmeared with it, that 
their nearest friends do not recognize them, so this creature has fallen into the mire of sin and lost the 
blessing of being an image of the imperishable Deity; he has clothed himself instead with a perishable and 
foul resemblance to something else; and this Reason counsels him to put away again by washing it off in 
the cleansing water of this calling(1). The earthly envelopment once removed, the soul's beauty will again 
appear. Now the putting off of a strange accretion is equivalent to the return to that which is familiar and 
natural; yet such a return cannot be but by again becoming that which in the beginning we were created. In 
fact this likeness to the divine is not our work at all; it is not the achievement of any faculty of man; it is the 
great gift of God bestowed upon our nature at the very moment of our birth; human efforts can only go so far 
as to clear away the filth of sin, and so cause the buried beauty of the soul to shine forth again. This truth is, I 
think, taught in the Gospel, when our Lord says, to those who can hear what Wisdom speaks beneath a 
mystery, that "the Kingdom of God is within you(2)." That word(3) points out the fact that the Divine good is 
not something apart from our nature, and is not removed far away from those who have the will to seek it; it is 
in fact within each of us, ignored indeed, and unnoticed while it is stifled beneath the cares and pleasures of 
life, but found again whenever we can turn our power of conscious thinking towards it. If further confirmation of 
what we say is required, I think it will be found in what is suggested by our Lord in the searching for the Lost 
Drachma(4). The thought, there, is that the widowed soul reaps no benefit from the other virtues (called 
drachmas in the Parable) being all of them found safe, if that one other is not amongst them. The Parable 
therefore suggests that a candle should first be lit, signifying doubtless our reason which throws light on 
hidden principles; then that in one's own house, that is, within oneself, we should search for that lost coin; and 
by that coin the Parable doubtless hints at the image of our King, not yet hopelessly lost, but hidden beneath 
the dirt; and by this last we must understand the impurities of the flesh, which, being swept and purged away 
by carefulness of life, leave clear to the view the object of our search. Then it is meant that the soul herself 
who finds this rejoices over it, and with her the neighbours, whom she calls in to share with her in this delight. 
Verily, all those powers which are the housemates of the soul, and which the Parable names her neighbours 
for this occasion(5), when so be that the image of the mighty King is revealed in all its brightness at last (that 
image which the Fashioner of each individual heart of us has stamped upon this our Drachma(6)), will then 
be converted to that divine delight and festivity, and will gaze upon the ineffable beauty of the recovered 
one. "Rejoice with me," she says, "because I have found the Drachma which I had lost." The neighbours, 
that is, the soul's familiar powers, both the reasoning and the appetitive, the affections of grief and of anger, 
and all the rest that are discerned in her, at that joyful feast which celebrates the finding of the heavenly 
Drachma are well called her friends also; and it is meet that they should all rejoice in the Lord when they all 
look towards the Beautiful and the Good, and do everything for the glory of God, no longer instruments of 
sin(7). If, then, such is the lesson of this Finding of the lost, viz. that we should restore the divine image from 
the foulness which the flesh wraps round it to its primitive state, let us become that which the First Man was at 
the moment when he first breathed. And what was that? Destitute he was then of his covering of dead skins, 
but he could gaze without shrinking upon God's countenance. He did not yet judge of what was lovely by 
taste or sight; he found in the Lord alone all that was sweet; and he used the helpmeet given him only for this 
delight, as Scripture signifies when it said that "he knew her not(8)" till he was driven forth from the garden, 
and till she, for the sin which she was decoyed into committing, was sentenced to the pangs of childbirth. 
We, then, who in our first ancestor were thus ejected, are allowed to return to our earliest state of 
blessedness by the very same stages by which we lost Paradise. What are they? Pleasure, craftily offered, 
began the Fall, and there followed after pleasure shame, and fear, even to remain longer in the sight of their 
Creator, so that they hid themselves in leaves and shade; and after that they covered themselves with the 
skins of dead animals; and then were sent forth into this pestilential and exacting land where, as the 
compensation for having to die, marriage was instituted (9). Now if we are destined "to depart hence, and be 
with Christ(1)," we must begin at the end of the route of departure (which ties nearest to ourselves); just as 
those who have travelled far from their friends at home, when they turn to reach again the place from which 
they started, first leave that district which they reached at the end of their outward journey. Marriage, then, is 
the last stage of our separation from the life that was led in Paradise; marriage therefore, as our discourse 
has been suggesting, is the first thing to be left; it is the first station as it were for our departure to Christ. Next, 
we must retire from all anxious toil upon the land, such as man was bound to after his sin. Next we must 
divest ourselves of those coverings of our nakedness, the coats of skins, namely the wisdom of the flesh; 
we must renounce all shameful things done in secret(2), and be covered no longer with the fig-leaves of this 
bitter world; then, when we have torn off the coatings of this life's perishable leaves, we must stand again in 
the sight of our Creator; and repelling all the illusion of taste and sight, take for our guide God's 
commandment only, instead of the venom-spitting serpent. That commandment was, to touch nothing but 
what was Good, and to leave what was evil untasted; because impatience to remain any longer in 

ignorance of evil would be but the beginning of the long train of actual evil. For this reason it was forbidden 
to our first parents to grasp the knowledge of the opposite to the good, as well as that of the good itself; they 
were to keep themselves from "the knowledge of good and evil(3)," and to enjoy the Good in its purity, 
unmixed with one particle of evil: and to enjoy that, is in my judgment nothing else than to be ever with God, 
and to feel ceaselessly and continually this delight, unalloyed by aught that could tear us away from it. One 
might even be bold to say that this might be found the way by which a man could be again caught up into 
Paradise out of this world which lieth in the Evil, into that Paradise where Paul was when he saw the 
unspeakable sights which it is not lawful for a man to talk of(4). 

CHAPTER XIII. 

BUT seeing that Paradise is the home of living spirits, and will not admit those who are dead in sin, and that 
we on the other hand are fleshly, subject to death, and sold under sin(5), how is it possible that one who is a 
subject of death's empire should ever dwell in this land where all is life? What method of release from this 
jurisdiction can be devised? Here too the Gospel teaching is abundantly sufficient. We hear our Lord saying 
to Nicodemus, "That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit(6)." We 
know too that the flesh is subject to death because of sin, but the Spirit of God is both incorruptible, and 
life-giving, and deathless. As at our physical birth there comes into the world with us a potentiality of being 
again turned to dust, plainly the Spirit also imparts a life-giving potentiality to the children begotten by 
Himself. What lesson, then, results from these remarks? This: that we should wean ourselves from this life in 
the flesh, which has an inevitable follower, death; and that we should search for a manner of life which does 
not bring death in its train. Now the life of Virginity is such a life. We will add a few other things to show how 
true this is. Every one knows that the propagation of mortal frames is the work which the intercourse of the 
sexes has to do; whereas for those who are joined to the Spirit, life and immortality instead of children are 
produced by this latter intercourse; and the words of the Apostle beautifully suit their case, for the joyful 
mother of such children as these "shall be saved in child-bearing(7);" as the Psalmist in his divine songs 
thankfully cries, "He maketh the barren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful mother of children(8)." Truly 
a joyful mother is the virgin mother who by the operation of the Spirit conceives the deathless children, and 
who is called by the Prophet barren because of her modesty only. This life, then, which is stronger than the 
power of death, is, to those who think, the preferable one. The physical bringing of children into the world-l 
speak without wishing to offend-is as much a starting-point of death as of life; because from the moment of 
birth the process of dying commences. But those who by virginity have desisted from this process have 
drawn within themselves the boundary line of death, and by their own deed have checked his advance; they 
have made themselves, in fact, a frontier between life and death, and a barrier too, which thwarts him. If, then, 
death cannot pass beyond virginity, but finds his power checked and shattered there, it is demonstrated that 
virginity is a stronger thing than death; and that body is rightly named undying which does not lend its 
service to a dying world, nor brook to become the instrument of a succession of dying creatures. In such a 
body the long unbroken career of decay and death, which has intervened between(9) the first man and the 
lives of virginity which have been led, is interrupted. It could not be indeed that death should cease working 
as long as the human race by marriage was working too; he walked the path of life with all preceding 
generations; he started with every new-born child and accompanied it to the end: but he found in virginity a 
barrier, to pass which was an impossible feat. Just as, in the age of Mary the mother of God, he who had 
reigned from Adam to her time found, when he came to her and dashed his forces against the fruit of her 
virginity as against a rock, that he was shattered to pieces upon her, so in every soul which passes through 
this life in the flesh under the protection of virginity, the strength of death is in a manner broken and annulled, 
for he does not find the places upon which he may fix his sting. If you do not throw into the fire wood, or straw, 
or grass, or something that it can consume, it has not the force to last by itself; so the power of death cannot 
go on working, if marriage does not supply it with material and prepare victims for this executioner. If you 
have any doubts left, consider the actual names of those afflictions which death brings upon mankind, and 
which were detailed in the first part of this discourse. Whence do they get their meaning? "Widowhood," 
"orphanhood," "loss of children," could they be a subject for grief, if marriage did not precede? Nay, all the 
dearly-prized blisses, and transports, and comforts of marriage end in these agonies of grief. The hilt of a 
sword is smooth and handy, and polished and glittering outside; it seems to grow to the outline of the 
hand(1); but the other part is steel and the instrument of death, formidable to look at, more formidable still to 
come across. Such a thing is marriage. It offers for the grasp of the senses a smooth surface of delights, like 
a hilt of rare polish and beautiful workmanship; but when a man has taken it up and has got it into his hands, 
he finds the pain that has been wedded to it is in his hands as well; and it becomes to him the worker of 
mourning and of loss. It is marriage that has the heartrending spectacles to show of children left desolate in 
the tenderness of their years, a mere prey to the powerful, yet smiling often at their misfortune from 
ignorance of coming woes. What is the cause of widowhood but marriage? And retirement from this would 

bring with it an immunity from tiie wiiole burden of tiiese sad taxes on our iiearts. Can we expect it otiierwise? 
Wiien tiie verdict tiiat was pronounced on tiie delinquents in tiie beginning is annulled, then too the mothers' 
"sorrows(2)" are no longer "multiplied," nor does "sorrow" herald the births of men; then all calamity has 
been removed from life and "tears wiped from, off all faces(3);" conception is no more an iniquity, nor 
child-bearing a sin; and births shall be no more "of bloods," or "of the will of man," or "of the will of the 
flesh(4)", but of God alone. This is always happening whenever any one in a lively heart conceives all the 
integrity of the Spirit, and brings forth wisdom and righteousness, and sanctification and redemption too. It is 
possible for any one to be the mother of such a son; as our Lord says, "He that doeth my will is my brother, 
my sister, and my mother(5)." What room is there for death in such parturitions? Indeed in them death is 
swallowed up by life. In fact, the Life of Virginity seems to be an actual representation of the blessedness in 
the world to come, showing as it does in itself so many signs of the presence of those expected blessings 
which are reserved for us there. That the truth of this statement may be perceived, we will verify it thus. It is 
so, first, because a man who has thus died once for all to sin lives for the future to God; he brings forth no 
more fruit unto death; and having so far as in him lies made an end(6) of this life within him according to the 
flesh, he awaits thenceforth the expected blessing of the manifestation(7) of the great God, refraining from 
putting any distance between himself and this coming of God by an intervening posterity: secondly, 
because he enjoys even in this present life a certain exquisite glory of all the blessed results of our 
resurrection. For our Lord has announced that the life after our resurrection shall be as that of the angels. 
Now the peculiarity of the angelic nature is that they are strangers to marriage; therefore the blessing of this 
promise has been already received by him who has not only mingled his own glory with the halo of the 
Saints, but also by the stainlessness of his life has so imitated the purity of these incorporeal beings. If 
virginity then can win us favours such as these, what words are fit to express the admiration of so great a 
grace? What other gift of the soul can be found so great and precious as not to suffer by comparison with 
this perfection ? 

CHAPTER XIV. 

BUT if we apprehend at last the perfection of this grace, we must understand as well what necessarily 
follows from it; namely that it is not a single achievement, ending in the subjugation of the body, but that in 
intention it reaches to and pervades everything that is, or is considered, a right condition of the soul. That 
soul indeed which in virginity cleaves to the true Bridegroom will not remove herself merely from all bodily 
defilement; she will make that abstension only the beginning of her purity, and will carry this security from 
failure equally into everything else upon her path. Fearing lest, from a too partial heart, she should by 
contact with evil in any one direction give occasion for the least weakness of unfaithfulness (to suppose 
such a case: but I will begin again what I was going to say), that soul which cleaves to her Master so as to 
become with Him one spirit, and by the compact of a wedded life has staked the love of all her heart and all 
her strength on Him alone-that soul will no more commit any other of the offences contrary to salvation, than 
imperil her union with Him by cleaving to fornication; she knows that between all sins there is a single kinship 
of impurity, and that if she were to defile herself with but one(8), she could no longer retain her spotlessness. 
An illustration will show what we mean. Suppose all the water in a pool remaining smooth and motionless, 
while no disturbance of any kind comes to mar the peacefulness of the spot; and then a stone thrown into the 
pool; the movement in that one part(9) will extend to the whole, and while the stone's weight is carrying it to 
the bottom, the waves that are set in motion round it pass in circles(1) into others, and so through all the 
intervening commotion are pushed on to the very edge of the water, and the whole surface is ruffled with 
these circles, feeling the movement of the depths. So is the broad serenity and calm of the soul troubled by 
one invading passion, and affected by the injury of a single part. They tell us too, those who have 
investigated the subject, that the virtues are not disunited from each other, and that to grasp the principle of 
any one virtue will be impossible to one who has not seized that which underlies the rest, and that the man 
who shows one virtue in his character will necessarily show them all. Therefore, by contraries, the 
depravation of anything in our moral nature will extend to the whole virtuous life; and in very truth, as the 
Apostle tells us, the whole is affected by the parts, and "if one member(2) suffer, all the members suffer with 
it," "if one be honoured, all rejoice." 

CHAPTER XV. 

BUT the ways in our life which turn aside towards sin are innumerable; and their number is told by Scripture 
in divers manners. "Many are they that trouble me and persecute," and "Many are they that fight against me 
from on high(3)"; and many other texts like that. We may affirm, indeed, absolutely, that many are they who 
plot in the adulterer's fashion to destroy this truly honourable marriage, and to defile this inviolate bed; and if 
we must name them one by one, we charge with this adulterous spirit anger, avarice, envy, revenge, enmity. 

malice, hatred, and whatever the Apostle puts in the class of those things which are contrary to sound 
doctrine. Now let us suppose a lady, prepossessing and lovely above her peers, and on that account 
wedded to a king, but besieged because of her beauty by profligate lovers. As long as she remains 
indignant at these would-be seducers and complains of them to her lawful husband, she keeps her chastity 
and has no one before her eyes but her bridegroom; the profligates find no vantage ground for their attack 
upon her. But if she were to listen to a single one of them, her chastity with regard to the rest would not 
exempt her from the retribution; it would he sufficient to condemn her, that she had allowed that one to defile 
the marriage bed. So the soul whose life is in God will find her pleasure(4) in no single one of those things 
which make a beauteous show to deceive her. If she were, in some, fit of weakness, to admit the defilement 
to her heart, she would herself have broken the covenant of her spiritual marriage; and, as the Scripture tells 
us, "into the malicious soul Wisdom cannot come(5)." It may, in a word, be truly said that the Good Husband 
cannot come to dwell with the soul that is irascible, or malice-bearing, or harbours any other disposition 
which jars with that concord. No way has been discovered of harmonizing things whose nature is 
antagonistic and which have nothing in common. The Apostle tells us there is "no communion of light with 
darkness(6)," or of righteousness with iniquity, or, in a word, of all the qualities which we perceive and name 
as the essence of God's nature, with all the opposite which are perceived in evil. Seeing, then, the 
impossibility of any union between mutual repellents, we understand that the vicious soul is estranged from 
entertaining the company of the Good. What then is the practical lesson from this? The chaste and thoughtful 
virgin must sever herself from any affection which can in any way impart contagion to her soul; she must 
keep herself pure for the Husband who has married her, "not having spot or blemish or any such thing(7)." 

CHAPTER XVI. 

THERE is only one right path. It is narrow and contracted. It has no turnings either on the one side or the 
other. No matter how we leave it, there is the same danger of straying hopelessly away. This being so, the 
habit which many have got into must be as far as possible corrected; those, I mean, who while they fight 
strenuously against the baser pleasures, yet still go on hunting for pleasure m the shape of worldly honour 
and positions which will gratify their love of power. They act like some domestic who longed for liberty, but 
instead of exerting himself to get away from slavery proceeded only to change his masters, and thought 
liberty consisted in that change. But all alike are slaves, even though they should not all go on being ruled 
by the same masters, as long as a dominion of any sort, with power to enforce it, is set over them. There are 
others again who after a long battle against all the pleasures(8), yield themselves easily on another field, 
where feelings of an opposite kind come in; and in the intense exactitude of their lives fall a ready prey to 
melancholy and irritation, and to brooding over injuries, and to everything that is the direct opposite of 
pleasurable feelings; from which they are very reluctant to extricate themselves. This is always happening, 
whenever any emotion, instead of virtuous reason, controls the course of a life. For the commandment of the 
Lord is exceedingly far-shining, so as to "enlighten the eyes" even of "the simple(9)," declaring that good 
cleaveth only unto God. But God is not pain any more than He is pleasure; He is not cowardice any more 
than boldness; He is not fear, nor anger, nor any other emotion which sways the untutored soul, but, as the 
Apostle says. He is Very Wisdom and Sanctification, Truth and Joy and Peace, and everything like that. If 
He is such, how can any one be said to cleave to Him, who is mastered by the very opposite? Is it not want 
of reason in any one to suppose that when he has striven successfully to escape the dominion of one 
particular passion, he will find virtue in its opposite? For instance, to suppose that when he has escaped 
pleasure, he will find virtue in letting pain have possession of him; or when he has by an effort remained 
proof against anger, in crouching with fear. It matters not whether we miss virtue, or rather God Himself Who 
is the Sum of virtue, in this way, or in that. Take the case of great bodily prostration; one would say that the 
sadness of this failure was just the same, whether the cause has been excessive under-feeding, or 
immoderate eating; both failures to stop in time end in the same result. He therefore who watches over the 
life and the sanity of the soul will confine himself to the moderation of the truth; he will continue without 
touching either of those opposite states which run along-side virtue. This teaching is not mine; it comes from 
the Divine lips. It is clearly contained in that passage where our Lord says to His disciples, that they are as 
sheep wandering amongst wolves(1), yet are not to be as doves only, but are to have something of the 
serpent too in their disposition; and that means that they should neither carry to excess the practice of that 
which seems praiseworthy in simplicity(2), as such a habit would come very near to downright madness, nor 
on the other hand should deem the cleverness which most admire to be a virtue, while unsoftened by any 
mixture with its opposite; they were in fact to form another disposition, by a compound of these two seeming 
opposites, cutting off its silliness from the one, its evil cunning from the other; so that one single beautiful 
character should be created from the two, a union of simplicity of purpose with shrewdness. "Be ye," He 
says, "wise as serpents, and harmless as doves." 

CHAPTER XVII. 

LET that which was then said by our Lord be the general maxim for every life; especially let it be the maxim 
for those who are coming nearer God through the gateway of virginity, that they should never in watching for 
a perfection in one direction present an unguarded side in another and contrary one; but should in all 
directions realize the good, so that they may guarantee in all things their holy life against failure. A soldier 
does not arm himself only on some points, leaving the rest of his body to take its chance unprotected. If he 
were to receive his death-wound upon that, what would have been the advantage of this partial armour? 
Again, who would call that feature faultless, which from some accident had lost one of those requisites which 
go to make up the sum of beauty? The disfigurement of the mutilated part mars the grace of the part 
untouched. The Gospel implies that he who undertakes the building of a tower, but spends all his labour 
upon the foundations without ever reaching the completion, is worthy of ridicule; and what else do we learn 
from the Parable of the Tower, but to strive to come to the finish of every lofty purpose, accomplishing the 
work of God in all the multiform structures of His commandments? One stone, indeed, is no more the whole 
edifice of the Tower, than one commandment kept will raise the soul's perfection to the required height. The 
foundation must by all means first be laid but over it, as the Apostle says(3), the edifice of gold and precious 
gems must be built; for so is the doing of the commandment put by the Prophet who cries, "I have loved Thy 
commandment above gold and many a precious stone(4)." Let the virtuous life have for its substructure the 
love of virginity; but upon this let every result of virtue be reared. If virginity is believed to be a vastly 
precious thing and to have a divine look (as indeed is the case, as well as men believe of it), yet, if the 
whole life does not harmonize with this perfect note, and it be marred by the succeeding s discord of the 
soul, this thing becomes but "the jewel of gold in the swine's snout(6)," or "the pearl that is trodden under the 
swine's feet." But we have said enough upon this. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

IF any one supposes that(7) this want of mutual harmony between his life and a single one of its 
circumstances is quite unimportant, let him be taught the meaning of our maxim by looking at the 
management of a house. The master of a private dwelling will not allow any untidiness or unseemliness to 
be seen in the house, such as a couch upset, or the table littered with rubbish, or vessels of price thrown 
away into dirty corners, while those which serve ignobler uses are thrust forward for entering guests to see. 
He has everything arranged neatly and in the proper place, where it stands to most advantage; and then he 
can welcome his guests, without any misgivings that he be ashamed of opening the interior of his house to 
receive them. The same duty, I take it, is incumbent on that master of our "tabernacle," the mind; it has to 
arrange everything within us, and to put each particular faculty of the soul, which the Creator has fashioned to 
be our implement or our vessel, to fitting and noble uses. We will now mention in detail the way in which any 
one might manage his life, with its present advantages, to his improvement, hoping that no one will accuse 
us of trifling (8), or over-minuteness. We advise, then, that love's passion be placed in the soul's purest 
shrine, as a thing chosen to be the first fruits of all our gifts, and devoted(9) entirely to God; and when once 
this has been done, to keep it untouched and unsullied by any secular defilement. Then indignation, and 
anger, and hatred must be as watch-dogs to be roused only against attacking sins; they must follow their 
natural impulse only against the thief and the enemy who is creeping in to plunder the divine 
treasure-chamber, and who comes only for that, that he may steal, and mangle, and destroy. Courage and 
confidence are to be weapons in our hands to baffle any sudden surprise and attack of the wicked who 
advance. Hope and patience are to be the staffs to lean upon, whenever we are weary with the trials of the 
world. As for sorrow, we must have a stock of it ready to apply, if need should happen to arise for it, in the 
hour of repentance for our sins; believing at the same time that it is never useful, except to minister to that. 
Righteousness will be our rule of straightforwardness, guarding us from stumbling either in word or deed, 
and guiding us in the disposal of the faculties of our soul, as well as in the due consideration for every one 
we meet. The love of gain, which is a large, incalculably large, element in every soul, when once applied to 
the desire for God, will bless the man who has it; for he will be violent z where it is right to be violent. Wisdom 
and prudence will be our advisers as to our best interests; they will order our lives so as never to suffer from 
any thoughtless folly. But suppose a man does not apply the aforesaid faculties of the soul to their proper 
use, but reverses their intended purpose; suppose he wastes his love upon the basest objects, and stores 
up his hatred only for his own kinsmen; suppose he welcomes iniquity, plays the man only against his 
parents, is bold only in absurdities, fixes his hopes on emptiness, chases prudence and wisdom from his 
company, takes gluttony and folly for his mistresses, and uses all his other opportunities in the same 
fashion, he would indeed be a strange and unnatural character to a degree beyond any one's power to 
express. If we could imagine any one putting his armour on all the wrong way, reversing the helmet so as to 
cover his face while the plume nodded backward, putting his feet into the cuirass, and fitting the greaves on 

to his breast, changing to the right side all that ought to go on the left and vice versa, and how such a hoplite 
would be likely to fare in battle, then we should have an idea of the fate in life which is sure to await him 
whose confused judgment makes him reverse the proper uses of his soul's faculties. We must therefore 
provide this balance in all feeling; the true sobriety of mind is naturally able to supply it; and if one had to find 
an exact definition of this sobriety, one might declare absolutely, that it amounts to our ordered control, by 
dint of wisdom and prudence, over every emotion of the soul. Moreover, such a condition in the soul will be 
no longer in need of any laborious method to attain to the high and heavenly realities; it will accomplish with 
the greatest ease that which erewhile seemed so unattainable; it will grasp the object of its search as a 
natural consequence of rejecting the opposite attractions. A man who comes out of darkness is necessarily 
in the light; a man who is not dead is necessarily alive. Indeed, if a man is not to have received his soul to no 
purpose(2), he will certainly be upon the path of truth; the prudence and the science employed to guard 
against error will be itself a sure guidance along the right road. Slaves who have been freed and cease to 
serve their former masters, the very moment they become their own masters, direct all their thoughts 
towards themselves so, I take it, the soul which has been freed from ministering to the body becomes at 
once cognizant of its own inherent energy. But this liberty consists, as we learn from the Apostle(3), in not 
again being held in the yoke of slavery, and in not being bound again, like a runaway or a criminal, with the 
fetters of marriage. But I must return here to what I said at first; that the perfection of this liberty does not 
consist only in that one point of abstaining from marriage. Let no one suppose that the prize of virginity is so 
insignificant and so easily won as that; as if one little observance of the flesh could settle so vital a matter. 
But we have seen that every man who doeth a sin is the servant of sin(4); so that a declension towards vice 
in any act, or in any practice whatever, makes a slave, and still more, a branded slave, of the man, covering 
him through sin's lashes with bruises and seared spots. Therefore it behoves the man who grasps at the 
transcendent aim of all virginity to be true to himself in h every respect, and to manifest his purity equally c in 
every relation of his life. If any of the inspired words are required to aid our pleading, the Truth s Itself will be 
sufficient to corroborate the truth when It inculcates this very kind of teaching in the veiled meaning of a 
Gospel Parable: the good and eatable fish are separated by the fishers' skill from the bad and poisonous 
fish, so that the enjoyment of the good should not be spoilt by any of the bad getting into the "vessels" with 
them. The work of true sobriety is the same; from all pursuits and habits to choose that which is pure and 
improving, rejecting in every case that which does not seem likely to be useful, and letting it go back into the 
universal and secular life, called "the sea(6)," in the imagery of the Parable. The Psalmist(7) also, when 
expounding the doctrine of a full confession(8), calls this restless suffering tumultuous life, "waters coming in 
even unto the soul," "depths of waters," and a "hurricane"; in which sea indeed every rebellious thought 
sinks, as the Egyptian did, with a stone's weight into the deeps(9). But all in us that is dear to God, and has a 
piercing insight into the truth (called "Israel" in the narrative), passes, but that alone, over that sea as if it were 
dry land, and is never reached by the bitterness and the brine of life's billows. Thus, typically, under the 
leadership of the Law (for Moses was a type of the Law that was coming) Israel passes unwetted over that 
sea, while the Egyptian who crosses in her track is overwhelmed. Each fares according to the disposition 
which he carries with him; one walks lightly enough, the other is dragged into the deep water. For virtue is a 
light and buoyant thing, and all who live in her way "fly like clouds(1)," as Isaiah says, "and as doves with 
their young ones"; but sin is a heavy affair, "sitting," as another of the prophets says, "upon a talent of 
lead(2)." If, however, this reading of the history appears to any forced and inapplicable, and the miracle at 
the Red Sea does not present itself to him as written for our profit, let him listen to the Apostle: "Now all these 
things happened unto them for types, and they are written for our admonition(3)." 

CHAPTER XIX. 

BUT besides other things the action of Miriam the prophetess also gives rise to these surmisings of ours. 
Directly the sea was crossed she took in her hand a dry and sounding timbrel and conducted the women's 
dance(4). By this timbrel the story may mean to imply virginity, as first perfected by Miriam; whom indeed I 
would believe to be a type of Mary the mother of God(5). Just as the timbrel emits a loud sound because it is 
devoid of all moisture and reduced to the highest degree of dryness, so has virginity a clear and ringing 
report amongst men because it repels from itself the vital sap of merely physical life. Thus, Miriam's timbrel 
being a dead thing, and virginity being a deadening of the bodily passions, it is perhaps not very far 
removed from the bounds of probability(6) that Miriam was a virgin. However, we can but guess and 
surmise, we cannot clearly prove, that this was so, and that Miriam the prophetess led a dance of virgins, 
even though many of the learned have affirmed distinctly that she was unmarried, from the fact that the 
history makes no mention either of her marriage or of her being a mother; and surely she would have been 
named and known, not as "the sister of Aaron(7)," but from her husband, if she had had one; since the head 
of the woman is not the brother but the husband. But if, amongst a people with whom motherhood was 
sought after and classed as a blessing and, regarded as a public duty, the grace of virginity, nevertheless 

came to be regarded as a precious thing, iiow does it beiiove us to feel towards it, wiio do not "judge" of tiie 
Divine blessings(8) "according to tiie flesii"? Indeed it has been revealed in the oracles of God, on what 
occasion to conceive and to bring forth is a good thing, and what species of fecundity was desired by God's 
saints; for both the Prophet Isaiah and the divine Apostle have made this clear and certain. The one cries, 
"From fear of Thee, O Lord, have I conceived(9);" the other boasts that he is the parent of the largest family 
of any, bringing to the birth whole cities and nations; not the Corinthians and Galatians only whom by his 
travailings he moulded for the Lord, but all in the wide circuit from Jerusalem to lllyricum; his children filled 
the world, "begotten" by him in Christ through the Gospel(1). In the same strain the womb of the Holy Virgin, 
which ministered to an Immaculate Birth, is pronounced blessed in the Gospel(2); for that birth did not annul 
the Virginity, nor did the Virginity impede so great a birth. When the "spirit of salvation(3)," as Isaiah names it, 
is being born, the willings of the flesh are useless. There is also a particular teaching of the Apostle, which 
harmonizes with this; viz. each man of us is a double man(4); one the outwardly visible, whose natural fate it 
is to decay; the other perceptible only in the secret of the heart, yet capable of renovation. If this teaching is 
true,-and it must be true s because Wisdom is speaking there,-then there is no absurdity in supposing a 
double marriage also which answers in every detail to either man; and, maybe, if one was to assert boldly 
that the body's virginity was the co-operator and the agent of the inward marriage, this assertion would not 
be much beside the probable fact. 

CHAPTER XX. 

Now it is impossible, as far as manual exercise goes, to ply two arts at once; for instance, husbandry and 
sailing, or tinkering and carpentering. If one is to be honestly taken in hand, the other must be left alone. Just 
so, there are these two marriages for our choice, the one effected in the flesh, the other in the spirit; and 
preoccupation m the one must cause of necessity alienation from the other. No more is the eye able to look 
at two objects at once; but it must concentrate its special attention on one at a time; no more can the tongue 
effect utterances in two different languages, so as to pronounce, for instance, a Hebrew word and a Greek 
word in the same moment: no more can the ear take in at one and the same time a narrative of facts, and a 
hortatory discourse; if each special tone is heard separately, it will impress its ideas upon the hearers' 
minds; but if they are combined and so poured into the ear, an inextricable confusion of ideas will be the 
result, one meaning being mutually lost in the other: and no more, by analogy, do our emotional powers 
possess a nature which can at once pursue the pleasures of sense and court the spiritual union; nor, 
besides, can both those ends be gained by the same courses of life; continence, mortification of the 
passions, scorn of fleshly needs, are the agents of the one union; but all that are the reverse of these are the 
agents of bodily habitation. As, when two masters are before us to choose between, and we cannot be 
subject to both, for "no man can serve two masters(6)," he who is wise will choose the one most useful to 
himself, so, when two marriages are before us to choose between, and we cannot contract both, for "he that 
is unmarried cares for the things of the Lord, but he that is married careth for the things of the world(7)," I 
repeat that it would be the aim of a sound mind not to miss choosing the more profitable one; and not to be 
ignorant either of the way which will lead it to this, a way which cannot be learnt but by some such 
comparison as the following. In the case of a marriage of this world a man who is anxious to avoid 
appearing altogether insignificant pays the greatest attention both to physical health, and becoming 
adornment, and amplitude of means and the security from any disgraceful revelations as to his antecedents 
or his parentage; for so he thinks things will be most likely to turn out as he wishes. Now just in the same way 
the man who is courting the spiritual alliance will first of all display himself, by the renewal of his mind(8), a 
young man, without a single touch of age upon him; next he will reveal a lineage rich in that in which it is a 
noble ambition to be rich, not priding himself on worldly wealth, but luxuriating only in the heavenly treasures. 
As for family distinction, he will not vaunt that which comes by the mere routine of devolution even to 
numbers of the worthless, but that which is gained by the successful efforts of his own zeal and labours; a 
distinction which only those can boast of who are "sons of the light" and children of God, and are styled 
"nobles from the sunrise(9)" because of their splendid deeds. Strength and health he will not try to gain by 
bodily training and feeding, but by all that is the contrary of this, perfecting the spirit's strength in the body's 
weakness. I could tell also of the suitor's gifts to the bride in such a wedding(1); they are not procured by the 
money that perishes, but are contributed out of the wealth peculiar to the soul. Would you know their names? 
You must hear from Paul, that excellent adorner of the Bride(2), in what the wealth of those consists who in 
everything commend themselves. He mentions much else that is priceless in it, and adds, "in chastity(3)"; 
and besides this all the recognized fruits of the spirit from any quarter whatever are gifts of this marriage. If a 
man is going to carry out the advice of Solomon and take for helpmate and life-companion that true Wisdom 
of which he says, "Love her, and she shall keep thee," "honour her, that she may embrace thee(4)," then he 
will prepare himself in a manner worthy of such a love, so as to feast with all the joyous wedding guests in 
spotless raiment, and not be cast forth, while claiming to sit at that feast, for not having put on the wedding 

garment. It is plain moreover that the argument applies equally to men and women, to move them towards 
such a marriage. "There is neither male nor female(5)," the Apostle says; "Christ is all, and in all(6)"; and so 
it is equally reasonable that he who is enamoured of wisdom should hold the Object of his passionate 
desire. Who is the True Wisdom; and that the soul which cleaves to the undying Bridegroom should have 
the fruition of her love for the true Wisdom, which is God. We have now sufficiently revealed the nature of the 
spiritual union, and the Object of the pure and heavenly Love. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

IT is perfectly clear that no one can come near the purity of the Divine Being who has not first himself 
become such; he must therefore place between himself and the pleasures of the senses a high strong wall 
of separation, so that in this his approach to the Deity the purity of his own heart may not become soiled 
again. Such an impregnable wall will be found in a complete estrangement from everything wherein passion 
operates. 

Now pleasure is one in kind, as we learn from the experts; as water parted into various channels from one 
single fountain, it spreads itself over the pleasure-lover through the various avenues of the senses; so that it 
has been on his heart that the man, who through any one particular sensation succumbs to the resulting 
pleasure, has received a wound from that sensation. This accords with the teaching given from the Divine 
lips, that "he who has satisfied the lust of the eyes has received the mischief already in his heart(7)"; for I 
take it that our Lord was speaking in that particular example of any of the senses; so that we might well carry 
on His saying, and add, "He who hath heard, to lust after," and what follows, "He who hath touched to lust 
after," "He who hath lowered any faculty within us to the service of pleasure, hath sinned in his heart." 
To prevent this, then, we want to apply to our own lives that rule of all temperance, never to let the mind dwell 
on anything wherein pleasure's bait is hid; but above all to be specially watchful against the pleasure of 
taste. For that seems in a way the most deeply rooted, and to be the mother as it were of all forbidden 
enjoyment. The pleasures of eating and drinking, leading to boundless excess, inflict upon the body the 
doom of the most dreadful sufferings(8); for over-indulgence is the parent of most of the painful diseases. To 
secure for the body a continuous tranquillity, unstirred by the pains of surfeit, we must make up our minds to 
a more sparing regimen, and constitute the need of it on each occasion not the pleasure of it, as the 
measure and limit of our indulgence. If the sweetness will nevertheless mingle itself with the satisfaction of 
the need (for hunger knows how to sweeten everything(9), and by the vehemence of appetite she gives the 
zest of pleasure to every discoverable supply of the need), we must not because of the resulting enjoyment 
reject the satisfaction, nor yet make this latter our leading aim. In everything we must select the expedient 
quantity, and leave untouched what merely feasts the senses(1). 

CHAPTER XXII. 

WE see how the husbandmen have a method for separating the chaff, which is united with the wheat, with a 
view to employ each for its proper purpose, the one for the sustenance of man, the other for burning and the 
feeding of animals. The labourer in the field of temperance will in like manner distinguish the satisfaction 
from the mere delight, and will fling this latter nature to savages(2) "whose end is to be burned(3)," as the 
Apostle says, but will take the other, in proportion to the actual need, with thankfulness. Many, however, slide 
into the very opposite kind of excess, and unconsciously to themselves, in their over-preciseness, 
laboriously thwart their own design; they let their soul fall down the other side from the heights of Divine 
elevation to the level of dull thoughts and occupations, where their minds are so bent upon regulations 
which merely affect the body, that they can no longer walk in their heavenly freedom and gaze above; their 
only inclination is to this tormenting and afflicting of the flesh. It would be well, then, to give this also careful 
thought, so as to be equally on our guard against either over-amount(4), neither stifling the mind beneath the 
wound of the flesh, nor, on the other hand, by gratuitously inflicted weakenings sapping and lowering the 
powers, so that it can have no thought but of the body's pain(5); and let every one remember that wise 
precept, which warns us from turning to the right hand or to the left. I have heard a certain physician of my 
acquaintance, in the course of explaining the secrets of his art, say that our body consists of four elements, 
not of the same species, but disposed to be conflicting: yet the hot penetrated the cold, and an equally 
unexpected union of the wet and the dry took place, the contradictories of each pair being brought into 
contact by their relationship to the intervening pair. He added an extremely subtle explanation of this 
account of his studies in nature. Each of these elements was in its essence diametrically(6) opposed to its 
contradictory; but then it had two other qualities lying on each side of it, and by virtue of its kinship with them it 
came into contact with its contradictory; for example, the cold and the hot each unite with the wet, or the dry; 
and again, the wet and the dry each unite with the hot, or the cold: and so this sameness of quality, when it 
manifests itself in contradictories, is itself the agent which affects the union of those contradictories. What 

business of mine, iiowever, is it to explain exactly the details of this change from this mutual separation and 
repugnance of nature, to this mutual union through the medium of kindred qualities, except for the purpose 
for which we mentioned it? And that purpose was to add that the author of this analysis of the body's 
constitution advised that all possible care be taken to preserve a balance between these properties, for 
that in fact health consisted in not letting any one of them gain the mastery within us. If his doctrine has truth in 
it, then, for our health's continuance, we must secure such a habit, and by no irregularity of diet produce 
either an excess or a defect in any member of these our constituent elements. The chariot-master, if the 
young horses which he has to drive will not work well together, does not urge a fast one with the whip, and 
rein in a slow one; nor, again, does he let a horse that shies in the traces or is hard-mouthed gallop his own 
way to the confusion of orderly driving; but he quickens the pace of the first, checks the second, reaches the 
third with cuts of his whip, till he has made them all breathe evenly together in a straight career. Now our 
mind in like manner holds in its grasp the reins of this chariot of the body; and in that capacity it will not 
devise, in the time of youth, when heat of temperament is abundant, ways of heightening that fever; nor will it 
multiply the cooling and the thinning things when the body is already chilled by illness or by time; and in the 
case of all these physical qualities it will be guided by the Scripture, so as actually to realize it: "He that 
gathered much had nothing over; and he that had gathered little had no lack(7)." It will curtail immoderate 
lengths in either direction, and so will be careful to replenish where there is much lack. The inefficiency of the 
body from either cause will be that which it guards against; it will train the flesh, neither making it wild and 
ungovernable by excessive pampering, nor sickly and unstrung and nerveless for the required work by 
immoderate mortification. That is temperance's highest aim; it looks not to the afflicting of the body, but to the 
peaceful action of the soul's functions. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

Now the details of the life of him who has chosen to live in such a philosophy as this, the things to be 
avoided, the exercises to be engaged in, the rules of temperance, the whole method of the training, and all 
the daily regimen which contributes towards this great end, has been dealt with in certain written manuals of 
instruction for the benefit of those who love details. Yet there is a plainer guide to be found than verbal 
instruction; and that is practice: and there is nothing vexatious in the maxim that when we are undertaking a 
long journey or voyage we should get an instructor. "But," says the Apostle(3), "the word is nigh thee;"the 
grace begins at home; there is the manufactory of all the virtues; there this life has become exquisitely 
refined by a continual progress towards consummate perfection; there, whether men are silent or whether 
they speak, there is large opportunity for being instructed in this heavenly citizenship through the actual 
practice of it. Any theory divorced from living examples, however admirably it may be dressed out, is like 
the unbreathing statue, with its show of a blooming complexion impressed in tints and colours; but the man 
who acts as well as teaches, as the Gospel tells us, he is the man who is truly living, and has the bloom of 
beauty, and is efficient and stirring. It is to him that we must go, if we mean, according to the saying(9) of 
Scripture, to "retain" virginity. One who wants to learn a foreign language is not a competent instructor of 
himself; he gets himself taught by experts, and can then talk with foreigners. So, for this high life, which does 
not advance in nature's groove, but is estranged from her by the novelty of its course, a man cannot be 
instructed thoroughly unless he puts himself into the hands of one who has himself led it in perfection; and 
indeed in all the other professions of life the candidate is more likely to achieve success if he gets from 
tutors a scientific knowledge of each part of the subject of his choice, than if he undertook to study it by 
himself; and this particular profession(l) is not one where everything is so clear that judgment as to our best 
course in it is necessarily left to ourselves; it is one where to hazard a step into the unknown at once brings 
us into danger. The science of medicine once did not exist; it has come into being by the experiments which 
men have made, and has gradually been revealed through their various observations; the healing and the 
harmful drug became known from the attestation of those who had tried them, and this distinction was 
adopted into the theory of the art, so that the close observation of former practitioners became a precept for 
those who succeeded; and now any one who studies to attain this art is under no necessity to ascertain at 
his own peril the power of any drug, whether it be a poison or a medicine; he has only to learn from others 
the known facts, and may than practise with success. It is so also with that medicine of the soul, philosophy, 
from which we learn the remedy for every weakness that can touch the soul. We need not hunt after a 
knowledge of these remedies by dint of guess-work and surmisings; we have abundant means of learning 
them from him who by a long and rich experience has gained the possession which we seek. In any matter 
youth is generally a giddy(2) guide; and it would not be easy to find anything of importance succeeding, in 
which gray hairs have not been called in to share in the deliberations. Even in all other undertakings we 
must, in proportion to their greater importance, take the more precaution against failure; for in them too the 
thoughtless designs of youth have brought loss; on property, for instance; or have compelled the surrender 
of a position in the world, and even of renown. But in this mighty and sublime ambition it is not property, or 

secular glory lasting for its hour, or any external fortune, that is at stake;-of such things(3), whether they settle 
themselves well or the reverse, the wise take small account;-here rashness can affect the soul itself; and 
we run the awful hazard, not of losing any of those other things whose recovery even may perhaps be 
possible, but of ruining our very selves and making the soul a bankrupt. A man who has spent or lost his 
patrimony does not despair, as long as he is in the land of the living, of perchance coming again through 
contrivances into his former competence; but the man who has ejected himself from this calling, deprives 
himself as well of all hope of a return to better things. Therefore, since most embrace virginity while still 
young and unformed in understanding, this before anything else should be their employment, to search out 
a fitting guide and master of this way, lest, in their present ignorance, they should wander from the direct 
route, and strike out new paths of their own in trackless wilds(4). "Two are better than one," says the 
Preacher(5); but a single one is easily vanquished by the foe who infests the path which leads to God; and 
verily "woe to him that is alone when he falleth, for he hath not another to help him up(6)." Some ere now in 
their enthusiasm for the stricter life have shown a dexterous alacrity; but, as if in the very moment of their 
choice they had already touched perfection, their pride has had a shocking fall(7), and they have been 
tripped up from madly deluding themselves into thinking that that to which their own mind inclined them was 
the true beauty. In this number are those whom Wisdom calls the "slothful ones(8)," who bestrew their "way" 
with "thorns"; who think it a moral loss to be anxious about keeping the commandments; who erase from 
their own minds the Apostolic teaching, and instead of eating the bread of their own honest earning fix on 
that of others, and make their idleness itself into an art of living. From this number, too, come the Dreamers, 
who put more faith in the illusions of their dreams(9) than in the Gospel teaching, and style their own 
phantasies "revelations." Hence, too, those who "creep into the houses "; and again others who suppose 
virtue to consist in savage bearishness, and have never known the fruits of long-suffering and humility of 
spirit. Who could enumerate all the pitfalls into which any one might slip, from refusing to have recourse to 
men of godly celebrity? Why, we have known ascetics of this class who have persisted in their fasting even 
unto death, as if "with such sacrifices God were well pleased(1);" and, again, others who rush off into the 
extreme diametrically opposite, practising celibacy in name only and leading a life in no way different from 
the secular; for they not only indulge in the pleasures of the table, but are openly known to have a woman in 
their houses(2); and they call such a friendship a brotherly affection, as if, forsooth, they could veil their own 
thought, which is inclined to evil, under a sacred term. It is owing to them that this pure and holy profession of 
virginity is "blasphemed amongst the Gentiles(3)." 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

IT would therefore be to their profit, for the young to refrain from laying down(4) for themselves their future 
course in this profession; and indeed, examples of holy lives for them to follow are not wanting in the living 
generation(5). Now, if ever before, saintliness abounds and penetrates our world; by gradual advances it 
has reached the highest mark of perfectness; and one who follows such footsteps in his daily rounds may 
catch this halo; one who tracks the scent of this preceding perfume may be drenched in the sweet odours of 
Christ Himself. As, when one torch has been fired, flame is transmitted to all the neighbouring candlesticks, 
without either the first light being lessened or blazing with unequal brilliance on the other points where it has 
been caught; so the saintliness of a life is transmitted from him who has achieved it, to those who come 
within his circle; for there is truth in the Prophet's saying(6), that one who lives with a man who is "holy" and 
"clean" and "elect," will become such himself. If you would wish to know the sure signs, which will secure you 
the real model, it is not hard to take a sketch from life. If you see a man so standing between death and life, 
as to select from each helps for the contemplative course, never letting death's stupor paralyze his zeal to 
keep all the commandments, nor yet placing both feet in the world of the living, since he has weaned himself 
from secular ambitions;-a man who remains more insensate than the dead themselves to everything that is 
found on examination to be living for the flesh, but instinct with life and energy and strength in the 
achievements of virtue, which are the sure marks of the spiritual life;-then look to that man for the rule of your 
life; let him be the leading light of your course of devotion, as the constellations that never set are to the pilot; 
imitate his youth and his gray hairs: or, rather, imitate the old man and the stripling who are joined in him; for 
even now in his declining years time has not blunted the keen activity of his soul, nor was his youth active in 
the sphere of youth's well-known employments; in both seasons of life he has shown a wonderful 
combination of opposites, or rather an exchange of the peculiar qualities of each; for in age he shows, in the 
direction of the good, a young man's energy, while, in the hours of youth, in the direction of evil, his passions 
were powerless. If you wish to know what were the passions of that glorious youth of his, you will have for 
your imitation the intensity and glow of his godlike love of wisdom, which grew with him from his childhood, 
and has continued with him into his old age. But if you cannot gaze upon him, as the weak-sighted cannot 
gaze upon the sun, at all events watch that band of holy men who are ranged beneath him, and who by the 
illumination of their lives are a model for this age. God has placed them as a beacon for us who live around; 

many among them have been young men there in their prime, and have grown gray in the unbrol<en 
practice of continence and temperance; they were old in reasonableness before their time, and in character 
outstripped their years. The only love they tasted was that of wisdom; not that their natural instincts were 
different from the rest; for in all alike "the flesh lusteth against the spirit(7);" but they listened to some purpose 
to him who said that Temperance "is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her(8);" and they sailed across 
the swelling billows of existence upon this tree of life, as upon a skiff; and anchored in the haven of the will of 
God; enviable now after so fair a voyage, they rest their souls in that sunny cloudless calm. They now ride 
safe themselves at the anchor of a good hope, far out of reach of the tumult of the billows; and for others who 
will follow they radiate the splendour of their lives as beacon-fires on some high watch-tower. We have 
indeed a mark to guide us safely over the ocean of temptations; and why make the too curious inquiry, 
whether some with such thoughts as these have not fallen nevertheless, and why therefore despair, as if the 
achievement was beyond your reach? Look on him who has succeeded, and boldly launch upon the 
voyage with confidence that it will be prosperous, and sail on under the breeze of the Holy Spirit with Christ 
your pilot and with the oarage of good cheer(9). For those who "go down to the sea in ships and occupy 
their business in great waters" do not let the shipwreck that has befallen some one else prevent their being 
of good cheer; they rather shield their hearts in this very, confidence, and so sweep on to accomplish their 
successful feat. Surely it is the most absurd thing in the world to reprobate him who has slipped in a course 
which requires the greatest nicety, while one considers those who all their lives have been growing old in 
failures and in errors, to have chosen the better part. If one single approach to sin is such an awful thing that 
you deem it safer not to take in hand at all this loftier aim, how much more awful a thing it is to make sin the 
practice of a whole life, and to remain thereby absolutely ignorant of the purer course! How can you in your 
full life obey the Crucified? How can you, hale in sin, obey Him Who died to sin? How can you, who are not 
crucified to the world, and will not accept the mortification of the flesh, obey Him Who bids you follow after 
Him, and Who bore the Cross in His own body, as a trophy from the foe? How can you obey Paul when he 
exhorts you "to present your body a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God(1)," when you are 
"conformed to this world," and not transformed by the renewing of your mind, when you are not "walking" in 
this "newness of life," but still pursuing the routine of "the old man"? How can you be a priest unto God(2), 
anointed though you are for this very office, to offer a gift to God; a gift in no way another's, no counterfeited 
gift from sources outside yourself, but a gift that is really your own, namely, "the inner man(3)," who must be 
perfect and blameless, as it is required of a lamb to be without spot or blemish? How can you offer this to 
God, when you do not listen to the law forbidding the unclean to offer sacrifices? If you long for God to 
manifest Himself to you, why do you not hear Moses, when he commands the people to be pure from the 
stains of marriage, that they may take in the vision of God(4)? If this all seems little in your eyes, to be 
crucified with Christ, to present yourself a sacrifice to God, to become a priest unto the most high God, to 
make yourself worthy of the vision of the Almighty, what higher blessings than these can we imagine for you, 
if indeed you make light of the consequences of these as well? And the consequence of being crucified with 
Christ is that we shall live with Him, and be glorified with Him, and reign with Him; and the consequence of 
presenting ourselves to God is that we shall be changed from the rank of human nature and human dignity 
to that of Angels; for so speaks Daniel, that "thousand thousands stood before him(5)." He too who has 
taken his share in the true priesthood and placed himself beside the Great High Priest remains altogether 
himself a priest for ever, prevented for eternity from remaining any more in death. To say, again, that one 
makes oneself worthy to see God, produces no less a result than this; that one is made worthy to see God. 
Indeed, the crown of every hope, and of every desire, of every blessing, and of every promise of God, and 
of all those unspeakable delights which we believe to exist beyond our perception and our knowledge,-the 
crowning result of them all, I say, is this. Moses longed earnestly to see it, and many prophets and kings 
have desired to see the same: but the only class deemed worthy of it are the pure in heart, those who are, 
and are named "blessed," for this very reason, that "they shall see God(6)." Wherefore we would that you 
too should become crucified with Christ, a holy priest standing before God, a pure offering in all chastity, 
preparing yourself by your own holiness for God's coming; that you also may have a pure heart in which to 
see God, according to the promise of God, and of our Saviour Jesus Christ, to Whom be glory for ever and 
ever. Amen. 

ON INFANTS' EARLY DEATHS 

Every essayist and every pamphleteer will have you, most Excellent, to display his eloquence upon; your 
wondrous qualities will be a broad race-course wherein he may expatiate. A noble and suggestive subject 
in able hands has indeed a way of making a grander style, lifting it to the height of the great reality. We, 
however, like an aged horse, will remain outside this proposed race-course, only turning the ear to listen for 
the contest waged in celebrating your praises, if the sound of any literary car careering in full swing through 
such wonders may reach us. But though old age may compel a horse to remain away from the race, it may 
often happen that the din of the trampling racers rouses him into excitement, that he lifts his head with eager 
looks, that he shows his spirit in his breathings, and prances and paws the ground frequently, though this 
eagerness is all that is left to him, and time has sapped his powers of going. In the same way our pen 
remains outside the combat, and age compels it to yield the course to the professors who flourish now; 
nevertheless its eagerness to join the contest about you survives, and that it can still evince, even though 
these stylists who flourish now are at the height of their powers(2). But none of this display of my enthusiasm 
for you has anything to do with sounding your own praises: no style, however nervous and well-balanced, 
would easily succeed there; so that any one, who attempted to describe that embarrassing yet harmonious 
mixture of opposites in your character, would inevitably be left far behind your real worth. Nature, indeed, by 
throwing out the shade of the eyelashes before the glaring rays, brings to the eyes themselves a weaker 
light, and so the sunlight becomes tolerable to us, mingling as it does, in quantities proportionate to our 
need, with the shadows which the lashes cast. Just so the grandeur and the greatness of your character, 
tempered by your modesty and humbleness of mind, instead of blinding the beholder's eye, makes the 
sight on the contrary a pleasurable one; wherein this humbleness of mind does not occasion the splendour 
of the greatness to be dimmed, and its latent force to be overlooked; but the one is to be noticed in the 
other, the humility of your character in its elevation, and the grandeur reversely in the lowliness. Others must 
describe all this; and extol, besides, the many-sightedness of your mind. Your intellectual eyes are indeed 
as numerous, it may perhaps be said, as the hairs of the head; their keen unerring gaze is on everything 
alike; the distant is foreseen; the near is not unnoticed; they do not wait for experience to teach expedience; 
they see with Hope's insight, or else with that of Memory; they scan the present all over; first on one thing, 
then on another, but without confusing them, your mind works with the same energy and with the amount of 
attention that is required. Another, too, must record his admiration of the way in which poverty is made rich by 
you; if indeed any one is to be found in this age of ours who will make that a subject of praise and wonder. 
Yet surely now, if never before, the love of poverty will through you abound, and your ingotten wealth(3) will 
be envied above the ingots of Croesus. For whom has sea and land, with all the dower of their natural 
produce, enriched, as thy rejection of worldly abundance has enriched thee? They wipe the stain from steel 
and so make it shine like silver: so has the gleam of thy life grown brighter, ever carefully cleansed from the 
rust of wealth. We leave that to those who can enlarge upon it, and also upon your excellent knowledge of 
the things in which it is more glorious to gain than to abstain from gain. Grant me, however, leave to say, that 
you do not despise all acquisitions; that there are some which, though none of your predecessors has been 
able to clutch, yet you and you alone have seized with both your hands; for, instead of dresses and slaves 
and money, you have and hold the very souls of men, and store them in the treasure-house of your love. 
The essayists and pamphleteers, whose glory comes from such laudations, will go into these matters. But 
our pen, veteran as it now is, is to rouse itself only so far as to go at a foot's pace through the problem which 
your wisdom has proposed; namely, this-what we are to think of those who are taken prematurely, the 
moment of whose birth almost coincides with that of their death. The cultured heathen Plato spoke, in the 
person of one who had come to life again(4), much philosophy about the judgment courts in that other world; 
but he has left this other question a mystery, as ostensibly too great for human conjecture to be employed 
upon. If, then, there is anything in these lucubrations of ours that is of a nature to clear up the obscurities of 
this question, you will doubtless welcome the new account of it if otherwise, you will at all events excuse this 
in old age, and accept, if nothing else, our wish to afford you some degree of pleasure. History(5) says that 
Xerxes, that great prince who had made almost every land under the sun into one vast camp, and roused 
with his own designs the whole world, when he was marching against the Greeks received with delight a 
poor man's gift; and that gift was water, and that not in ajar, but carried in the hollow of the palm of his hand. 
So do you, of your innate generosity, follow his example; to him the will made the gift, and our gift may be 
found in itself but a poor watery thing. In the case of the wonders in the heavens, a man sees their beauty 

equally, whether he is trained to watch them, or whether he gazes upwards with an unscientific eye; but the 
feeling towards them is not the same in the man who comes from philosophy to their contemplation, and in 
him who has only his senses of perception to commit them to; the latter may be pleased with the sunlight, or 
deem the beauty of stars worthy of his wonder, or have watched the stages of the moon's course throughout 
the month; but the former, who has the soul-insight, and whose training has enlightened him so as to 
comprehend the phenomena of the heavens, leaves unnoticed all these things which delight the senses of 
the more unthinking, and looks at the harmony of the whole, inspecting the concert which results even from 
opposite movements in the circular revolutions; how the inner circles of these turn the contrary way to that in 
which the fixed stars are carried round(6); how those of the heavenly bodies to be observed in these inner 
circles are variously grouped in their approachments and divergements, their disappearances behind 
each other and their flank movements, and yet effect always precisely in the same way that notable and 
never-ending harmony; of which those are conscious who do not overlook the position of the tiniest star, and 
whose minds, by training domiciled above, pay equal attention to them all. In the same way do you, a 
precious life to me, watch the Divine economy; leaving those objects which unceasingly occupy the minds 
of the crowd, wealth, I mean, and luxury(7) and vainglory-things which like sunbeams flashing in their faces 
dazzle the unthinking-you will not pass without inquiry the seemingly most trivial questions in the world; for 
you do most carefully scrutinize the inequalities in human lives; not only with regard to wealth and penury, 
and the differences of position and descent (for you know that they are as nothing, and that they owe their 
existence not to any intrinsic reality, but to the foolish estimate of those who are struck with nonentities, as if 
they were actual things; and that if one were only to abstract from somebody who glitters with glory the blind 
adoration(8) of those who gaze at him, nothing would be left him after all the inflated pride which elates him, 
even though the whole mass of the world's riches were buried in his cellars), but it is one of your anxieties to 
know, amongst the other intentions of each detail of the Divine government, wherefore it is that, while the life 
of one is lengthened into old age, another has only so far a portion of it as to breathe the air with one gasp, 
and die. If nothing in this world happens without God, but all is linked tO the Divine will, and if the Deity is 
skilful and prudential, then it follows necessarily that there is some plan in these things bearing the mark of 
His wisdom, and at the same time of His providential care. A blind unmeaning occurrence can never be the 
work of God; for it is the property of God, as the Scripture says(9), to "make all things in wisdom." What 
wisdom, then, can we trace in the following? A human being enters on the scene of life, draws in the air, 
beginning the process of living with a cry of pain, pays the tribute of a tear to Nature(1), just tastes life's 
sorrows, before any of its sweets have been his, before his feelings have gained any strength; still loose in 
all his joints, tender, pulpy, unset; in a word, before he is even human (if the gift of reason is man's 
peculiarity, and he has never had it in him), such an one, with no advantage over the embryo in the womb 
except that he has seen the air, so short-lived, dies and goes to pieces again; being either exposed or 
suffocated, or else of his own accord ceasing to live from weakness. What are we to think about him? How 
are we to feel about such deaths? Will a soul such as that behold its Judge? Will it stand with the rest before 
the tribunal? Will it undergo its trial for deeds done in life? Will it receive the just recompense by being 
purged, according to the Gospel utterances, in fire, or refreshed with the dew of blessing(2)? But I do not see 
how we can imagine that, in the case of such a soul. The word "retribution "implies that something must have 
been previously given; but he who has not lived at all has been deprived of the material from which to give 
anything. There being, then, no retribution, there is neither good nor evil left to expect. "Retribution" purports 
to be the paying back of one of these two qualities; but that which is to be found neither in the category of 
good nor that of bad is in no category at all; for this antithesis between good and bad is an opposition that 
admits no middle; and neither will come to him who has not made a beginning with either of them. What 
therefore falls under neither of these heads may be said not even to have existed. But if some one says that 
such a life does not only exist, but exists as one of the good ones, and that God gives, though He does not 
repay, what is good to such, we may ask what sort of reason he advances for this partiality; how is justice 
apparent in such a view; how will he prove his idea in concordance with the utterances in the Gospels? 
There (the Master) says, the acquisition of the Kingdom comes to those who are deemed worthy of it, as a 
matter of exchange. "When ye have done such and such things, then it is fight that ye get the Kingdom as a 
reward." But in this case there is no act of doing or of willing beforehand, and so what occasion is there for 
saying that these will receive from God any expected recompense? If one unreservedly accepts a 
statement such as that, to the effect that any so passing into life will necessarily be classed amongst the 
good, it will dawn upon him then that not partaking in life at all will be a happier state than living, seeing that in 
the one case the enjoyment of good is placed beyond a doubt even with barbarian parentage, or a 
conception from a union not legitimate; but he who has lived the span ordinarily possible to Nature gets the 
pollution of evil necessarily mingled more or less with his life, or, if he is to be quite outside this contagion, it 
will be at the price of much painful effort. For virtue is achieved by its seekers not without a struggle; nor is 
abstinence from the paths of pleasure a painless process to human nature. So that one of two probations 
must be the inevitable fate of him who has had the longer lease of life; either to combat here on Virtue's 

toilsome field, or to suffer there the painful recompense of a life of evil. But in the case of infants prematurely 
dying there is nothing of that sort; but they pass to the blessed lot at once, if those who take this view of the 
matter speak true. It follows also necessarily from this that a state of unreason is preferable to having 
reason, and virtue will thereby be revealed as of no value: if he who has never possessed it suffers no loss, 
so, as regards the enjoyment of blessedness, the labour to acquire it will be useless folly; the unthinking 
condition will be the one that comes out best from God's judgment. For these and such-like reasons you bid 
me sift the matter, with a view to our getting, by dint of a closely-reasoned inquiry, some firm ground on which 
to rest our thoughts about it. 

For my part, in view of the difficulties of the subject proposed, I think the exclamation of the Apostle very 
suitable to the present case, just as he uttered it over unfathomable questions: "O the depth of the riches 
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are His judgments, and His ways past finding 
out! For who hath known the mind of the Lord(3)?" But seeing on the other hand that that Apostle declares it 
to be a peculiarity of him that is spiritual to "judge all things(4)," and commends those who have been 
"enriched(5)" by the Divine grace "in all utterance and in all knowledge," I venture to assert that it is not right 
to omit the examination which is within the range of our ability, nor to leave the question here raised without 
making any inquiries, or having any ideas about it; lest, like the actual subject of our proposed discussion, 
this essay should have an ineffectual ending, spoilt before its maturity by the fatal indolence of those who 
will not nerve themselves to search out the truth, like a new-born infant ere it sees the light and acquires any 
strength. I assert, too, that it is not well at once to confront and meet objections, as if we were pleading in 
court, but to introduce a certain order into the discussion and to lead the view on from one point to another. 
What, then, should this order be? First, we want to know the whence of human nature, and the wherefore of its 
ever having come into existence. If we hit the answer to these questions, we shall not fail in getting the 
required explanation. Now, that everything that exists, after God, in the intellectual or sensible world of 
beings owes that existence to Him, is a proposition which it is superfluous to prove; no one, with however 
little insight into the truth of things, would gainsay it. For every one agrees that the Universe is linked to one 
First Cause; that nothing in it owes its existence to itself, so as to be its own origin and cause; but that there is 
on the other hand a single uncreate eternal Essence, the same for ever, which transcends all our ideas of 
distance, conceived of as without increase or decrease, and beyond the scope of any definition; and that 
time and space with all their consequences, and anything previous to these that thought can grasp in the 
intelligible supramundane world, are all the productions of this Essence. Well, then, we affirm that human 
nature is one of these productions; and a word of the inspired Teaching helps us in this, which declares that 
when God had brought all things else upon the scene of life, man was exhibited upon the earth, a mixture 
from Divine sources, the godlike intellectual essence being in him united with the several portions of earthly 
elements contributed towards his formation, and that he was fashioned by his Maker to be the incarnate 
likeness of Divine transcendent Power. It would be better however to quote the very words: "And God 
created man, in the image of God created He him(6)." Now the reason of the making of this animate being 
has been given by certain writers previous to us as follows. The whole creation is divided into two parts; that 
"which is seen," and that "which is not seen," to use the Apostle's words (the second meaning the intelligible 
and immaterial, the first, the sensible and material); and being thus divided, the angelic and spiritual natures, 
which are among "the things not seen," reside in places above the world, and above the heavens, because 
such a residence is in correspondence with their constitution; for an intellectual nature is a fine, clear, 
unencumbered, agile kind of thing, and a heavenly body is fine and light, and perpetually moving, and the 
earth on the contrary, which stands last in the list of things sensible, can never be an adequate and 
congenial spot for creatures intellectual to sojourn in. For what correspondence can there possibly be 
between that which is light and buoyant, on the one hand, and that which is heavy and gravitating on the 
other? Well, in order that the earth may not be completely devoid of the local indwelling of the intellectual 
and the immaterial, man (these writers tell us) was fashioned by the Supreme forethought, and his earthy 
parts moulded over the intellectual and godlike essence of his soul; and so this amalgamation with that 
which has material weight enables the soul to live on this element of earth, which possesses a certain bond 
of kindred with the substance of the flesh. The design of all that is being born(7), then, is that the Power which 
is above both the heavenly and the earthly universe may in all parts of the creation be glorified by means of 
intellectual natures, conspiring to the same end by virtue of the same faculty in operation in all, I mean that of 
looking upon God. But this operation of looking upon God is nothing less than the life-nourishment 
appropriate, as like to like, to an intellectual nature. For just as these bodies, earthy as they are, are 
preserved by nourishment that is earthy, and we detect in them all alike, whether brute or reasoning, the 
operations of a material kind of vitality, so it is right to assume that there is an intellectual life-nourishment as 
well, by which such natures(8) are maintained in existence. But if bodily food, coming and going as it does in 
circulation, nevertheless imparts a certain amount of vital energy to those who get it, how much more does 
the partaking of the real thing, always remaining and always the same, preserve the eater in existence? If, 
then, this is the life-nourishment of an intellectual nature, namely, to have a part in God, this part will not be 

gained by that which is of an opposite quality; the would-be partaker must m some degree be akin to that 
which is to be partaken of. The eye enjoys the light by virtue of having light within itself to seize its kindred 
light, and the finger or any other limb cannot effect the act of vision because none of this natural light is 
organized in any of them. The same necessity requires that in our partaking of God there should be some 
kinship in the constitution of the partaker with that which is partaken of. Therefore, as the Scripture says, man 
was made in the image of God; that like, I take it, might be able to see like; and to see God is, as was said 
above, the life of the soul. But seeing that ignorance of the true good is like a mist that obscures the visual 
keenness of the soul, and that when that mist grows denser a cloud is formed so thick that Truth's ray cannot 
pierce through these depths of ignorance, it follows further that with the total deprivation of the light the soul's 
life ceases altogether; for we have said that the real life of the soul is acted out in partaking of the Good; but 
when ignorance hinders this apprehension of God, the soul which thus ceases to partake of God, ceases 
also to live. But no one can force us to give the family history(9) of this ignorance, asking whence and from 
what father it is; let him be given to understand from the word itself that "ignorance" and "knowledge" 
indicate one of the relations of the soul;(1) but no relation, whether expressed or not, conveys the idea of 
substance; a relation and a substance are quite of different descriptions. If, then, knowledge is not a 
substance, but a perfected(2) operation of the soul, it must be conceded that ignorance must be much 
farther removed still from anything in the way of substance; but that which is not in that way does not exist at 
all; and so it would be useless to trouble ourselves about where it comes from. Now seeing that the Word(3) 
declares that the living in God is the life of the soul, and seeing that this living is knowledge according to 
each man's ability, and that ignorance does not imply the reality of anything, but is only the negation of the 
operation of knowing, and seeing that upon this partaking in God being no longer effected there follows at 
once the cancelling of the soul's life, which is the worst of evils,-because of all this the Producer of all Good 
would work in us the cure of such an evil. A cure is a good thing, but one who does not look to the evangelic 
mystery would still be ignorant of the manner of the cure. We have shown that alienation from God, Who is 
the Life, is an evil; the cure, then, of this infirmity is, again to be made friends with God, and so to be in life 
once more. When such a life, then, is always held up in hope before humanity, it cannot be said that the 
winning of this life is absolutely a reward of a good life, and that the contrary is a punishment (of a bad one); 
but what we insist on resembles the case of the eyes. We do not say that one who has clear eyesight is 
rewarded as with a prize by being able to perceive the objects of sight; nor on the other hand that he who 
has diseased eyes experiences a failure of optic activity as the result of some penal sentence. With the eye 
in a natural state sight follows necessarily; with it vitiated by disease failure of sight as necessarily follows. In 
the same way the life of blessedness is as a familiar second nature to those who have kept clear the 
senses of the soul; but when the blinding stream of ignorance prevents our partaking in the real light, then it 
necessarily follows that we miss that, the enjoyment of which we declare to be the life of the partaker. 
Now that we have laid down these premisses, it is time to examine in the light of them the question proposed 
to us. It was somewhat of this kind. "If the recompense of blessedness is assigned according to the 
principles of justice, in what class shall he be placed who has died in infancy without having laid in this life 
any foundation, good or bad, whereby any return according to his deserts may be given him?" To this we 
shall make answer, with our eye fixed upon the consequences of that which we have already laid down, that 
this happiness in the future, while it is in its essence a heritage of humanity, may at the same time be called 
in one sense a recompense; and we will make clear our meaning by the same instance as before. Let us 
suppose two persons suffering from an affection of the eyes; and that the one surrenders himself most 
diligently to the process of being cured, and undergoes all that Medicine can apply to him, however painful 
it may be; and that the other indulges without restraint in baths(4) and wine-drinking, and listens to no advice 
whatever of his doctor as to the healing of his eyes. Well, when we look to the end of each of these we say 
that each duly receives in requital the fruits Of his choice, the one in deprivation of the light, the other in its 
enjoyment; by a misuse of the word we do actually call trial which necessarily follows, a recompense. We 
may speak, then, in this way also as regards this question of the infants: we may say that the enjoyment of 
that future life does indeed belong of right to the human being, but that, seeing the plague of ignorance has 
seized almost all now living in the flesh, he who has purged himself of it by means of the necessary courses 
of treatment receives the due reward of his diligence, when he enters on the life that is truly natural; while he 
who refuses Virtue's purgatives and renders that plague of ignorance, through the pleasures he has been 
entrapped by, difficult in his case to cure, gets himself into an unnatural state, and so is estranged from the 
truly natural life, and has no share in the existence which of right belongs to us and is congenial to us. 
Whereas the innocent babe has no such plague before its soul's eyes obscuring(5) its measure of light, and 
so it continues to exist in that natural life; it does not need the soundness which comes from purgation, 
because it never admitted the plague into its soul at all. Further, the present life appears to me to offer a sort 
of analogy to the future life we hope for, and to be intimately connected with it, thus; the tenderest infancy is 
suckled and reared with milk from the breast; then another sort of food appropriate to the subject of this 
fostering, and intimately adapted to his needs, succeeds, until at last he arrives at full growth. And so I think. 

in quantities continually adapted to it, in a sort of regular progress, the soul partakes of that truly natural life; 
according to its capacity and its power it receives a measure of the delights of the Blessed state; indeed we 
learn as much from Paul, who had a different sort of food for him who was already grown in virtue and for the 
imperfect "babe." For to the last he says, "I have fed you with milk, and not with meat: for hitherto ye were not 
able to bear it(6)." But to those who have grown to the full measure of intellectual maturity he says, "But 
strong meat belongeth to those that are of full age, even those who by reason of use have their senses 
exercised. ...(7)" Now it is not right to say that the man and the infant are in a similar state however free both 
may be from any contact of disease (for how can those who do not partake of exactly the same things be in 
an equal state of enjoyment?); on the contrary, though the absence of any affliction from disease may be 
predicated of both alike as long as both are out of the reach of its influence, yet, when we come to the matter 
of delights, there is no likeness in the enjoyment, though the percipients are in the same condition. For the 
man there is a natural delight in discussions, and in the management of affairs, and in the honourable 
discharge of the duties of an office, and in being distinguished for acts of help to the needy; in living, it may 
be, with a wife whom he loves, and ruling his household; and in all those amusements to be found in this life 
in the way of pastime, in musical pieces and theatrical spectacles, in the chase, in bathing, in gymnastics, in 
the mirth of banquets, and anything else of that sort. For the infant, on the contrary, there is a natural delight in 
its milk, and in its nurse's arms, and in gentle rocking that induces and then sweetens its slumber. Any 
happiness beyond this the tenderness of its years naturally prevents it from feeling. In the same manner 
those who in their life here have nourished the forces of their souls by a course of virtue, and have, to use the 
Apostle's words, had the "senses" of their minds "exercised," will, if they are translated to that life beyond, 
which is out of the body, proportionately to the condition and the powers they have attained participate in 
that divine delight; they will have more or they will have less of its riches according to the capacity acquired. 
But the soul that has never felt the taste of virtue, while it may indeed remain perfectly free from the sufferings 
which flow from wickedness having never caught the disease of evil at all, does nevertheless in the first 
instance s partake only so far in that life beyond (which consists, according to our previous definition, in the 
knowing and being in God) as this nursling can receive; until the time comes that it has thriven on the 
contemplation of the truly Existent as on a congenial diet, and, becoming capable of receiving more, takes 
at will more from that abundant supply of the truly Existent which is offered. 

Having, then, all these considerations in our view, we hold that the soul of him who has reached every virtue 
in his course, and the soul of him whose portion of life has been simply nothing, are equally out of the reach 
of those sufferings which flow from wickedness. Nevertheless we do not conceive of the employment of their 
lives as on the same level at all. The one has heard those heavenly announcements, by which, in the words 
of the Prophet, "the glory of God is declared(9)," and, travelling through creation, has been led to the 
apprehension of a Master of the creation; he has taken the true Wisdom for his teacher, that Wisdom which 
the spectacle of the Universe suggests; and when he observed the beauty of this material sunlight he had 
grasped by analogy the beauty of the real sunlight(1); he saw in the solid firmness of this earth the 
unchangeableness of its Creator; when he perceived the immensity of the heavens he was led on the road 
towards the vast Infinity of that Power which encompasses the Universe; when he saw the rays of the sun 
reaching from such sublimities even to ourselves he began to believe, by the means of such phenomena, 
that the activities of the Divine Intelligence did not fail to descend from the heights of Deity even to each one 
of us; for if a single luminary can occupy everything alike that lies beneath it with the force of light, and, more 
than that, can, while lending itself to all who can use it, still remain self-centred and undissipated, how much 
more shall the Creator of that luminary become "all in all," as the Apostle speaks, and come into each with 
such a measure of Himself as each subject of His influence can receive! Nay, look only at an ear of corn, at 
the germinating of some plant, at a ripe bunch of grapes, at the beauty of early autumn, whether in fruit or 
flower, at the grass springing unbidden, at the mountain reaching up with its summit to the height of the ether, 
at the springs on its slopes bursting from those swelling breasts, and running in rivers through the glens, at 
the sea receiving those streams from every direction and yet remaining within its limits, with waves edged 
by the stretches of beach and never stepping beyond those fixed boundaries of continent: look at these and 
such-like sights, and how can the eye of reason fail to find in them all that our education for Realities 
requires? Has a man who looks at such spectacles procured for himself only a slight power for the 
enjoyment of those delights beyond? Not to speak of the studies which sharpen the mind towards moral 
excellence geometry, I mean, and astronomy, and the knowledge of the truth that the science of numbers 
gives, and every method that furnishes a proof of the unknown and a conviction of the known, and, before all 
these, the philosophy contained in the inspired Writings, which affords a complete purification to those who 
educate themselves thereby in the mysteries of God. But the man who has acquired the knowledge of none 
of these things and has not even been conducted by the material cosmos to the perception of the beauties 
above it, and passes through life with his mind in a kind offender, unformed, and untrained state, he is not 
the man that is likely to be placed amongst the same surroundings as our argument has indicated that other 
man, before spoken of, to be placed; so that, in this view, it can no longer be maintained that, in the two 

supposed and completely opposite cases, the one who has taken no part in life is more blessed than the 
one who has taken a noble part in it. Certainly, in comparison with one who has lived all his life in sin, not 
only the innocent babe but even one who has never come into the world at all will be blessed. We learn as 
much too in the case of Judas, from the sentence pronounced upon him in the Gospels(2); namely, that 
when we think of such men, that which never existed is to be preferred to that which has existed in such sin. 
For, as to the latter, on account of the depth of the ingrained evil, the chastisement in the way of purgation will 
be extended into infinity(3); but as for what has never existed, how can any torment touch it?-However, 
notwithstanding that, the man who institutes a comparison between the infantine immature life and that of 
perfect virtue, must himself be pronounced immature for so judging of realities. Do you, then, in 
consequence of this, ask the reason why so and so, quite tender in age, is quietly taken away from amongst 
the living? Do you ask what the Divine wisdom contemplates in this? Well, if you are thinking of all those 
infants who are proofs of illicit connections, and so are made away with by their parents, you are not justified 
in calling to account, for such wickedness, that God Who will surely bring to judgment the unholy deeds 
done in this way. In the case, on the other hand, of any infant who, though his parents have nurtured him, and 
have with nursing and supplication spent earnest care upon him, nevertheless does not continue in this 
world, but succumbs to a sickness even unto death, which is unmistakably the sole cause of it, we venture 
upon the following considerations. It is a sign of the perfection of God's providence, that He not only heals 
maladies(4) that have come into existence, but also provides that some should be never mixed up at all in 
the things which He has forbidden; it is reasonable, that is, to expect that He Who knows the future equally 
with the past should check the advance of an infant to complete maturity, in order that the evil may not be 
developed which His foreknowledge has detected in his future life, and in order that a lifetime granted to 
one whose evil dispositions will be lifelong may not become the actual material for his vice. We shall better 
explain what we are thinking of by an illustration. Suppose a banquet of very varied abundance, prepared 
for a certain number of guests, and let the chair be taken by one of their number who is gifted to know 
accurately the peculiarities of constitution in each of them, and what food is best adapted to each 
temperament, what is harmful and unsuitable; in addition to this let him be entrusted with a sort of absolute 
authority over them, whether to allow as he pleases so and so to remain at the board or to expel so and so, 
and to take every precaution that each should address himself to the viands most suited to his constitution, 
so that the invalid should not kill himself by adding the fuel of what he was eating to his ailment, while the 
guest in robuster health should not make himself ill with things not good for him s and fall into discomfort from 
over-feeding(6). Suppose, amongst these, one of those inclined to drink is conducted out in the middle of 
the banquet or even at the very beginning of it; or let him remain to the very end, it all depending on the way 
that the president can secure that perfect order shall prevail, if possible, at the board throughout, and that the 
evil sights of surfeiting, tippling, and tipsiness shall be absent. It is just so, then, as when that individual is not 
very pleased at being torn away from all the savoury dainties and deprived of his favourite liquors, but is 
inclined to charge the president with want of justice and judgment, as having turned him away from the feast 
for envy, and not for any forethought for him; but if he were to catch a sight of those who were already 
beginning to misbehave themselves, from the long continuance of their drinking, in the way of vomitings and 
putting their heads on the table and unseemly talk, he would perhaps feel grateful to him for having removed 
him, before he got into such a condition, from a deep debauch. If our illustration(7) is understood, we can 
easily apply the rule which it contains to the question before us. What, then, was that question? Why does 
God, when fathers endeavour their utmost to preserve a successor to their line, often let the son and heir be 
snatched away in earliest infancy(8)? To those who ask this, we shall reply with the illustration of the 
banquet; namely, that Life's board is as it were crowded with a vast abundance and variety of dainties; and 
it must, please, be noticed that, true to the practice of gastronomy, all its dishes are not sweetened with the 
honey of enjoyment, but in some cases an existence has a taste of some especially harsh mischances(9) 
given to it: just as experts in the arts of catering desire how they may excite the appetites of the guests with 
sharp, or briny, or astringent dishes. Life, I say, is not in all its circumstances as sweet as honey; there are 
circumstances in it in which mere brine is the only relish, or into which an astringent, or vinegary, or sharp 
pungent flavour has so insinuated itself, that the rich sauce becomes very difficult to taste: the cups of 
Temptation, too, are filled with all sorts of beverages; some by the error of pride(1) produce the vice of 
inflated vanity; others lure on those who drain them to some deed of rashness; whilst in other cases they 
excite a vomiting in which all the ill-gotten acquisitions of years are with shame surrendered (2). Therefore, to 
prevent one who has indulged in the carousals to an improper extent from lingering over so profusely 
furnished a table, he is early taken from the number of the banqueters, and thereby secures an escape out 
of those evils which unmeasured indulgence procures for gluttons. This is that achievement of a perfect 
Providence which I spoke of; namely, not only to heal evils that have been committed, but also to forestall 
them before they have been committed; and this, we suspect, is the cause of the deaths of new-born infants. 
He Who does all things upon a Plan withdraws the materials for evil in His love to the individual, and, to a 
character whose marks His Foreknowledge has read, grants no time to display by a pre-eminence in actual 

vice what it is wiien its propensity to evil gets free play. Often, too, the Arranger of this Feast of Life exposes 
by such-like dispensations the cunning device of the "constraining cause" of money-loving(3), so that this 
vice comes to the light bared of all specious pretexts, and no longer obscured by any misleading screen(4). 
For most declare that they give play s to their cravings for more, in order that they may make their offspring 
all the richer; but that their vice belongs to their nature, and is not caused by any external necessity, is 
proved by that inexcusable avarice which is observed in childless persons. Many who have no heir, nor any 
hope of one, for the great wealth which they have laboriously gained, rear a countless brood within 
themselves of wants instead of children, and they are left without a channel into which to convey this 
incurable disease, though they cannot find an excuse in any necessity for this failing(6). But take the case of 
some who, during their sojourn in life, have been fierce and domineering in disposition, slaves to every kind 
of lust, passionate to madness, refraining from no act even of the most desperate wickedness, robbers and 
murderers, traitors to their country, and, more execrable still, patricides, mother-killers, child-murderers, mad 
after unnatural intercourse; suppose such characters grow old in this wickedness; how, some one may ask, 
does this harmonize with the result of our previous investigations? If that which is taken away before its time 
in order that it may not continuously glut itself, according to our illustration of the banquet, with Life's 
indulgences, is providentially removed from that carouse, what is the special design in so and so, who is of 
that disposition, being allowed to continue his revels(7) to old age, steeping both himself and his boon 
companions in the noxious fumes of his debauchery? In fine, you will ask, wherefore does God in His 
Providence withdraw one from life before his character can be perfected in evil, and leave another to grow 
to be such a monster that it had been better for him if he had never been born? In answerto this we will give, 
to those who are inclined to receive it favourably, a reason such as follows: viz. that oftentimes the existence 
of those whose life has been a good one operates to the advantage of their offspring; and there are 
hundreds of passages testifying to this in the inspired Writings, which clearly teach us that the tender care 
shown by God to those who have deserved it is shared in by their successors, and that even to have been 
an obstruction, in the path to wickedness, to any one who is sure to live wickedly, is a good result(8). But 
seeing that our Reason in this matter has to grope in the dark, clearly no one can complain if its conjecturing 
leads our mind to a variety of conclusions. Well, then, not only one might pronounce that God, in kindness to 
the Founders of some Family, withdraws a member of it who is going to live a bad life from that bad life, but, 
even if there is no antecedent such as this in the case of some early deaths, it is not unreasonable to 
conjecture that they would have plunged into a vicious life with a more desperate vehemence than any of 
those who have actually become notorious for their wickedness. That nothing happens without God we 
know from many sources; and, reversely, that God's dispensations have no element of chance and 
confusion in them every one will allow, who realizes that God is Reason, and Wisdom, and Perfect 
Goodness, and Truth, and could not admit of that which is not good and not consistent with His Truth(9). 
Whether, then, the early deaths of infants are to be attributed to the aforesaid causes, or whether there is 
some further cause of them beyond these, it befits us to acknowledge that these things happen for the best. I 
have another reason also to give which I have learnt from the wisdom of an Apostle; a reason, that is, why 
some of those who have been distinguished for their wickedness have been suffered to live on in their 
self-chosen course. Having expanded a thought of this kind at some length in his argument to the 
Romans(1), and having retorted upon himself with the counter-conclusion, which thence necessarily follows, 
that the sinner could no longer be justly blamed, if his sinning is a dispensation of God, and that he would not 
have existed at all, if it had been contrary to the wishes of Him Who has the world in His power, the Apostle 
meets this conclusion and solves this counter-plea by means of a still deeper view of things. He tells us that 
God, in rendering to every one his due, sometimes even grants a scope to wickedness for good in the end. 
Therefore He allowed the King of Egypt, for example, to be born and to grow up such as he was; the 
intention was that Israel, that great nation exceeding all calculation by numbers, might be instructed by his 
disaster. God's omnipotence is to be recognized in every direction; it has strength to bless the deserving; it 
is not inadequate to the punishment of wickedness(2); and so, as the complete removal of that peculiar 
people out of Egypt was necessary in order to prevent their receiving any infection from the sins of Egypt in 
a misguided way of living, therefore that God-defying and infamous Pharaoh rose and reached his maturity 
in the lifetime of the very people who were to be benefited, so that Israel might acquire a just knowledge of 
the two-fold energy of God, working as it did in either direction; the more beneficent they learnt in their own 
persons, the sterner by seeing it exercised upon those who were being scourged for their wickedness; for in 
His consummate wisdom God can mould even evil into co-operation with good. The artisan (if the Apostle's 
argument may be confirmed by any words of ours)-the artisan who by his skill has to fashion iron to some 
instrument for daily use, has need not only of that which owing to its natural ductility lends itself to his art, but, 
be the iron never so hard, be it never so difficult to soften it in the fire, be it even impossible owing to its 
adamantine resistance to mould it into any useful implement, his art requires the co-operation even of this; 
he will use it for an anvil, upon which the soft workable iron may be beaten and formed into something useful. 
But some one will say, "It is not all who thus reap in this life the fruits of their wickedness, any more than all 

those whose lives have been virtuous profit while living by their virtuous endeavours; what then, I ask, is the 
advantage of their existence in the case of these who live to the end unpunished?" I will bring forward to 
meet this question of yours a reason which transcends all human arguments. Somewhere in his utterances 
the great David declares that some portion of the blessedness of the virtuous will consist in this; in 
contemplating side by side with their own felicity the perdition of the reprobate. He says, "The righteous 
shall rejoice when he seeth the vengeance; he shall wash his hands in the blood of the ungodly(3)"; not 
indeed as rejoicing over the torments of those sufferers, but as then most completely realizing the extent of 
the well-earned rewards of virtue. He signifies by those words that it will be an addition to the felicity of the 
virtuous and an intensification of it, to have its contrary set against it. In saying that "he washes his hands in 
the blood of the ungodly" he would convey the thought that "the cleanness of his own acting in life is plainly 
declared in the perdition of the ungodly." For the expression "wash" represents the idea of cleanness; but 
no one is washed, but is rather defiled, in blood; whereby it is clear that it is a comparison with the harsher 
forms of punishment that puts in a clearer light the blessedness of virtue. We must now summarize our 
argument, in order that the thoughts which we have expanded may be more easily retained in the memory. 
The premature deaths of infants have nothing in them to suggest the thought that one who so terminates his 
life is subject to some grievous misfortune, any more than they are to be put on a level with the deaths of 
those who have purified themselves in this life by every kind of virtue; the more far-seeing Providence of 
God curtails the immensity of sins in the case of those whose lives are going to be so evil. That some of the 
wicked have lived on(4) does not upset this reason which we have rendered; for the evil was in their case 
hindered in kindness to their parents; whereas, in the case of those whose parents have never imparted to 
them any power of calling upon God, such a form of the Divine kindness(5), which accompanies such a 
power, is not transmitted to their own children; otherwise the infant now prevented by death from growing up 
wicked would have exhibited a far more desperate wickedness than the most notorious sinners, seeing that 
it would have been unhindered. Even granting that some have climbed to the topmost pinnacle of crime, the 
Apostolic view supplies a comforting answer to the question; for He Who does everything with Wisdom 
knows how to effect by means of evil some good. Still further, if some occupy a pre-eminence in crime, and 
yet for all that have never been a metal, to use our former illustration, that God's skill has used for any good, 
this is a case which constitutes an addition to the happiness of the good, as the Prophet's words suggest; it 
may be reckoned as not a slight element in that happiness, nor, on the other hand, as one unworthy of God's 
providing. 

ON PILGRIMAGES 

Since, my friend, you asl< me a question in your letter, I tliinl< tiiat it is incumbent upon me to answer you in 
tiieir proper order upon all the points connected with it. It is, then, my opinion that it is a good thing for those 
who have dedicated themselves once for all to the higher life to fix their attention continually upon the 
utterances in the Gospel, and, just as those who correct their work in any given material by a rule, and by 
means of the straightness of that rule bring the crookedness which their hands detect to straightness, so it is 
right that we should apply to these questions a strict and flawless measure as it were, -I mean, of course, the 
Gospel rule of life(2),-and in accordance with that, direct ourselves in the sight of God. Now there are some 
amongst those who have entered upon the monastic and hermit life, who have made it a part of their 
devotion to behold those spots at Jerusalem where the memorials of our Lord's life in the flesh are on view; 
it would be well, then, to look to this Rule, and if the finger of its precepts points to the observance of such 
things, to perform the work, as the actual injunction of our Lord; but if they lie quite outside the commandment 
of the Master, I do not see what there is to command any one who has become a law of duty to himself to be 
zealous in performing any of them. When the Lord invites the blest to their inheritance in the kingdom of 
heaven. He does not include a pilgrimage to Jerusalem amongst their good deeds; when He announces 
the Beatitudes, He does not name amongst them that sort of devotion. But as to that which neither makes us 
blessed nor sets us in the path to the kingdom, for what reason it should be run after, let him that is wise 
consider. Even if there were some profit in what they do, yet even so, those who are perfect would do best 
not to be eager in practising it; but since this matter, when closely looked into, is found to inflict upon those 
who have begun to lead the stricter life a moral mischief, it is so far from being worth an earnest pursuit, that it 
actually requires the greatest caution to prevent him who has devoted himself to God from being penetrated 
by any of its hurtful influences. What is it, then, that is hurtful in it? The Holy Life is open to all, men and women 
alike. Of that contemplative Life the peculiar mark is Modesty(3). But Modesty is preserved in societies that 
live distinct and separate, so that there should be no meeting and mixing up of persons of opposite sex; 
men are not to rush to keep the rules of Modesty in the company of women, nor women to do so in the 
company of men. But the necessities of a journey are continually apt to reduce this scrupulousness to a 
very indifferent observance of such rules. For instance, it is impossible for a woman to accomplish so long a 
journey without a conductor; on account of her natural weakness she has to be put upon her horse and to be 
lifted down again; she has to be supported(4) in difficult situations. Whichever we suppose, that she has an 
acquaintance to do this yeoman's service, or a hired attendant to perform it, either way the proceeding 
cannot escape being reprehensible; whether she leans on the help of a stranger, or on that of her own 
servant, she fails to keep the law of correct conduct; and as the inns and hostelries and cities of the East 
present many examples of licence and of indifference to vice, how will it be possible for one passing 
through such smoke to escape without smarting eyes? Where the ear and the eye is defiled, and the heart 
too, by receiving all those foulnesses through eye and ear, how will it be possible to thread without infection 
such seats of contagion? What advantage, moreover, is reaped by him who reaches those celebrated 
spots themselves? He cannot imagine that our Lord is living, in the body, there at the present day, but has 
gone away from us foreigners; or that the Holy Spirit is in abundance at Jerusalem, but unable to travel as 
far as us. Whereas, if it is really possible to infer God's presence from visible symbols, one might more 
justly consider that He dwelt in the Cappadocian nation than in any of the spots outside it. For how many 
Altars s there are there, on which the name of our Lord is glorified! One could hardly count so many in all the 
rest of the world. Again, if the Divine grace was more abundant about Jerusalem than elsewhere, sin would 
not be so much the fashion amongst those that live there; but as it is, there is no form of uncleanness(6) that 
is not perpetrated amongst them; rascality, adultery, theft, idolatry, poisoning, quarrelling, murder, are rife; 
and the last kind of evil is so excessively prevalent, that nowhere in the world are people so ready to kill 
each other as there; where kinsmen attack each other like wild beasts, and spill each other's blood, merely 
for the sake of lifeless plunder. Well, in a place where such things go on, what proof, I ask, have you of the 
abundance of Divine grace? But I know what many will retort to all that I have said; they will say, "Why did 
you not lay down this rule for yourself as well? If there is no gain for the godly pilgrim in return for having been 
there, for what reason did you undergo the toil of so long a journey?" Let them hear from me my plea for this. 
By the necessities of that office in which I have been placed by the Dispenser of my life to live, it was my 
duty, for the purpose of the correction which the Holy Council had resolved upon, to visit the places where 
the Church in Arabia is; secondly, as Arabia is on the confines of the Jerusalem district, I had promised that I 

would confer also with the Heads of the Holy Jerusalem Churches, because matters with them were in 
confusion, and needed an arbiter; thirdly, our most religious Emperor had granted us facilities for the 
journey, by postal conveyance, so that we had to endure none of those inconveniences which in the case of 
others we have noticed; our waggon was, in fact, as good as a church or monastery to us, for all of us were 
singing psalms and fasting in the Lord during the whole journey. Let our own case therefore cause difficulty 
to none; rather let our advice be all the more listened to, because we are giving it upon matters which came 
actually before our eyes. We confessed that the Christ Who was manifested is very God, as much before as 
after our sojourn at Jerusalem; our faith in Him was not increased afterwards any more than it was 
diminished. Before we saw Bethlehem we knew His being made man by means of the Virgin; before we 
saw His Grave we believed in His Resurrection from the dead; apart from seeing the Mount of Olives, we 
confessed that His Ascension into heaven was real. We derived only thus much of profit from our travelling 
thither, namely that we came to know by being able to compare them, that our own places are far holier than 
those abroad. Wherefore, O ye who fear the Lord, praise Him in the places where ye now are. Change of 
place does not effect any drawing nearer unto God, but wherever thou mayest be, God will come to thee, if 
the chambers of thy soul be found of such a sort that He can dwell in thee and walk in thee. But if thou 
keepest thine inner man full of wicked thoughts, even if thou wast on Golgotha, even if thou wast on the 
Mount of Olives, even if thou stoodest on the memorial-rock of the Resurrection, thou wilt be as faraway 
from receiving Christ into thyself, as one who has not even begun to confess Him. Therefore, my beloved 
friend, counsel the brethren to be absent from the body to go to our Lord, rather than to be absent from 
Cappadocia to go to Palestine; and if any one should adduce the command spoken by our Lord to His 
disciples that they should not quit Jerusalem, let him be made to understand its true meaning. Inasmuch as 
the gift and the distribution of the Holy Spirit had not yet passed upon the Apostles, our Lord commanded 
them to remain in the same place, until they should have been endued with power from on high. Now, if that 
which happened at the beginning, when the Holy Spirit was dispensing each of His gifts under the 
appearance of a flame, continued until now, it would be right for all to remain in that place where that 
dispensing took place; but if the Spirit "bloweth" where He "listeth," those, too, who have become believers 
here are made partakers of that gift; and that according to the proportion of their faith, not in consequence of 
their pilgrimage to Jerusalem. 

PHILOSOPHICAL WORKS: THE TREATISE "ON THE 
MAKING OF MAN" 

ill. PHILOSOPHICAL WORKS 

NOTE ON THE TREATISE "ON THE MAKING OF MAN." 

THIS work was intended to supplement and complete the Hexaemeron of S. Basil, and presupposes an 
acquaintance with that treatise. The narrative of the creation of the world is not discussed in detail: it is 
referred to, but chiefly in order to insist on the idea that the world was prepared to be the sphere of man's 
sovereignty. On the other hand, Gregory shows that man was made "with circumspection," fitted by nature 
for rule over the other creatures, made in the likeness of God in respect of various moral attributes, and in 
the possession of reason, while differing from the Divine nature in that the human mind receives its 
information by means of the senses and is dependent on them for its perception of external things. The 
body is fitted to be the instrument of the mind, adapted to the use of a reasonable being: and it is by the 
possession of the "rational soul," as well as of the "natural" or "vegetative" and the "sensible" soul, that man 
differs from the lower animals. At the same time, his mind waves by means of the senses: it is 
incomprehensible in its nature (resembling in this the Divine nature of which it is the image), and its relation 
to the body is discussed at some length (chs. 12-15). The connection between mind and body is ineffable: it 
is not to be accounted for by supposing that the mind resides in any particular part of the body: the mind 
acts upon and is acted upon by the whole body, depending on the corporeal and material nature for one 
element of perception, so that perception requires both body and mind. But it is to the rational element that 
the name of "soul" properly belongs: the nutritive and sensible faculties only borrow the name from that 
which is higher than themselves. Man was first made "in the image of God:" and this conception excludes 
the idea of distinction of sex. In the first creation of man all humanity is included, according to the Divine 
foreknowledge: "our whole nature extending from the first to the last" is "one image of Him Who is." But for 
the Fall, the increase of the human race would have taken place as the increase of the angelic race takes 
place, in some way unknown to us. The declension of man from his first estate made succession by 
generation necessary: and it was because this declension and its consequences were present to the 
Divine mind that God "created them male and female." In this respect, and in respect of the need of 
nourishment by food, man is not "in the image of God," but shows his kindred with the lower creation. But 
these necessities are not permanent: they will end with the restoration of man to his former excellence (chs. 
16-18). Here Gregory is led to speak (chs. 19-20) of the food of man in Paradise, and of the "tree of the 
knowledge of good and evil." And thus, having made mention of the Fall of man, he goes on to speak of his 
Restoration. This, in his view, follows from the finite nature of evil: it is deferred until the sum of humanity is 
complete. As to the mode in which the present state of things will end, we know nothing: but that it will end is 
inferred from the non-eternity of matter (chs. 21-24). The doctrine of the Resurrection is supported by our 
knowledge of the accuracy with which other events have been predicted in Scripture, by the experience 
given to us of like events in particular cases, in those whom our Lord raised to life, and especially in His own 
resurrection. The argument that such a restoration is impossible is met by an appeal to the unlimited 
character of the Divine power, and by inferences from parallels observed in nature (chs. 25-27). Gregory 
then proceeds to deal with the question of the pre-existence of the soul, rejecting that opinion, and 
maintaining that the body and the soul come into existence together, potentially, in the Divine will, actually at 
the moment when each individual man comes into being by generation (chs. 28-29). In the course of his 
argument on this last point, he turns aside to discuss at some length, in the last chapter, the structure of the 
human body: but he returns once more, in conclusion, to his main position, that man "is generated as a living 
and animated being," and that the power of the soul is gradually manifested in, and by means of, the 
material substratum of the body; so that man is brought to perfection by the aid of the lower attributes of the 
soul. But the true perfection of the soul is not in these, which will ultimately be "put away," but in the higher 
attributes which constitute for man "the image of God."
