Gregory of Nyssa, On the Making of Man
Translation: Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Schaff et al. (1886-1900), Public Domain
Source: https://archive.org/details/EarlyChurchFathers38Volumes

ON THE MAKING OF MAN 

Gregory, Bishop of Nyssa, to his brother Peter, THE SERVANT OF GOD. 

If we had to honour with rewards of money those who excel in virtue, the whole world of money, as Solomon 
says(1), would seem but small to be made equal to your virtue in the balance. Since, however, the debt of 
gratitude due to your Reverence is greater than can be valued in money, and the holy Eastertide demands 
the accustomed gift of love, we offer to your greatness of mind, O man of God, a gift too small indeed to be 
worthy of presentation to you, yet not falling short of the extent of our power. The gift is a discourse, like a 
mean garment, woven not without toil from our poor wit, and the subject of the discourse, while it will perhaps 
be generally thought audacious, yet seemed not unfitting. For he alone has worthily considered the creation 
of God who truly was created after God, and whose soul was fashioned in the image of Him Who created 
him,-Basil, our common father and teacher,-who by his own speculation made the sublime ordering of the 
universe generally intelligible, making the world as established by God in the true Wisdom known to those 
who by means of his understanding are led to such contemplation: but we, who fall short even of worthily 
admiring him, yet intend to add to the great writer's speculations that which is lacking in them, not so as to 
interpolate his work by insertion(2) (for it is not to be thought of that that lofty mouth should suffer the insult of 
being given as authority for our discourses), but so that the glory of the teacher may not seem to be failing 
among his disciples. 

For if, the consideration of man being lacking in his Hexaemeron, none of those who had been his disciples 
contributed any earnest effort to supply the defect, the scoffer would perhaps have had a handle against his 
great fame, on the ground that he had not cared to produce in his hearers any habit of intelligence. But now 
that we venture according to our powers upon the exposition of what was lacking, if anything should be 
found in our work such as to be not unworthy of his teaching, it will surely be referred to our teacher: while if 
our discourse does not reach the height of his sublime speculation, he will be free from this charge and 
escape the blame of seeming not to wish that his disciples should have any skill at all, though we perhaps 
may he answerable to our censurers as being unable to contain in the littleness of our hear the wisdom of 
our instructor. 

The scope of our proposed enquiry is not small: it is second to none of the wonders of the world,-perhaps 
even greater than any of those known to us, because no other existing thing, save the human creation, has 
been made like to God: thus we shall readily find that allowance will be made for what we say by kindly 
readers, even if our discourse is far behind the merits of the subject. For it is our business, I suppose, to 
leave nothing unexamined of all that concerns man,-of what we believe to have taken place previously, of 
what we now see, and of the results which are expected afterwards to appear (for surely our effort would be 
convicted of failing of its promise, if, when man is proposed for contemplation, any of the questions which 
bear upon the subject were to be omitted); and, moreover, we must fit together, according to the explanation 
of Scripture and to that derived from reasoning, those statements concerning him which seem, by a kind of 
necessary sequence, to be opposed, so that our whole subject may be consistent in train of thought and in 
order, as the Statements that seem to be contrary are brought (if the Divine power so discovers a hope for 
what is beyond hope, and a way for what is inextricable) to one and the same end: and for clearness' sake I 
think it well to set forth to you the discourse by chapters, that you may be able briefly to know the force of the 
several arguments of the whole work. 

1. Wherein is a partial inquiry into the nature of the world, and a more minute exposition ofthe things which 
preceded the genesis of man. 

2. Why man appeared last, after the creation. 

3. That the nature of man is more precious than all the visible creation. 

4. That the construction of man throughout signifies his ruling power. 

5. That man is a likeness ofthe Divine sovereignty. 

6. An examination ofthe kindred of mind to nature: wherein by way of digression is refuted the doctrine ofthe 
Anomoeans. 

7. Why man is destitute of natural weapons and covering. 

8. Why man's form is upright, and that hands were given him because of reason; wherein also is a 
speculation on the difference of souls. 

9. That the form of man was framed to serve as an instrument for the use of reason. 

10. That the mind works by means ofthe senses. 

1 1 . That the nature of mind is invisible. 

12. An examination ofthe question where the ruling principle is to be considered to reside; wherein also is a 
discussion of tears and laughter, and a physiological speculation as to the interrelation of matter, nature, 
and mind. 

13. A rationale of sleep, of yawning, and of dreams. 

14. That the mind is not in a part ofthe body; wherein also is a distinction ofthe movements ofthe body and 
ofthe soul. 

1 5. That the soul proper, in fact and name, is the rational soul, while the others are called so equivocally: 
wherein also is this statement, that the power ofthe mind extends throughout the whole body in fitting contact 

with every part. 

16. A contemplation of tiie Divine utterance wiiicii said,-"Let us mal<e man after our image and lil<eness;" 
wiierein is examined wiiat is tiie definition of tiie image, and iiow tiie passible and mortal is like to the 
Blessed and Impassible, and how in the image there are male and female, seeing these are not in the 
Prototype. 

17. What we must answerto those who raise the question-"lf procreation is after sin, how would souls have 
come into being if the first of mankind had remained sinless?" 

18. That our irrational passions have their rise from kindred with irrational nature. 

1 9. To those who say that the enjoyment of the good things we look for will again consist in meat and drink, 
because it is written that by these means man at first lived in Paradise. 

20. What was the life in Paradise, and what was the forbidden tree. 

21 . That the resurrection is looked for as a consequence, not so much from the declaration of Scripture as 
from the very necessity of things. 

22. To those who say, "If the resurrection is a thing excellent and good, how is it that it has not happened 
already, but is hoped for in some periods of time?" 

23. That he who confesses the beginning of the world's existence must necessarily agree also as to its end. 

24. An argument against those who say that matter is co-eternal with God. 

25. How one even of those who are without may be brought to believe the Scripture when teaching of the 
resurrection. 

26. That the resurrection is not beyond probability. 

27. That it is possible, when the human body is dissolved into the elements of the universe, that each should 
have his own body restored from the common source. 

28. To those who say that souls existed before bodies, or that bodies were formed before souls: wherein 
there is also a refutation of the fables concerning transmigrations of souls. 

29. An establishment of the doctrine that the cause of existence of soul and body is one and the same. 

30. A brief consideration of the construction of our bodies from a medical point of view. 

I. Wherein is a partial inquiry into the nature of the world, and a more minute exposition of 
the things which preceded the genesis of man(3). 

1 . "This is the book of the generation of heaven and earth(4)," saith the Scripture, when all that is seen was 
finished, and each of the things that are betook itself to its own separate place, when the body of heaven 
compassed all things round, and those bodies which are heavy and of downward tendency, the earth and 
the water, holding each other in, took the middle place of the universe; while, as a sort of bond and stability 
for the things that were made, the Divine power and skill was implanted in the growth of things, guiding all 
things with the reins of a double operation (for it was by rest and motion that it devised the genesis of the 
things that were not, and the continuance of the things that are), driving around, about the heavy and 
changeless element contributed by the creation that does not move, as about some fixed path, the 
exceedingly rapid motion of the sphere, like a wheel, and preserving the indissolubility of both by their 
mutual action, as the circling substance by its rapid motion compresses the compact body of the earth 
round about, while that which is firm and unyielding, by reason of its unchanging fixedness, continually 
augments the whirting motion of those things which revolve round it, and intensity s is produced in equal 
measure in each of the natures which thus differ in their operation, in the stationary nature, I mean, and in the 
mobile revolution; for neither is the earth shifted from its own base, nor does the heaven ever relax in its 
vehemence, or slacken its motion. 

2. These, moreover, were first framed before other things, according to the Divine wisdom, to be as it were a 
beginning of the whole machine, the great Moses indicating, I suppose, where he says that the heaven and 
the earth were made by God "in the beginning(6)" that all things that are seen in the creation are the offspring 
of rest and motion, brought into being by the Divine will. Now the heaven and the earth being diametrically 
opposed to each other in their operations, the creation which lies between the opposites, and has in part a 
share in what is adjacent to it, itself acts as a mean between the extremes, so that there is manifestly a 
mutual contact of the opposites through the mean; for air in a manner imitates the perpetual motion and 
subtlety of the fiery substance, both in the lightness of its nature, and in its suitableness for motion; yet it is not 
such as to be alienated from the solid substance, for it is no more in a state of continual flux and dispersion 
than in a permanent state of immobility, but becomes, in its affinity to each, a kind of borderland of the 
opposition between operations, at once uniting in itself and dividing things which are naturally distinct. 

3. In the same way, liquid substance also is attached by double qualities to each of the opposites; for in so 
far as it is heavy and of downward tendency it is closely akin to the earthy; but in so far as it partakes of a 
certain fluid and mobile energy it is not altogether alien from the nature which is in motion; and by means of 
this also there is effected a kind of mixture and concurrence of the opposites, weight being transferred to 

motion, and motion finding no iiindrance in weigiit, so tiiat tilings most extremely opposite in nature combine 
witli one anotiier, and are mutually joined by those which act as means between them. 

4. But to speak strictly, one should rather say that the very nature of the contraries themselves is not entirely 
without mixture of properties, each with the other, so that, as I think, all that we see in the world mutually 
agree, and the creation, though discovered in properties of contrary natures, is yet at union with itself. For as 
motion is not conceived merely as local shifting, but is also contemplated in change and alteration, and on 
the other hand the immovable nature does not admit motion by way of alteration, the wisdom of God has 
transposed these properties, and wrought unchangeableness in that which is ever moving, and change in 
that which is immovable; doing this, it may be, by a providential dispensation, so that that property of nature 
which constitutes its immutability and immobility might not, when viewed in any created object, cause the 
creature to be accounted as God; for that which may happen to move or change would cease to admit of 
the conception of Godhead. Hence the earth is stable without being immutable, while the heaven, on the 
contrary, as it has no mutability, so has not stability either, that the Divine power, by interweaving change in 
the stable nature and motion with that which is not subject to change, might, by the interchange of attributes, 
at once join them both closely to each other, and make them alien from the conception of Deity; for as has 
been said, neither of these (neither that which is unstable, nor that which is mutable) can be considered to 
belong to the more Divine nature. 

5. Now all things were already arrived at their own end: "the heaven and the earth(7)," as Moses says, "were 
finished," and all things that lie between them, and the particular things were adorned with their appropriate 
beauty; the heaven with the rays of the stars, the sea and air with the living creatures that swim and fly, and 
the earth with all varieties of plants and animals, to all which, empowered by the Divine will, it gave birth 
together; the earth was full, too, of her produce, bringing forth fruits at the same time with flowers; the 
meadows were full of all that grows therein, and all the mountain ridges, and summits, and every hillside, 
and slope, and hollow, were crowned with young grass, and with the varied produce of the trees, just risen 
from the ground, yet shot up at once into their perfect beauty; and all the beasts that had come into life at 
God's command were rejoicing, we may suppose, and skipping about, running to and for in the thickets in 
herds according to their kind, while every sheltered and shady spot was ringing with the chants of the 
songbirds. And at sea, we may suppose, the sight to be seen was of the like kind, as it had just settled to 
quiet and calm in the gathering together of its depths, where havens and harbours spontaneously hollowed 
out on the coasts made the sea reconciled with the land; and the gentle motion of the waves vied in beauty 
with the meadows, rippling delicately with light and harmless breezes that skimmed the surface; and all the 
wealth of creation by land and sea was ready, and none was there to share it. 

II. Why man appeared last, afterthe creation 

1 . For not as yet had that great and precious thing, man, come into the world of being; it was not to be looked 
for that the ruler should appear before the subjects of his rule; but when his dominion was prepared, the next 
step was that the king should be manifested. When, then the Maker of all had prepared beforehand, as it 
were, a royal lodging for the future king (and this was the land, and islands, and sea, and the heaven arching 
like a roof over them), and when all kinds of wealth had been stored in this palace (and by wealth I mean the 
whole creation, all that is in plants and trees, and all that has sense, and breath, and life; and-if we are to 
account materials also as wealth-all that for their beauty are reckoned precious in the eyes of men, as gold 
and silver, and the substances of your jewels which men delight in-having concealed, I say, abundance of 
all these also in the bosom of the earth as in a royal treasure-house), he thus manifests man in the world, to 
be the beholder of some of the wonders therein, and the lord of others; that by his enjoyment he might have 
knowledge of the Giver, and by the beauty and majesty of the things he saw might trace out that power of the 
Maker which is beyond speech and language. 

2. For this reason man was brought into the world last afterthe creation, not being rejected to the last as 
worthless, but as one whom it behoved to be king over his subjects at his very birth. And as a good host 
does not bring his guest to his house before the preparation of his feast, but, when he has made all due 
preparation, and decked with their proper adornments his house, his couches, his table, brings his guest 
home when things suitable for his refreshment are in readiness, rain the same manner the rich and 
munificent Entertainer of our nature, when He had decked the habitation with beauties of every kind, and 
prepared this great and varied banquet, then introduced man, assigning to him as his task not the acquiring 
of what was not there, but the enjoyment of the things which were there; and for this reason He gives him as 
foundations the instincts of a twofold organization, blending the Divine with the earthy, that by means of both 
he may be naturally and properly disposed to each enjoyment, enjoying God by means of his more divine 
nature, and the good things of earth by the sense that is akin to them. 

III. Thatthe nature of man is more precious than all the visible creation(9). 

1 . But it is rigiit tiiat we sliould not leave tiiis point witiiout consideration, tiiat wiiile tiie world, great as it is, and 
its parts, are laid as an elemental foundation for the formation of the universe, the creation is, so to say, 
made offhand by the Divine power, existing at once on His command, while counsel precedes the making 
of man; and that which is to be is fore-shown by the Maker in verbal description, and of what kind it is fitting 
that it should be, and to what archetype it is fitting that it should bear a likeness, and for what it shall be made, 
and what its operation shall be when it is made, and of what it shall be the ruler, wall these things the saying 
examines beforehand, so that he has a rank assigned him before his genesis, and possesses rule over the 
things that are before his coming into being; for it says, "God said. Let us make man in our image, after our 
likeness, and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and the beasts of the earth, and the fowls of 
the heaven, and the cattle, and all the earth(1)" 

2. O marvellous! a sun is made, and no counsel precedes; a heaven likewise; and to these no single thing 
in creation is equal. So great a wonder is formed by a word alone, and the saying indicates neither when, 
nor how, nor any such detail. So too in all particular cases, the aether, the stars, the intermediate air, the sea, 
the earth, the animals, the plants,-all are brought into being with a word, while only to the making of man 
does the Maker of all draw near with circumspection, so as to prepare beforehand for him material for his 
formation, and to liken his form to an archetypal beauty, and, setting before him a mark for which he is to 
come into being, to make for him a nature appropriate and allied to the operations, and suitable for the 
object in hand. 

IV. That the construction of man throughout signifies his ruling power(2). 

1 . For as in our own life artificers fashion a tool in the way suitable to its use, so the best Artificer made our 
nature as it were a formation fit for the exercise of royalty, preparing it at once by superior advantages of 
soul, and by the very form of the body, to be such as to be adapted for royalty: for the soul immediately 
shows its royal and exalted character, far removed as it is from the lowliness of private station, in that it owns 
no lord, and is self-governed, swayed autocratically by its own will; for to whom else does this belong than 
to a king? And further, besides these facts, the fact that it is the image of that Nature which rules over all 
means nothing else than this, that our nature was created to be royal from the first. For as, in men's ordinary 
use, those who make images(3) of princes both mould the figure of their form, and represent along with this 
the royal rank by the vesture of purple, and even the likeness is commonly spoken of as "a king," so the 
human nature also, as it was made to rule the rest, was, by its likeness to the King of all, made as it were a 
living image, partaking with the archetype both in rank and in name, not vested in purple, nor giving 
indication of its rank by sceptre and diadem (for the archetype itself is not arrayed with these), but instead of 
the purple robe, clothed in virtue, which is in truth the most royal of all raiment, and in place of the sceptre, 
leaning on the bliss of immortality, and instead of the royal diadem, decked with the crown of righteousness; 
so that it is shown to be perfectly like to the beauty of its archetype in all that belongs to the dignity of royalty. 

V. That man is a likeness of the Divine sovereignty(4). 

1 . It is true, indeed, that the Divine beauty is not adorned with any shape or endowment of form, by any 
beauty of colour, but is contemplated as excellence in unspeakable bliss. As then painters transfer human 
forms to their pictures by the means of certain colours, laying on their copy the proper and corresponding 
tints, so that the beauty of the original may be accurately transferred to the likeness, so I would have you 
understand that our Maker also, painting the portrait to resemble His own beauty, by the addition of virtues, 
as it were with colours, shows in us His own sovereignty: and manifold and varied are the tints, so to say, by 
which His true form is portrayed: not red, orwhite(5), or the blending of these, whatever it may be called, nor 
a touch of black that paints the eyebrow and the eye, and shades, by some combination, the depressions in 
the figure, and all such arts which the hands of painters contrive, but instead of these, purity, freedom from 
passion, blessedness, alienation from all evil, and all those attributes of the like kind which help to form in 
men the likeness of God: with such hues as these did the Maker of His own image mark our nature. 

2. And if you were to examine the other points also by which the Divine beauty is expressed, you will find that 
to them too the likeness in the image which we present is perfectly preserved. The Godhead is mind and 
word: for "in the beginning was the Word(6)" and the followers of Paul "have the mind of Christ" which 
"speaks" in them(7): humanity too is not far removed from these: you see in yourself word and 
understanding, an imitation of the very Mind and Word. Again, God is love, and the fount of love: for this the 
great John declares, that "love is of God," and "God is love(8)" : the Fashioner of our nature has made this 
to be our feature too: for "hereby," He says, "shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one 
another(9)" :-thus, if this be absent, the whole stamp of the likeness is transformed. The Deity beholds and 
hears all things, and searches all things out: you too have the power of apprehension of things by means of 

sight and hearing, and the understanding that inquires into things and searches them out. 

VI. An examination of the kindred of mind to nature: wherein, by way of digression, is refuted 
the doctrine of the Anomoeans(l). 

1 . And let no one suppose me to say that the Deity is in touch with existing things in a manner resembling 
human operation, by means of different faculties. For it is impossible to conceive in the simplicity of the 
Godhead the varied and diverse nature of the apprehensive operation: not even in our own case are the 
faculties which apprehend things numerous, although we are in touch with those things which affect our life in 
many ways by means of our senses; for there is one faculty, the implanted mind itself, which passes through 
each of the organs of sense and grasps the things beyond: this it is that, by means of the eyes, beholds 
what is seen; this it is that, by means of hearing, understands what is said; that is content with what is to our 
taste, and turns from what is unpleasant; that uses the hand for whatever it wills, taking hold or rejecting by its 
means, using the help of the organ for this purpose precisely as it thinks expedient. 

2. If in men, then, even though the organs formed by nature for purposes of perception may be different, that 
which operates and moves by means of all, and uses each appropriately for the object before it, is one and 
the same, not changing its nature by the differences of operations, how could any one suspect multiplicity of 
essence in God on the ground of His varied powers? for "He that made the eye," as the prophet says, and 
"that planted the ear(2)," stamped on human nature these operations to be as it were significant characters, 
with reference to their models in Himself: for He says, "Let us make man in our image(3). 

3. But what, I would ask, becomes of the heresy oftheAnomoeans? what will they say to this utterance? how 
will they defend the vanity of their dogma in view of the words cited? Will they say that it is possible that one 
image should be made like to different forms? if the Son is in nature unlike the Father, how comes it that the 
likeness He forms of the different natures is one? for He Who said, "Let us make after our image," and by 
the plural signification revealed the Holy Trinity, would not, if the archetypes were unlike one another, have 
mentioned the image in the singular: for it would be impossible that there should be one likeness displayed 
of things which do not agree with one another: if the natures were different he would assuredly have begun 
their images also differently, making the appropriate image for each: but since the image is one, while the 
archetype is not one, who is so far beyond the range of understanding as not to know that the things which 
are like the same thing, surely resemble one another? Therefore He says (the word, it may be, cutting short 
this wickedness at the very formation of human life), "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness." 

VII. Why man is destitute of natural weapons and covering(4). 

1 . But what means the uprightness of his figure? and why is it that those powers which aid life do not naturally 
belong to his body? but man is brought into life bare of natural covering, an unarmed and poor being, 
destitute of all things useful, worthy, according to appearances, of pity rather than of admiration, not armed 
with prominent horns or sharp claws, nor with hoofs nor with teeth, nor possessing by nature any deadly 
venom in a sting,-things such as most animals have in their own power for defence against those who do 
them harm: his body is not protected with a covering of hair: and yet possibly it was to be expected that he 
who was promoted to rule over the rest of the creatures should be defended by nature with arms of his own 
so that he might not need assistance from others for his own security. Now, however, the lion, the boar, the 
tiger, the leopard, and all the like have natural power sufficient for their safety: and the bull has his horn, the 
hare his speed, the deer his leap and the certainty of his sight, and another beast has bulk, others a 
proboscis, the birds have their wings, and the bee her sting, and generally in all there is some protective 
power implanted by nature: but man alone of all is slower than the beasts that are swift of foot, smaller than 
those that are of great bulk, more defenceless than those that are protected by natural arms; and how, one 
will say, has such a being obtained the sovereignty over all things? 

2. Well, I think it would not be at all hard to show that what seems to be a deficiency of our nature is a means 
for our obtaining dominion over the subject creatures. For if man had had such power as to be able to outrun 
the horse in swiftness, and to have a foot that, from its solidity, could not be worn out, but was strengthened 
by hoofs or claws of some kind, and to carry upon him horns and stings and claws, he would be, to begin 
with, a wild-looking and formidable creature, if such things grew with his body: and moreover he would have 
neglected his rule over the other creatures if he had no need of the co-operation of his subjects; whereas 
now, the needful services of our life are divided among the individual animals that are under our sway, for 
this reason-to make our dominion over them necessary. 

3. It was the slowness and difficult motion of our body that brought the horse to supply our need, and tamed 
him: it was the nakedness of our body that made necessary our management of sheep, which supplies the 
deficiency of our nature by its yearly produce of wool: it was the fact that we import from others the supplies 
for our living which subjected beasts of burden to such service: furthermore, 'it was the fact that we cannot 

eat grass like cattle which brought the ox to render service to our life, who makes our living easy for us by 
his own labour; and because we needed teeth and biting power to subdue some of the other animals by 
grip of teeth, the dog gave, together with his swiftness, his own jaw to supply our need, becoming like a live 
sword for man; and there has been discovered by men iron, stronger and more penetrating than prominent 
horns or sharp claws, not, as those things do with the beasts, always growing naturally with us, but entering 
into alliance with us for the time, and for the rest abiding by itself: and to compensate for the crocodile's 
scaly hide, one may make that very hide serve as armour, by putting it on his skin upon occasion: or, failing 
that, art fashions iron for this purpose too, which, when it has served him for a time for war, leaves the 
man-at-arms once more free from the burden in time of peace: and the wing of the birds, too, ministers to our 
life, so that by aid of contrivance we are not left behind even by the speed of wings: for some of them 
become tame and are of service to those who catch birds, and by their means others are by contrivance 
subdued to serve our needs:, moreover art contrives to make our arrows feathered, and by means of the 
bow gives us for our needs the speed of wings: while the fact that our feet are easily hurt and worn in 
travelling makes necessary the aid which is given by the subject animals: for hence it comes that we fit 
shoes to our feet. 

VIII. Why man's form is upright; and that hands were given him because of reason; wherein 
also is a speculation on the difference of souls. 

1 . But man's form is upright, and extends aloft towards heaven, and looks upwards: and these are marks of 
sovereignty which show his royal dignity. For the fact that man alone among existing things is such as this, 
while all others bow their bodies downwards, clearly points to the difference of dignity between those which 
stoop beneath his sway and that power which rises above them: for all the rest have the foremost limbs of 
their bodies in the form of feet, because that which stoops needs something to support it: but in the formation 
of man these limbs were made hands, for the upright body found one base, supporting its position securely 
on two feet, sufficient for its needs. 

2. Especially do these ministering hands adapt themselves to the requirements of the reason: indeed if one 
were to say that the ministration of hands is a special property of the rational nature, he would not be entirely 
wrong; and that not only because his thought turns to the common and obvious fact that we signify our 
reasoning by means of the natural employment of our hands in written characters. It is true that this fact, that 
we speak by writing, and, in a certain way, converse by the aid of our hands, preserving sounds by the 
forms of the alphabet, is not unconnected with the endowment of reason; but I am referring to something else 
when I say that the hands co-operate with the bidding of reason. 

3. Let us, however, before discussing this point, consider the matter we passed over (for the subject of the 
order of created things almost escaped our notice), why the growth of things that spring from the earth takes 
precedence, and the irrational animals come next, and then, after the making of these, comes man: for it 
may be that we learn from these facts not only the obvious thought, that grass appeared to the Creator 
useful for the sake of the animals, while the animals were made because of man, and that for this reason, 
before the animals there was made their food, and before man that which was to minister to human life. 

4. But it seems to me that by these facts Moses reveals a hidden doctrine, and secretly delivers that wisdom 
concerning the soul, of which the learning that is without had indeed some imagination, but no clear 
comprehension. His discourse then hereby teaches us that the power of life and soul may be considered in 
three divisions. For one is only a power of growth and nutrition supplying what is suitable for the support of 
the bodies that are nourished, which is called the vegetative(6) soul, and is to be seen in plants; for we may 
perceive in growing plants a certain vital power destitute of sense; and there is another form of life besides 
this, which, while it includes the form above mentioned, is also possessed in addition of the power of 
management according to sense; and this is to be found in the nature of the irrational animals: for they are 
not only the subjects of nourishment and growth, but also have the activity of sense and perception. But 
perfect bodily life is seen in the rational (I mean the human) nature, which both is nourished and endowed 
with sense, and also partakes of reason and is ordered by mind. 

5. We might make a division of our subject in some such way as this. Of things existing, part are intellectual, 
part corporeal. Let us leave alone for the present the division of the intellectual according to its properties, 
for our argument is not concerned with these. Of the corporeal, part is entirely devoid of life, and part shares 
in vital energy. Of a living body, again, part has sense conjoined with life, and part is without sense: lastly, 
that which has sense is again divided into rational and irrational. For this reason the lawgiver says that after 
inanimate matter (as a sort of foundation for the form of animate things), this vegetative life was made, and 
had earlier(7) existence in the growth of plants: then he proceeds to introduce the genesis of those creatures 
which are regulated by sense: and since, following the same order, of those things which have obtained life 
in the flesh, those which have sense can exist by themselves even apart from the intellectual nature, while 
the raflonal principle could not be embodied save as blended with the sensiflve,-for this reason man was 

made last after the animals, as nature advanced in an orderly course to perfection. For this rational animal, 
man, is blended of every form of soul; he is nourished by the vegetative kind of soul, and to the faculty of 
growth was added that of sense, which stands midway, if we regard its peculiar nature, between the 
intellectual and the more material essence being as much coarser than the one as it is more refined than the 
other: then takes place a certain alliance and commixture of the intellectual essence with the subtle and 
enlightened element of the sensitive nature: so that man consists of these three: as we are taught the like 
thing by the apostle in what he says to the Ephesians(8), praying for them that the complete grace of their 
"body and soul and spirit" may be preserved at the coming of the Lord; using, the word "body" for the 
nutritive part, and denoting the sensitive by the word "soul," and the intellectual by "spirit." Likewise too the 
Lord instructs the scribe in the Gospel that he should set before every commandment that love to God which 
is exercised with all the heart and soul and mind(9): for here also it seems to me that the phrase indicates 
the same difference, naming the more corporeal existence "heart," the intermediate "soul," and the higher 
nature, the intellectual and mental faculty, "mind." 

6. Hence also the apostle recognizes three divisions of dispositions, calling one "carnal," which is busied 
with the belly and the pleasures connected with it, another "natural(1)," which holds a middle position with 
regard to virtue and vice, rising above the one, but without pure participation in the other; and another 
"spiritual," which perceives the perfection of godly life: wherefore he says to the Corinthians, reproaching 
their indulgence in pleasure and passion, "Ye are carnal(2)," and incapable of receiving the more perfect 
doctrine; while elsewhere, making a comparison of the middle kind with the perfect, he says, "but the natural 
man receiveth not the things of the Spirit: for they are foolishness unto him: but he that is spiritual judgeth all 
things, yet he himself is judged of no man(3)." As, then, the natural man is higher than the carnal, by the same 
measure also the spiritual man rises above the natural. 

7. If, therefore. Scripture tells us that man was made last, after every animate thing, the lawgiver is doing 
nothing else than declaring to us the doctrine of the soul, considering that what is perfect comes last, 
according to a certain necessary sequence in the order of things: for in the rational are included the others 
also, while in the sensitive there also surely exists the vegetative form, and that again is conceived only in 
connection with what is material: thus we i may suppose that nature makes an ascent as it were by steps-l 
mean the various properties of life-from the lower to the perfect form. 

8 4. Now since man is a rational animal, the instrument of his body must be made suitable for the use of 
reason(5); as you may see musicians producing their music according to the form of their instruments, and 
not piping with harps nor harping upon flutes, so it must needs be that the organizaflon of these instruments 
of ours should be adapted for reason, that when struck by the vocal organs it might be able to sound 
properly for the use of words. For this reason the hands were attached to the body; for though we can count 
up very many uses in daily life for which these skilfully contrived and helpful instruments, our hands, that 
easily follow every art and every operation, alike in war and peace(6), are serviceable, yet nature added 
them to our body pre-eminently for the sake of reason. For if man were destitute of hands, the various parts 
of his face would certainly have been arranged like those of the quadrupeds, to suit the purpose of his 
feeding: so that its form would have been lengthened out and pointed towards the nostrils, and his lips 
would have projected from his mouth, lumpy, and sflff, and thick, fitted for taking up the grass, and his tongue 
would either have lain between his teeth, of a kind to match his lips, fleshy, and hard, and rough, assisflng 
his teeth to deal with what came under his grinder, or it would have been moist and hanging out at the side 
like that of dogs and other carnivorous beasts, projecflng through the gaps in his jagged row of teeth. If, then, 
our body had no hands, how could articulate sound have been implanted in it, seeing that the form of the 
parts of the mouth would not have had the configuraflon proper for the use of speech, so that man must of 
necessity have either bleated, or "baaed," or barked, or neighed, or bellowed like oxen or asses, or uttered 
some besflal sound? but now, as the hand is made part of the body, the mouth is at leisure for the service of 
the reason. Thus the hands are shown to be the property of the raflonal nature, the Creator having thus 
devised by their means a special advantage for reason. 

IX. Thatthe form of man was framed to serve as an instrument for the use of reason(7). 

1 . Now since our Maker has bestowed upon our formation a certain Godlike grace, by implanting in His 
image the likeness of His own excellences, for this reason He gave, of His bounty. His other good gifts to 
human nature; but mind and reason we cannot strictly say that He gave, but that He imparted them, adding 
to the image the proper adornment of His own nature. Now since the mind is a thing intelligible and 
incorporeal, its grace would have been incommunicable and isolated, if its moflon were not manifested by 
some contrivance. For this cause there was sflll need of this instrumental organizaflon, that it might, like a 
plectrum, touch the vocal organs and indicate by the quality of the notes struck, the moflon within. 

2. And as some skilled musician, who may have been deprived by some affection of his own voice, and yet 
wish to make his skill known, might make melody with voices of others, and publish his art by the aid of flutes 

or of the lyre, so also the human mind being a discoverer of all sorts of conceptions, seeing that it is unable, 
by the mere soul, to reveal to those who hear by bodily senses the motions of its understanding, touches, 
like some skilful composer, these animated instruments, and makes known its hidden thoughts by means of 
the sound produced upon them. 

3. Now the music of the human instrument is a-sort of compound of flute and lyre, sounding together in 
combination as in a concerted piece of music. For the breath, as it is forced up from the air-receiving 
vessels through the windpipe, when the speaker's impulse to utterance attunes the harmony to sound, and 
as it strikes against the internal protuberances which divide this flute-like passage in a circular arrangement, 
imitates in a way the sound uttered through a flute, being driven round and round by the membranous 
projections. But the palate receives the sound from below in its own concavity, and dividing the sound by 
the two passages that extend to the nostrils, and by the cartilages about the perforated bone, as it were by 
some scaly protuberance, makes its resonance louder; while the cheek, the tongue, the mechanism of the 
pharynx by which the chin is relaxed when drawn in, and tightened when extended to a point-all these in 
many different ways answer to the motion of the plectrum upon the strings, varying very quickly, as occasion 
requires, the arrangement of the tones; and the opening and closing of the lips has the same effect as 
players produce when they check the breath of the flute with their fingers according to the measure of the 
tune. 

X. Thatthe mind works by means of the senses. 

1 . As the mind then produces the music of reason by means of our instrumental construction, we are born 
rational, while, as I think, we should not have had the gift of reason if we had had to employ our lips to supply 
the need of the body-the heavy and toilsome part of the task of providing food. As things are, however, our 
hands appropriate this ministration to themselves, and leave the mouth available for the service of reason. 
2(8). The operation of the instrument(9), however, is twofold; one for the production of sound, the other for the 
reception of concepts from without; and the one faculty does not blend with the other, but abides in the 
operation for which it was appointed by nature, not interfering with its neighbour either by the sense of 
hearing undertaking to speak, or by the speech undertaking to hear; for the latter is always uttering 
something, while the ear, as Solomon somewhere says, is not filled with continual hearing(1). 

3. That point as to our internal faculties which seems to me to be even in a special degree matter for 
wonder, is this :-what is the extent of that inner receptacle into which flows everything that is poured in by our 
hearing? who are the recorders of the sayings that are brought in by it? what sort of storehouses are there for 
the concepts that are being put in by our hearing? and how is it, that when many of them, of varied kinds, are 
pressing one upon another, there arises no confusion and error in the relative position of the things that are 
laid up there? And one may have the like feeling of wonder also with regard to the operation of sight; for by it 
also in like manner the mind apprehends those things which are external to the body, and draws to itself the 
images of phenomena, marking in itself the impressions of the things which are seen. 

4. And just as if there were some extensive city receiving all comers by different entrances, all will not 
congregate at any particular place, but some will go to the market, some to the houses, others to the 
churches, or the streets, or lanes, or the theatres, each according to his own inclination,-some such city of 
our mind I seem to discern established in us, which the different entrances through the senses keep filling, 
while the mind, distinguishing and examining each of the things that enters, ranks them in their proper 
departments of knowledge. 

5. And as, to follow the illustration of the city, it may often be that those who are of the same family and 
kindred do not enter by the same gate, coming in by different entrances, as it may happen, but are none the 
less, when they come within the circuit of the wall, brought together again, being on close terms with each 
other (and one may find the contrary happen; for those who are strangers and mutually unknown often take 
one entrance to the city, yet their community of entrance does not bind them together; for even when they are 
within they can be separated to join their own kindred); something of the same kind I seem to discern in the 
spacious territory of our mind; for often the knowledge which we gather from the different organs of sense is 
one, as the same object is divided into several parts in relation to the senses; and again, on the contrary, 
we may learn from some one sense many and varied things which have no affinity one with another. 

6. For instance-for it is better to make our argument clear by illustration-let us suppose that we are making 
some inquiry into the property of tastes-what is sweet to the sense, and what is to be avoided by tasters. 
We find, then, by experience, both the bitterness of gall and the pleasant character of the quality of honey; 
but when these facts are known, the knowledge is one which is given to us (the same thing being introduced 
to our understanding in several ways) by taste, smell, hearing, and often by touch and sight. For when one 
sees honey, and hears its name, and receives it by taste, and recognizes its odour by smell, and tests it by 
touch, he recognizes the same thing by means of each of his senses. 

7. On the other hand we get varied and multiform information by some one sense, for as hearing receives all 

sorts of sounds, and our visual perception exercises its operation by beiiolding tilings of different l<inds-for 
it liglits alil<e on blacl< and wliite, and all things that are distinguished by contrariety of colour,-so with taste, 
with smell, with perception by touch; each implants in us by means of its own perceptive power the 
knowledge of things of every kind. 

XI. Thatthe nature of mind is invisible(2) 

1 . What then is, in its own nature, this mind that distributes itself into faculties of sensation, and duly receives, 
by means of each, the knowledge of things? That it is something else besides the senses, I suppose no 
reasonable man doubts; for if it were identical with sense, it would reduce the proper character of the 
operations carried on by sense to one, on the the ground that it is itself simple, and that in what is simple no 
diversity is to be found. Now however, as all agree that touch is one thing and smell another, and as the rest 
of the senses are in like manner so situated with regard to each other as to exclude intercommunion or 
mixture, we must surely suppose, since the mind is duly present in each case, that it is something else 
besides the sensitive nature, so that no variation may attach to a thing intelligible. 

2. "Who hath known the mind of the Lord(3)?" the apostle asks; and I ask further, who has understood his 
own mind? Let those tell us who consider the nature of God to be within their comprehension, whether they 
understand themselves-if they know the nature of their own mind. "It is manifold and much compounded." 
How then can that which is intelligible be composite? or what is the mode of mixture of things that differ in 
kind? Or, "It is simple, and incomposite." How then is it dispersed into the manifold divisions of the senses? 
how is there diversity in unity? how is unity maintained in diversity? 

3. But I find the solution of these difficulties by recourse to the very utterance of God; for He says, "Let us 
make man in our image, after our likeness(4)." The image is properly an image so long as it fails in none of 
those attributes which we perceive in the archetype; but where it falls from its resemblance to the prototype it 
ceases in that respect to be an image; therefore, since one of the attributes we contemplate in the Divine 
nature is incomprehensibility of essence, it is clearly necessary that in this point the image should be able to 
show its imitation of the archetype. 

4. For if, while the archetype transcends comprehension, the nature of the image were comprehended, the 
contrary character of the attributes we behold in them would prove the defect of the image; but since the 
nature of our mind, which is the likeness of the Creator evades our knowledge, it has an accurate 
resemblance to the superior nature, figuring by its own unknowableness the incomprehensible Nature. 

XII. An examination of the question where the ruling principle is to be considered to reside; 
wherein also is a discussion of tears and laughter, and a physiological speculation as to the 
interrelation of matter, nature, and minds. 

1. Let there be an end, then, of all the vain and conjectural discussion of those who confine the intelligible 
energy to certain bodily organs; of whom some lay it down that the ruling principle is in the heart, while others 
say that the mind resides in the brain, strengthening such opinions by some plausible superficialities. For he 
who ascribes the principal authority to the heart makes its local position evidence of his argument (because 
it seems that it somehow occupies the middle position in the body(6)), on the ground thatthe motion of the 
will is easily distributed from the centre to the whole body, and so proceeds to operation; and he makes the 
troublesome and passionate disposition of man a testimony for his argument, because such affections 
seem to move this part sympathetically. Those, on the other hand, who consecrate the brain to reasoning, 
say that the head has been built by nature as a kind of citadel of the whole body, and that in it the mind 
dwells like a king, with a bodyguard of senses surrounding it like messengers and shield-bearers. And 
these find a sign of their opinion in the fact that the reasoning of those who have suffered some injury to the 
membrane of the brain is abnormally distorted, and that those whose heads are heavy with intoxication 
ignore what is seemly. 

2. Each of those who uphold these views puts forward some reasons of a more physical character on behalf 
of his opinion concerning the ruling principle. One declares that the motion which proceeds from the 
understanding is in some way akin to the nature of fire, because fire and the understanding are alike in 
perpetual motion; and since heat is allowed to have its source in the region of the heart, he says on this 
ground that the motion of mind is compounded with the mobility of heat, and asserts that the heart, in which 
heat is enclosed, is the receptacle of the intelligent nature. The other declares that the cerebral membrane 
(for so they call the tissue that surrounds the brain) is as it were a foundation or root of all the senses, and 
hereby makes good his own argument, on the ground that the intellectual energy cannot have its seat save 
in that part where the ear, connected with it, comes into concussion with the sounds that fall upon it, and the 
sight (which naturally belongs to the hollow of the place where the eyes are situated) makes its internal 
representation by means of the images that fall upon the pupils, while the qualities of scents are discerned 

in it by being drawn in tiirougii tiie nose, and tiie sense of taste is tried by tiie test of tiie cerebral membrane, 
wiiicii sends down from itself, by the veterbrae of the neck, sensitive nerve-processes to the isthmoidal 
passage, and unites them with the muscles there. 

3. I admit it to be true that the intellectual part of the soul is often disturbed by prevalence of passions; and 
that the reason is blunted by some bodily accident so as to hinder its natural operation; and that the heart is 
a sort of source of the fiery element in the body, and is moved in correspondence with the impulses of 
passion; and moreover, in addition to this, I do not reject (as I hear very much the same account from those 
who spend their time on anatomical researches) the statement that the cerebral membrane (according to 
the theory of those who take such a physiological view), enfolding in itself the brain, and steeped in the 
vapours that issue from it, forms a foundation for the senses; yet I do not hold this for a proof that the 
incorporeal nature is bounded by any limits of place. 

4. Certainly we are aware that mental aberrations do not arise from heaviness of head alone, but skilled 
physicians declare that our intellect is also weakened by the membranes that underlie the sides being 
affected by disease, when they call the disease frenzy, since the name given to those membranes is 
<greek>frenes</greek>. And the sensation resulting from sorrow is mistakenly supposed to arise at the 
heart; for while it is not the heart, but the entrance of the belly that is pained, people ignorantly refer the 
affection to the heart. Those, however, who have carefully studied the affections in question give some such 
account as follows:-by a compression and closing of the pores, which naturally takes place over the whole 
body in a condition of grief, everything that meets a hindrance in its passage is driven to the cavities in the 
interior of the body, and hence also (as the respiratory organs too are pressed by what surrounds them), the 
drawing of breath often becomes more violent under the influence of nature endeavouring to widen what has 
been contracted, so as to open out the compressed passages; and such breathing we consider a 
symptom of grief and call it a groan or a shriek. That, moreover, which appears to oppress the region of the 
heart is a painful affection, not of the heart, but of the entrance of the stomach, and occurs from the same 
cause (I mean, that of the compression of the pores), as the vessel that contains the bile, contracting, pours 
that bitter and pungent juice upon the entrance of the stomach; and a proof of this is that the complexion of 
those in grief becomes sallow and jaundiced, as the bile pours its own juice into the veins by reason of 
excessive pressure. 

5. Furthermore, the opposite affection, that, I mean, of mirth and laughter, contributes to establish the 
argument; for the pores of the body, in the case of those who are dissolved in mirth by hearing something 
pleasant, are also somehow dissolved and relaxed. Just as in the former case the slight and insensible 
exhalations of the pores are checked by grief, and, as they compress the internal arrangement of the higher 
viscera, drive up towards the head and the cerebral membrane the humid vapour which, being retained in 
excess by the cavities of the brain, is driven out by the pores at its base(7), while the closing of the eyelids 
expels the moisture in the form of drops (and the drop is called a tear), so I would have you think that when 
the pores, as a result of the contrary condition, are unusually widened, some air is drawn in through them into 
the interior, and thence again expelled by nature through the passage of the mouth, while all the viscera 
(and especially, as they say, the liver) join in expelling this air by a certain agitation and throbbing motion; 
whence it comes that nature, contriving to give facility for the exit of the air, widens the passage of the mouth, 
extending the cheeks on either side round about the breath; and the result is called laughter. 

6. We must not, then, on this account ascribe the ruling principle any more to the liver than we must think, 
because of the heated state of the blood about the heart in wrathful dispositions, that the seat of the mind is 
in the heart; but we must refer these matters to the character of our bodily organization, and consider that the 
mind is equally in contact with each of the parts according to a kind of combination which is indescribable. 

7. Even if any should allege to us on this point the Scripture which claims the ruling principle for the heart, we 
shall not receive the statement without examination; for he who makes mention of the heart speaks also of 
the reins, when he says, "God trieth the hearts and reins"(8); so that they must either confine the intellectual 
principle to the two combined or to neither. 

8. And although I am aware that the intellectual energies are blunted, or even made altogether ineffective in 
a certain condition of the body, I do not hold this a sufficient evidence for limiting the faculty of the mind by 
any particular place, so that it should be forced out of its proper amount of free space by any inflammations 
that may arise in the neighbouring parts of the body(9) (for such an opinion is a corporeal one, that when the 
receptacle is already occupied by something placed in it, nothing else can flnd place there); for the 
intelligible nature neither dwells in the empty spaces of bodies, nor is extruded by encroachments of the 
flesh; but since the whole body is made like some musical instrument, just as it often happens in the case of 
those who know how to play, but are unable, because the unfltness of the instrument does not admit of their 
art, to show their skill (for that which is destroyed by flme, or broken by a fall, or rendered useless by rust or 
decay, is mute and inefficient, even if it be breathed upon by one who may be an excellent artist in 
flute-playing); so too the mind, passing over the whole instrument, and touching each of the parts in a mode 
corresponding to its intellectual activities, according to its nature, produces its proper effect on those parts 

which are in a natural condition, but remains inoperative and ineffective upon those which are unable to 
admit the movement of its art; for the mind is somehow naturally adapted to be in close relation with that 
which is in a natural condition, but to be alien from that which is removed from nature. 
9.(1) And here, I think there is a view of the matter more close to nature, by which we may learn something of 
the more refined doctrines. For since the most beautiful and supreme good of all is the Divinity Itself, to 
which incline all things that have a tendency towards what is beautiful and good(2), we therefore say that the 
mind, as being in the image of the most beautiful, itself also remains in beauty and goodness so long as it 
partakes as far as is possible in its likeness to the archetype; but if it were at all to depart from this it is 
deprived of that beauty in which it was. And as we said that the mind was adorned(3) by the likeness of the 
archetypal beauty, being formed as though it were a mirror to receive the figure of that which it expresses, 
we consider that the nature which is governed by it is attached to the mind in the same relation, and that it too 
is adorned by the beauty that the mind gives, being, so to say, a mirror of the mirror; and that by it is swayed 
and sustained the material element of that existence in which the nature is contemplated. 

10. Thus so long as one keeps in touch with the other, the communication of the true beauty extends 
proportionally through the whole series, beautifying by the superior nature that which comes next to it; but 
when there is any interruption of this beneficent connection, or when, on the contrary, the superior comes to 
follow the inferior, then is displayed the misshapen character of matter, when it is isolated from nature (for in 
itself matter is a thing without form or structure), and by its shapelessness is also destroyed that beauty of 
nature with which(4) it is adorned through the mind; and so the transmission of the ugliness of matter reaches 
through the nature to the mind itself, so that the image of God is no longer seen in the figure expressed by 
that which was moulded according to it; for the mind, setting the idea of good like a mirror behind the back, 
turns off the incident rays of the effulgence of the good, and it receives into itself the impress of the 
shapelessness of matter. 

1 1 . And in this way is brought about the genesis of evil, arising through the withdrawal of that which is 
beautiful and good. Now all is beautiful and good that is closely related to the First Good; but that which 
departs from its relation and likeness to this is certainly devoid of beauty and goodness. If, then, according 
to the statement we have been considering, that which is truly good is one, and the mind itself also has its 
power of being beautiful and good, in so far as it is in the image of the good and beautiful, and the nature, 
which is sustained by the mind, has the like power, in so far as it is an image of the image, it is hereby shown 
that our material part holds together, and is upheld when it is controlled by nature; and on the other hand is 
dissolved and disorganized when it is separated from that which upholds and sustains it, and is dissevered 
from its conjunction with beauty and goodness. 

1 2. Now such a condition as this does not arise except when there takes place an overturning of nature to 
the opposite state, in which the desire has no inclination for beauty and goodness, but for that which is in 
need of the adorning element; for it must needs be that that which is made like to matter, destitute as matter 
is of form of its own, should be assimilated to it in respect of the absence alike of form and of beauty. 

13. We have, however, discussed these points m passing, as following on our argument, since they were 
introduced by our speculation on the point before us; for the subject of enquiry was, whether the intellectual 
faculty has its seat in any of the parts of us, or extends equally over them all; for as for those who shut up the 
mind locally in parts of the body, and who advance for the establishment of this opinion of theirs the fact that 
the reason has not free course in the case of those whose cerebral membranes are in an unnatural 
condition, our argument showed that in respect of every part of the compound nature of man, whereby every 
man has some natural operation, the power of the soul remains equally ineffective if the part does not 
continue in its natural condition. And thus there came into our argument, following out this line of thought, the 
view we have just stated, by which we learn that in the compound nature of man the mind is governed by 
God, and that by it is governed our material life, provided the latter remains in its natural state, but if it is 
perverted from nature it is alienated also from that operation which is carried on by the mind. 

14. Let us return however once more to the point from which we started-that in those who are not perverted 
from their natural condition by some affection, the mind exercises its own power, and is established firmly in 
those who are in sound health, but on the contrary is powerless in those who do not admit its operation; for 
we may confirm our opinion on these matters by yet other arguments: and if it is not tedious for those to hear 
who are already wearied with our discourse, we shall discuss these matters also, so far as we are able, in a 
few words. 

XIII. A Rationale of sleep, of yawning, and of dreams(5). 

1 . This life of our bodies, material and subject to flux, always advancing by way of motion, finds the power of 
its being in this, that it never rests from its motion: and as some river, flowing on by its own impulse, keeps 
the channel in which it runs well filled, yet is not seen in the same water always at the same place, but part of 
it glides away while part comes flowing on, so, too, the material element of our life here suffers change in the 

continuity of its succession of opposites by way of motion and flux, so tiiat it never can desist from ciiange, 
but in its inability to rest keeps up unceasingly its motion alternating by like ways(6): and if it should ever 
cease moving it will assuredly have cessation also of its being. 

2. For instance, emptying succeeds fulness, and on the other hand after emptiness comes in turn a process 
of filling: sleep relaxes the strain of waking, and, again, awakening braces up what had become slack: and 
neither of these abides continually, but both give way, each at the other's coming; nature thus by their 
interchange so renewing herself as, while partaking of each in turn, to pass from the one to the other without 
break. For that the living creature should always be exerting itself in its operations produces a certain 
rupture and severance of the overstrained part; and continual quiescence of the body brings about a certain 
dissolution and laxity in its frame: but to be in touch with each of these at the proper times in a moderate 
degree is a staying-power of nature, which, by continual transference to the opposed states, gives herself in 
each of them rest from the other. Thus she finds the body on the strain through wakefulness, and devises 
relaxation for the strain by means of sleep, giving the perceptive faculties rest for the time from their 
operations, loosing them like horses from the chariots after the race. 

3. Further, rest at proper times is necessary for the framework of the body, that the nutriment may be diffused 
over the whole body through the passages which it contains, without any strain to hinder its progress. For 
just as certain misty vapours are drawn up from the recesses of the earth when it is soaked with rain, 
whenever the sun heats it with rays of any considerable warmth, so a similar result happens in the earth that 
is in us, when the nutriment within is heated up by natural warmth; and the vapours, being naturally of upward 
tendency and airy nature, and aspiring to that which is above them, come to be in the region of the head like 
smoke penetrating the joints of a wall: then they are dispersed thence by exhalation to the passages of the 
organs of sense, and by them the senses are of course rendered inactive, giving way to the transit of these 
vapours. For the eyes are pressed upon by the eyelids when some leaden instrument(7), as it were (I mean 
such a weight as that I have spoken of), lets down the eyelid upon the eyes; and the hearing, being dulled 
by these same vapours, as though a door were placed upon the acoustic organs, rests from its natural 
operation: and such a condition is sleep, when the sense is at rest in the body, and altogether ceases from 
the operation of its natural motion, so that the digestive processes of nutriment may have free course for 
transmission by the vapours through each of the passages. 

4. And for this reason, if the apparatus of the organs of sense should be closed and sleep hindered by 
some occupation, the nervous system, becoming filled with the vapours, is naturally and spontaneously 
extended so that the part which has had its density increased by the vapours is rarefied by the process of 
extension, just as those do who squeeze the water out of clothes by vehement wringing: and, seeing that the 
parts about the pharynx are somewhat circular, and nervous tissue abounds there, whenever there is need 
for the expulsion from that part of the density of the vapours- since it is impossible that the part which is 
circular in shape should be separated directly, but only by being distended in the outline of its 
circumference-forthis reason, by checking the breath m a yawn the chin is moved downwards so as to 
leave a hollow to the uvula, and all the interior parts being arranged in the figure of a circle, that smoky 
denseness which had been detained in the neighbouring parts is emitted together with the exit of the breath. 
And often the like may happen even after sleep when any portion of those vapours remains in the region 
spoken of undigested and unexhaled. 

5. Hence the mind of man clearly proves its claim s to connection with his nature, itself also co-operating 
and moving with the nature in its sound and waking state, but remaining unmoved when it is abandoned to 
sleep, unless any one supposes that the imagery of dreams is a motion of the mind exercised in sleep. We 
for our part say that it is only the conscious and sound action of the intellect which we ought to refer to mind; 
and as to the fantastic nonsense which occurs to us in sleep, we suppose that some appearances of the 
operations of the mind are accidentally moulded in the less rational part of the soul; for the soul, being by 
sleep dissociated from the senses, is also of necessity outside the range of the operations of the mind; for it 
is through the senses that the union of mind with man takes place; therefore when the senses are at rest, the 
intellect also must needs be inactive; and an evidence of this is the fact that the dreamer often seems to be 
in absurd and impossible situations, which would not happen if the soul were then guided by reason and 
intellect. 

6. It seems to me, however, that when the soul is at rest so far as concerns its more excellent faculties (so far, 
I mean, as concerns the operations of mind and sense), the nutritive part of it alone is operative during 
sleep, and that some shadows and echoes of those things which happen in our waking moments-of the 
operations both of sense and of intellect-which are impressed upon it by that part of the soul which is 
capable of memory, that these, I say, are pictured as chance will have it, some echo of memory still 
lingering in this division of the soul. 

7. With these, then, the man is beguiled, not led to acquaintance with the things that present themselves by 
any train of thought, but wandering among confused and inconsequent delusions. But just as in his bodily 
operations, while each of the parts individually acts in some way according to the power which naturally 

resides in it, tiiere arises also in tiie limb that is at rest a state sympathetic with that which is in motion, 
similarly in the case of the soul, even if one part is at rest and another in motion, the whole is affected in 
sympathy with the part; for it is not possible that the natural unity should be in any way severed, though one 
of the faculties included in it is in turn supreme in virtue of its active operation. But as, when men are awake 
and busy, the mind is supreme, and sense ministers to it, yet the faculty which regulates the body is not 
dissociated from them (for the mind furnishes the food for its wants, the sense receives what is furnished, 
and the nutritive faculty of the body appropriates to itself that which is given to it), so in sleep the supremacy 
of these faculties is in some way reversed in us, and while the less rational becomes supreme, the 
operation of the other ceases indeed, yet is not absolutely extinguished; but while the nutritive faculty is then 
busied with digestion during sleep, and keeps all our nature occupied with itself, the faculty of sense is 
neither entirely severed from it (for that cannot be separated which has once been naturally joined), nor yet 
can its activity revive, as it is hindered by the inaction during sleep of the organs of sense; and by the same 
reasoning (the mind also being united to the sensitive part of the soul) it would follow that we should say that 
the mind moves with the latter when it is in motion, and rests with it when it is quiescent. 

8. As naturally happens with fire when it is heaped over with chaff, and no breath fans the flame it neither 
consumes what lies beside it, nor is entirely quenched, but instead of flame it rises to the air through the chaff 
in the form of smoke; yet if it should obtain any breath of air, it turns the smoke to flame-in the same way the 
mind when hidden by the inaction of the senses in sleep is neither able to shine out through them, nor yet is 
quite extinguished, but has, so to say, a smouldering activity, operating to a certain extent, but unable to 
operate farther. 

9. Again, as a musician, when he touches with the plectrum the slackened strings of a lyre, brings out no 
orderly melody (for that which is not stretched will not sound), but his hand frequently moves skilfully, 
bringing the plectrum to the position of the notes so far as place is concerned, yet there is no sound, except 
that he produces by the vibration of the strings a sort of uncertain and indistinct hum; so in sleep the 
mechanism of the senses being relaxed, the artist is either quite inactive, if the instrument is completely 
relaxed by satiety or heaviness; or will act slackly and faintly, if the instrument of the senses does not fully 
admit of the exercise of its art. 

10. For this cause memory is confused, and foreknowledge, though rendered doubtful(9) by uncertain veils, 
is imaged in shadows of our waking pursuits, and often indicates to us something of what is going to 
happen: for by its subtlety of nature the mind has some advantage, in ability to behold things, over mere 
corporeal grossness; yet it cannot make its meaning clear by direct methods, so that the information of the 
matter in hand should be plain and evident, but its declaration of the future is ambiguous and doubtful,-what 
those who interpret such things call an "enigma." 

1 1 . So the butler presses the cluster for Pharaoh's cup: so the baker seemed to carry his baskets; each 
supposing himself in sleep to be engaged in those services with which he was busied when awake: for the 
images of their customary occupations imprinted on the prescient element of their soul, gave them for a time 
the power of foretelling, by this sort of prophecy on the part of the mind, what should come to pass. 

12. But if Daniel and Joseph and others like them were instructed by Divine power, without any confusion of 
perception, in the knowledge of things to come, this is nothing to the present statement; for no one would 
ascribe this to the power of dreams, since he will be constrained as a consequence to suppose that those 
Divine appearances also which took place in wakefulness were not a miraculous vision but a result of 
nature brought about spontaneously. As then, while all men are guided by their own minds, there are some 
few who are deemed worthy of evident Divine communication; so, while the imagination of sleep naturally 
occurs in a like and equivalent manner for all, some, not all, share by means of their dreams in some more 
Divine manifestation: but to all the rest even if a foreknowledge of anything does occur as a result of 
dreams, it occurs in the way we have spoken of. 

13. And again, if the Egyptian and the Assyrian king were guided by God to the knowledge of the future, the 
dispensation wrought by their means is a different thing: for it was necessary that the hidden wisdom of the 
holy men(1) should be made known, that each of them might not pass his life without profit to the state. For 
how could Daniel have been known for what he was, if the soothsayers and magicians had not been 
unequal to the task of discovering the dream? And how could Egypt have been preserved while Joseph 
was shut up in prison, if his interpretation of the dream had not brought him to notice? Thus we must reckon 
these cases as exceptional, and not class them with common dreams. 

14. But this ordinary seeing of dreams is common to all men, and arises in our fancies in different modes 
and forms: for either there remain, as we have said, in the reminiscent part of the soul, the echoes of daily 
occupations; or, as often happens, the constitution of dreams is framed with regard to such and such a 
condition of the body: for thus the thirsty man seems to be among springs, the man who is in need of food to 
be at a feast, and the young man in the heat of youthful vigour is beset by fancies corresponding to his 
passion. 

15. I also knew another cause of the fancies of sleep, when attending one of my relations attacked by frenzy; 

who being annoyed by food being given iiim in too great quantity for iiis strengtii, l<ept crying out and finding 
fault witii tiiose wiio were about iiim for filling intestines with dung and putting them upon him: and when his 
body was rapidly tending to perspire he blamed those who were with him for having water ready to wet him 
with as he lay: and he did not cease calling out till the result showed the meaning of these complaints: for all 
at once a copious sweat broke out over his body, and a relaxation of the bowels explained the weight in the 
intestines. The same condition then which, while his sober judgment was dulled by disease, his nature 
underwent, being sympathetically affected by the condition of the body-not being without perception of what 
was amiss, but being unable clearly to express its pain, by reason of the distraction resulting from the 
disease-this, probably, if the intelligent principle of the soul were lulled to rest, not from infirmity but by 
natural sleep, might appear as a dream to one similarly situated, the breaking out of perspiration being 
expressed by water, and the pain occasioned by the food, by the weight of intestines. 

16. This view also is taken by those skilled in medicine, that according to the differences of complaints the 
visions of dreams appear differently to the patients: that the visions of those of weak stomach are of one 
kind, those of persons suffering from injury to the cerebral membrane of another, those of persons in fevers 
of yet another; that those of patients suffering from bilious and from phlegmatic affections are diverse, and 
those again of plethoric patients, and of patients in wasting disease, are different; whence we may see that 
the nutritive and vegetative faculty of the soul has in it by commixture some seed of the intelligent element, 
which is in some sense brought into likeness to the particular state of the body, being adapted in its fancies 
according to the complaint which has seized upon it. 

17. Moreover, most men's dreams are conformed to the state of their character: the brave man's fancies are 
of one kind, the coward's of another; the wanton man's dreams of one kind, the continent man's of another; 
the liberal man and the avaricious man are subject to different fancies; while these fancies are nowhere 
framed by the intellect, but by the less rational disposition of the soul, which forms even in dreams the 
semblances of those things to which each is accustomed by the practice of his waking hours. 

XIV. Thatthe mind is not in a part of the body; wherein also is a distinction of the movements 
of the body and of the soul(2). 

1 . But we have wandered far from our subject, for the purpose of our argument was to show that the mind is 
not restricted to any part of the body, but is equally in touch with the whole, producing its motion according to 
the nature of the part which is under its influence. There are cases, however, in which the mind even follows 
the bodily impulses, and becomes, as it were, their servant; for often the bodily nature takes the lead by 
introducing either the sense of that which gives pain or the desire for that which gives pleasure, so that it may 
be said to furnish the first beginnings, by producing in us the desire for food, or, generally, the impulse 
towards some pleasant thing; while the mind, receiving such an impulse, furnishes the body by its own 
intelligence with the proper means towards the desired object. Such a condition, indeed, does not occur in 
all, save in those of a somewhat slavish disposition, who bring the reason into bondage to the impulses of 
their nature and pay servile homage to the pleasures of sense by allowing them the alliance of their mind; 
but in the case of more perfect men this does not happen; for the mind takes the lead, and chooses the 
expedient course by reason and not by passion, while their nature follows in the tracks of its leader. 

2. But since our argument discovered in our vital faculty three different varieties-one which receives 
nourishment without perception, another which at once receives nourishment and is capable of perception, 
but is without the reasoning activity, and a third rational, perfect, and co-extensive with the whole faculty-so 
that among these varieties the advantage belongs to the intellectual,-let no one suppose on this account 
that in the compound nature of man there are three souls welded together, contemplated each in its own 
limits, so that one should think man's nature to be a sort of conglomeration of several souls. The true and 
perfect soul is naturally one, the intellectual and immaterial, which mingles with our material nature by the 
agency of the senses; but all that is of material nature, being subject to mutation and alteration, will, if it 
should partake of the animating power, move by way of growth: if, on the contrary, it should fall away from the 
vital energy, it will reduce its motion to destruction. 

3. Thus, neither is there perception without material substance, nor does the act of perception take place 
without the intellectual faculty. 

XV. Thatthe soul proper, in fact and name, is the rational soul, while the others are called so 
equivocally; wherein also is this statement, thatthe power of the mind extends throughout 
the whole body in fitting contact with every part 3. 

1 . Now, if some things in creation possess the nutritive faculty, and others again are regulated by the 
perceptive faculty, while the former have no share of perception nor the latter of the intellectual nature, and if 
for this reason any one is inclined to the opinion of a plurality of souls, such a man will be positing a variety 

of souls in a way not in accordance witii tiieir distinguisiiing definition. For everytiiing wiiicii we conceive 
among existing tilings, if it be perfectly that which it is, is also properly called by the name it bears: but of that 
which is not every respect what it is called, the appellation also is vain. For instance:-if one were to show us 
true bread, we say that he properly applies the name to the subject: but if one were to show us instead that 
which had been made of stone to resemble the natural bread, which had the same shape, and equal size, 
and similarity of colour, so as in most points to be the same with its prototype, but which yet lacks the power 
of being food, on this account we say that the stone receives the name of "bread," not properly, but by a 
misnomer, and all things which fall under the same description, which are not absolutely what they are 
called, have their name from a misuse of terms. 

2. Thus, as the soul finds its perfection in that which is intellectual and rational, everything that is not so may 
indeed share the name of "soul," but is not really soul, but a certain vital energy associated with the 
appellation of "soul(4)." And for this reason also He Who gave laws on every matter, gave the animal nature 
likewise, as not far removed from this vegetative life(5), for the use of man, to be for those who partake of it 
instead of herbs:-for He says, "Ye shall eat all kinds of flesh even as the green herb(6);" for the perceptive 
energy seems to have but a slight advantage over that which is nourished and grows without it. Let this 
teach carnal men not to bind their intellect closely to the phenomena of sense, but rather to busy themselves 
with their spiritual advantages, as the true soul is found in these, while sense has equal power also among 
the brute creation. 

3. The course of our argument, however, has diverged to another point: for the subject of our speculation 
was not the fact that the energy of mind is of more dignity among the attributes we conceive in man than the 
material element of his being, but the fact that the mind is not confined to any one part of us, but is equally in 
all and through all, neither surrounding anything without, nor being enclosed within anything: for these 
phrases are properly applied to casks or other bodies that are placed one inside the other; but the union of 
the mental with the bodily presents a connection unspeakable and inconceivable,-not being within it (for the 
incorporeal is not enclosed in a body), nor yet surrounding it without (for that which is incorporeal does not 
include(7) anything), but the mind approaching our nature in some inexplicable and incomprehensible way, 
and coming into contact with it, is to be regarded as both in it and around it, neither implanted in it nor 
enfolded with it, but in a way which we cannot speak or think, except so far as this, that while the nature 
prospers according to its own order, the mind is also operative; but if any misfortune befalls the former, the 
movement of the intellect halts correspondingly. 

XVI. A contemplation of the Divine utterance which said— "Let us make man after our image 
and likeness"; wherein is examined what is the definition of the image, and how the passible 
and mortal is like to the Blessed and Impassible, and how in the image there are male and 
female, seeing these are not in the Prototype (8). 

1 . Let us now resume our consideration of the Divine word, "Let us make man in our image, after our 
likeness(9)." How mean and how unworthy of the majesty of man are the fancies of some heathen writers, 
who magnify humanity, as they supposed, by their comparison of it to this world! for they say that man is a 
little world, composed of the same elements with the universe. Those who bestow on human nature such 
praise as this by a high-sounding name, forget that they are dignifying man with the attributes of the gnat and 
the mouse: for they too are composed of these four elements,-because assuredly about the animated 
nature of every existing thing we behold a part, greater or less, of those elements without which it is not 
natural that any sensitive being should exist. What great thing is there, then, in man's being accounted a 
representation and likeness of the world, -of the heaven that passes away, of the earth that changes, of all 
things that they contain, which pass away with the departure of that which compasses them round? 

2. In what then does the greatness of man consist, according to the doctrine of the Church? Not in his 
likeness to the created world, but in his being in the image of the nature of the Creator. 

3. What therefore, you will perhaps say, is the definition of the image? How is the incorporeal likened to 
body? how is the temporal like the eternal? that which is mutable by change like to the immutable? that 
which is subject to passion and corruption to the impassible and incorruptible? that which constantly dwells 
with evil, and grows up with it, to that which is absolutely free from evil? there is a great difference between 
that which is conceived in the archetype, and a thing which has been made in its image: for the image is 
properly so called if it keeps its resemblance to the prototype; but if the imitation be perverted from its 
subject, the thing is something else, and no longer an image of the subject. 

4. How then is man, this mortal, passible, shortlived being, the image of that nature which is immortal, pure, 
and everlasting? The true answer to this question, indeed, perhaps only the very Truth knows: but this is 
what we, tracing out the truth so far as we are capable by conjectures and inferences, apprehend 
concerning the matter. Neither does the word of God lie when it says that man was made in the image of 
God, nor is the pitiable suffering of man's nature like to the blessedness of the impassible Life: for if any one 

were to compare our nature with God, one of two things must needs be allowed in order that the definition of 
the likeness may be apprehended in both cases in the same terms,-either that the Deity is passible, or that 
humanity is impassible: but if neither the Deity is passible nor our nature free from passion, what other 
account remains whereby we may say that the word of God speaks truly, which says that man was made in 
the image of God? 

5. We must, then, take up once more the Holy Scripture itself, if we may perhaps find some guidance in the 
question by means of what is written. After saying, "Let us make man in our image," and for what purposes it 
was said "Let us make him," it adds this saying:-"and God created man; in the image of God created He 
him; male and female created He them(1)." We have already said in what precedes, that this saying was 
uttered for the destruction of heretical impiety, in order that being instructed that the Only-begotten God 
made man in the image of God, we should in no wise distinguish the Godhead of the Father and the Son, 
since Holy Scripture gives to each equally the name of God,-to Him Who made man, and to Him in Whose 
image he was made. 

6. However, let us pass by our argument upon this point: let us turn our inquiry to the question before 
us,-how it is that while the Deity is in bliss, and humanity is in misery, the latter is yet in Scripture called "like" 
the former? 

7. We must, then, examine the words carefully: for we find, if we do so, that that which was made "in the 
image" is one thing, and that which is now manifested in wretchedness is another. "God created man," it 
says; "in the image of God created He him(3)." There is an end of the creation of that which was made "in 
the image": then it makes a resumption of the account of creation, and says, "male and female created He 
them." I presume that every one knows that this is a departure from the Prototype: for "in Christ Jesus," as the 
apostle says, "there is neither male nor female(2)." Yet the phrase declares that man is thus divided. 

8. Thus the creation of our nature is in a sense twofold: one made like to God, one divided according to this 
distinction: for something like this the passage darkly conveys by its arrangement, where it first says, "God 
created man, in the image of God created He him(3)," and then, adding to what has been said, "male and 
female created He them 3, "-a thing which is alien from our conceptions of God. 

9. I think that by these words Holy Scripture conveys to us a great and lofty doctrine; and the doctrine is this. 
While two natures-the Divine and incorporeal nature, and the irrational life of brutes-are separated from 
each other as extremes, human nature is the mean between them: for in the compound nature of man we 
may behold a part of each of the natures I have mentioned,-of the Divine, the rational and intelligent 
element, which does not admit the distinction of male and female; of the irrational, our bodily form and 
structure, divided into male and female: for each of these elements is certainly to be found in all that 
partakes of human life. That the intellectual element, however, precedes the other, we learn as from one 
who gives in order an account of the making of man; and we learn also that his community and kindred with 
the irrational is for man a provision for reproduction. For he says first that "God created man in the image of 
God" (showing by these words, as the Apostle says, that in such a being there is no male or female): then he 
adds the peculiar attributes of human nature, "male and female created He them(3)." 

10. What, then, do we learn from this? Let no one, I pray, be indignant if I bring from far an argument to bear 
upon the present subject. God is in His own nature all that which our mind can conceive of good;-rather, 
transcending all good that we can conceive or comprehend. He creates man for no other reason than that 
He is good; and being such, and having this as His reason for entering upon the creation of our nature. He 
would not exhibit the power of His goodness in an imperfect form, giving our nature some one of the things at 
His disposal, and grudging it a share in another: but the perfect form of goodness is here to be seen by His 
both bringing man into being from nothing, and fully supplying him with all good gifts: but since the list of 
individual good gifts is a long one, it is out of the question to apprehend it numerically. The language of 
Scripture therefore expresses it concisely by a comprehensive phrase, in saying that man was made "in the 
image of God": for this is the same as to say that He made human nature participant in all good; for if the 
Deity is the fulness of good, and this is His image, then the image finds its resemblance to the Archetype in 
being filled with all good. 

1 1 . Thus there is in us the principle of all excellence, all virtue and wisdom, and every higher thing that we 
conceive: but pre-eminent among all is the fact that we are free from necessity, and not in bondage to any 
natural power, but have decision in our own power as we please; for virtue is a voluntary thing, subject to no 
dominion: that which is the result of compulsion and force cannot be virtue. 12. Now as the image bears in all 
points the semblance of the archetypal excellence, if it had not a difference in some respect, being 
absolutely without divergence it would no longer be a likeness, but will in that case manifestly be absolutely 
identical with the Prototype. What difference then do we discern between the Divine sad that which has been 
made like to the Divine? We find it in the fact that the former is uncreate, while the latter has its being from 
creation: and this distinction of property brings with it a train of other properties; for it is very certainly 
acknowledged that the uncreated nature is also immutable, and always remains the same, while the 
created nature cannot exist without change; for its very passage from nonexistence to existence is a certain 

motion and change of the non-existent transmuted by the Divine purpose into being. 

13. As the Gospel calls the stamp upon the coin "the image of Caesar(4)," whereby we learn that in that 
which was fashioned to resemble Caesar there was resemblance as to outward look, but difference as to 
material, so also in the present saying, when we consider the attributes contemplated both in the Divine and 
human nature, in which the likeness consists, to be in the place of the features, we find in what underlies them 
the difference which we behold in the uncreated and in the created nature. 

14. Now as the former always remains the same, while that which came into being by creation had the 
beginning of its existence from change, and has a kindred connection with the like mutation, for this reason 
He Who, as the prophetical writing says, "knoweth all things before they be(5)," following out, or rather 
perceiving beforehand by His power of foreknowledge what, in a state of independence and freedom, is the 
tendency of the motion of man's will,-as He saw, I say, what would be. He devised for His image the 
distinction of male and female, which has no reference to the Divine Archetype, but, as we have said, is an 
approximation to the less rational nature. 

15. The cause, indeed, of this device, only those can know who were eye-witnesses of the truth and 
ministers of the Word; but we, imagining the truth, asfar as we can, by means of conjectures and similitudes, 
do not set forth that which occurs to our mind authoritatively, but will place it in the form of a theoretical 
speculation before our kindly hearers. 

16. What is it then which we understand concerning these matters? In saying that "God created man" the text 
indicates, by the indefinite character of the term, all mankind; for was not Adam here named together with the 
creation, as the history tells us in what follows(6)? yet the name given to the man created is not the particular, 
but the general name: thus we are led by the employment of the general name of our nature to some such 
view as this-that in the Divine foreknowledge and power all humanity is included in the first creation; for it is 
fitting for God not to regard any of the things made by Him as indeterminate, but that each existing thing 
should have some limit and measure prescribed by the wisdom of its Maker. 

1 7. Now just as any particular man is limited by his bodily dimensions, and the peculiar size which is 
conjoined with the superficies of his body is the measure of his separate existence, so I think that the entire 
plenitude of humanity was included by the God of all, by His power of foreknowledge, as it were in one 
body, and that this is what the text teaches us which says, "God created man, in the image of God created 
He him." For the image is not in part of our nature, nor is the grace in any one of the things found in that 
nature, but this power extends equally to all the race: and a sign of this is that mind is implanted alike in all: 
for all have the power of understanding and deliberating, and of all else whereby the Divine nature finds its 
image in that which was made according to it: the man that was manifested at the first creation of the world, 
and he that shall be after the consummation of all, are alike: they equally bear in themselves the Divine 
image(7). 

18. For this reason the whole race was spoken of as one man, namely, that to God's power nothing is either 
past or future, but even that which we expect is comprehended, equally with what is at present existing, by 
the all-sustaining energy. Our whole nature, then, extending from the first to the last, is, so to say, one image 
of Him Who is; but the distinction of kind in male and female was added to His work lash as I suppose, for 
the reason which follows(8). 

XVII. What we must answer to those who raise the question-"lf procreation is after sin, how 
would souls have came into being if the first of mankind had remained sinless(9)?" 

1. It is better for us however, perhaps, rather to inquire, before investigating this point, the solution of the 
question put forward by our adversaries; for they say that before the sin there is no account of birth, or of 
travail, or of the desire that tends to procreation, but when they were banished from Paradise after their sin, 
and the woman was condemned by the sentence of travail, Adam thus entered with his consort upon the 
intercourse of married life, and then took place the beginning of procreation. If, then, marriage did not exist in 
Paradise, nor travail, nor birth, they say that it follows as a necessary conclusion that human souls would not 
have existed in plurality had not the grace of immortality fallen away to mortality, and marriage preserved 
our race by means of descendants, introducing the offspring of the departing to take their place, so that in a 
certain way the sin that entered into the world was for the life of man: for the human race would have 
remained in the pair of the first-formed, had not the fear of death impelled their nature to provide 
succession. 

2. Now here again the true answer, whatever it may be, can be clear to those only who, like Paul, have been 
instructed in the mysteries of Paradise; but our answer is as follows. When the Sadducees once argued 
against the doctrine of the resurrection, and brought forward, to establish their own opinion, that woman of 
many marriages, who had been wife to seven brethren, and thereupon inquired whose wife she will be after 
the resurrection, our Lord answered their argument so as not only to instruct the Sadducees, but also to 
reveal to all that come after them the mystery of the resurrection-life: "for in the resurrection," He says, "they 

neither marry, nor are given in marriage neitiier can tiiey die any more, for tiiey are equal to tiie angels, and 
are the children of God, being the children of the resurrection(l)." Now the resurrection promises us nothing 
else than the restoration of the fallen to their ancient state; for the grace we look for is a certain return to the 
first life, bringing back again to Paradise him who was cast out from it. If then the life of those restored is 
closely related to that of the angels, it is clear that the life before the transgression was a kind of angelic life, 
and hence also our return to the ancient condition of our life is compared to the angels. Yet while, as has 
been said, there is no marriage among them, the armies of the angels are in countless myriads; for so 
Daniel declared in his visions: so, in the same way, if there had not come upon us as the result of sin a 
change for the worse, and removal from equality with the angels, neither should we have needed marriage 
that we might multiply but whatever the mode of increase in the angelic nature is (unspeakable and 
inconceivable by human conjectures, except that it assuredly exists), it would have operated also in the 
case of men, who were "made a little lower than the angels(2)," to increase mankind to the measure 
determined by its Maker. 

3. But if any one finds a difficulty in an inquiry as to the manner of the generation of souls, had man not 
needed the assistance of marriage, we shall ask him in turn, what is the mode of the angelic existence, how 
they exist in countless myriads, being one essence, and at the same time numerically many; for we shall be 
giving a fit answer to one who raises the question how man would have been without marriage, if we say, "as 
the angels are without marriage;" for the fact that man was in a like condition with them before the 
transgression is shown by the restoration to that state. 

4. Now that we have thus cleared up these matters, let us return to our former point,-how it was that after the 
making of His image God contrived for His work the distinction of male and female. I say that the preliminary 
speculation we have completed is of service for determining this question; for He Who brought all things into 
being and fashioned Man as a whole by His own will to the Divine image, did not wait to see the number of 
souls made up to its proper fulness by the gradual additions of those coming after; but while looking upon 
the nature of man in its entirety and fulness by the exercise of His foreknowledge, and bestowing upon it a 
lot exalted and equal to the angels, since He saw beforehand by His all-seeing power the failure of their will 
to keep a direct course to what is good, and its consequent declension from the angelic life, in order that the 
multitude of human souls might not be cut short by its fall from that mode by which the angels were increased 
and multiplied, -for this reason, I say. He formed for our nature that contrivance for increase which befits 
those who had fallen into sin, implanting in mankind, instead of the angelic majesty of nature, that animal and 
irrational mode by which they now succeed one another. 

5. Hence also, it seems to me, the great David pitying the misery of man mourns over his nature with such 
words as these, that, "man being in honour knew it not" (meaning by "honour" the equality with the angels), 
therefore, he says, "he is compared to the beasts that have no understanding, and made like unto them(3)." 
For he truly was made like the beasts, who received in his nature the present mode of transient generation, 
on account of his inclination to material things. 

XVIII. That our irrational passions have their rise from kindred with irrational nature. (4) 

1 . For I think that from this beginning all our passions issue as from a spring, and pour their flood over man's 
life; and an evidence of my words is the kinship of passions which appears alike in ourselves and in the 
brutes; for it is not allowable to ascribe the first beginnings of our constitutional liability to passion to that 
human nature which was fashioned in the Divine likeness; but as brute life first entered into the world, and 
man, for the reason already mentioned, took something of their nature (I mean the mode of generation), he 
accordingly took at the same time a share of the other attributes contemplated in that nature; for the likeness 
of man to God is not found in anger, nor is pleasure a mark of the superior nature; cowardice also, and 
boldness, and the desire of gain, and the dislike of loss, and all the like, are far removed from that stamp 
which indicates Divinity. 

2. These attributes, then, human nature took to itself from the side of the brutes; for those qualities with which 
brute life was armed for self-preservation, when transferred to human life, became passions; for the 
carnivorous animals are preserved by their anger, and those which breed largely by their love of pleasure 
cowardice preserves the weak, fear that which is easily taken by more powerful animals, and greediness 
those of great bulk; and to miss anything that tends to pleasure is for the brutes a matter of pain. All these 
and the like affections entered man's composition by reason of the animal mode of generation. 

3. I may be allowed to describe the human image by comparison with some wonderful piece of modelling. 
For, as one may see in models those carved(5) shapes which the artificers of such things contrive for the 
wonder of beholders, tracing out upon a single head two forms of faces; so man seems to me to bear a 
double likeness to opposite things-being moulded in the Divine element of his mind to the Divine beauty, 
but bearing, in the passionate impulses that arise in him, a likeness to the brute nature; while often even his 
reason is rendered brutish, and obscures the better element by the worse through its inclination and 

disposition towards wiiat is irrational; for wiienever a man drags down iiis mental energy to these affections, 
and forces his reason to become the servant of his passions, there takes place a sort of conversion of the 
good stamp in him into the irrational image, his whole nature being traced anew after that design, as his 
reason, so to say, cultivates the beginnings of his passions, and gradually multiplies them; for once it lends 
its co-operation to passion, it produces a plenteous and abundant crop of evils. 

4. Thus our love of pleasure took its beginning from our being made like to the irrational creation, and was 
increased by the transgressions of men, becoming the parent of so many varieties of sins arising from 
pleasure as we cannot find among the irrational animals. Thus the rising of anger in us is indeed akin to the 
impulse of the brutes; but it grows by the alliance of thought: for thence come malignity, envy, deceit, 
conspiracy, hypocrisy; all these are the result of the evil husbandry of the mind; for if the passion were 
divested of the aid it receives from thought, the anger that is left behind is short-lived and not sustained, like 
a bubble, perishing straightway as soon as it comes into being. Thus the greediness of swine introduces 
covetousness, and the high spirit of the horse becomes the origin of pride; and all the particular forms that 
proceed from the want of reason in brute nature become vice by the evil use of the mind. 

5. So, likewise, on the contrary, if reason instead assumes sway over such emotions, each of them is 
transmuted to a form of virtue; for anger produces courage, terror caution, fear obedience, hatred aversion 
from vice, the power of love the desire for what is truly beautiful; high spirit in our character raises our thought 
above the passions, and keeps it from bondage to what is base; yea, the great Apostle, even, praises such 
a form of mental elevation when he bids us constantly to "think those things that are above(6);" and so we 
find that every such motion, when elevated by loftiness of mind, is conformed to the beauty of the Divine 
image. 

6. But the other impulse is greater, as the tendency of sin is heavy and downward; for the ruling element of 
our soul is more inclined to be dragged downwards by the weight of the irrational nature than is the heavy 
and earthy element to be exalted by the loftiness of the intellect; hence the misery that encompasses us 
often causes the Divine gift to be forgotten, and spreads the passions of the flesh, like some ugly mask, 
over the beauty of the image. 

7. Those, therefore, are in some sense excusable, who do not admit, when they look upon such cases, that 
the Divine form is there; yet we may behold the Divine image in men by the medium of those who have 
ordered their lives aright. For if the man who is subject to passion, and carnal, makes it incredible that man 
was adorned, as it were, with Divine beauty, surely the man of lofty virtue and pure from pollution will confirm 
you in the better concepflon of human nature. 

8. For instance (for it is better to make our argument clear by an illustraflon), one of those noted for 
wickedness-some Jechoniah, say, or some other of evil memory-has obliterated the beauty of his nature 
by the pollution of wickedness; yet in Moses and in men like him the form of the image was kept pure. Now 
where the beauty of the form has not been obscured, there is made plain the faithfulness of the saying that 
man is an image of God. 

9. It may be, however, that some one feels shame at the fact that our life, like that of the brutes, is sustained 
by food, and for this reason deems man unworthy of being supposed to have been framed in the image of 
God; but he may expect that freedom from this function will one day be bestowed upon our nature in the life 
we look for; for, as the Apostle says, "the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink(7);" and the Lord declared 
that "man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God(8)." 
Further, as the resurrection holds forth to us a life equal with the angels, and with the angels there is no food, 
there is sufficient ground for believing that man, who will live in like fashion with the angels, will be released 
from such a funcflon. 

XIX. To those who say that the enjoyment of the good things we look for will again consist in 
meat and drink, because it is written that by these means man at first lived in Paradise(9). 

1 . But some one perhaps will say that man will not be returning to the same form of life, if as it seems, we 
formerly existed by eating, and shall hereafter be free from that funcflon. I, however, when I hear the Holy 
Scripture, do not understand only bodily meat, or the pleasure of the flesh; but I recognize another kind of 
food also, having a certain analogy to that of the body, the enjoyment of which extends to the soul alone: 
"Eat of my bread(1)," is the bidding of Wisdom to the hungry; and the Lord declares those blessed who 
hunger for such food as this, and says, "If any man thirst, let him come unto Me, and drink": and "drink ye 
joy(2)," is the great Isaiah's charge to those who are able to hear his sublimity. There is a propheflc 
threatening also against those worthy of vengeance, that they shall be punished with famine; but the 
"famine" is not a lack of bread and water, but a failure of the word:-"not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for 
water, but a famine of hearing the word of the Lord." 

2. We ought, then, to conceive that the fruit in Eden was something worthy of God's planting(and Eden is 
interpreted to mean "delight"), and not to doubt that man was hereby nourished: nor should we at all 

conceive, concerning tiie mode of life in Paradise, tiiis transitory and perisiiable nutriment: "of every tree of 
tiie garden," He says, "tiiou mayest freely eat(4)." 

3. Who will give to him that has a healthful hunger that tree that is in Paradise, which includes all good, which 
is named "every tree," in which this passage bestows on man the right to share? for in the universal and 
transcendent saying every form of good is in harmony with itself, and the whole is one. And who will keep 
me back from that tasting of the tree which is of mixed and doubtful kind? for surely it is clear to all who are at 
all keen-sighted what that "every" tree is whose fruit is life, and what again that mixed tree is whose end is 
death: for He Who presents ungrudgingly the enjoyment of every" tree, surely by some reason and 
forethought keeps man from participation in those which are of doubtful kind. 

4. It seems to me that I may take the great David and the wise Solomon as my instructors in the interpretation 
of this text: for both understand the grace of the permitted delight to be one,-that very actual Good, which in 
truth is "every" good;-David, when he says, "Delight thou in the Lords," and Solomon, when he names 
Wisdom herself (which is the Lord) "a tree of life(6)." 

5. Thus the "every" tree of which the passage gives food to him who was made in the likeness of God, is the 
same with the tree of life; anti there is opposed to this tree another tree, the food given by which is the 
knowledge of good and evil:-not that it bears in turn as fruit each ofthese things of opposite significance, 
but that it produces a fruit blended and mixed with opposite qualities, the eating of which the Prince of Life 
forbids, and the serpent counsels, that he may prepare an entrance for death: and he obtained credence for 
his counsel, covering over the fruit with a fair appearance and the show of pleasure, that it might be pleasant 
to the eyes and stimulate the desire to taste. 

XX. What was the life in Paradise, and what was the forbidden tree(7)? 

1 . What then is that which includes the knowledge of good and evil blended together, and is decked with the 
pleasures of sense? I think I am not aiming wide of the mark in employing, as a starting-point for my 
speculation, the sense of "knowable(8)." It is not, I think, "science" which the Scripture here means by 
"knowledge"; but I find a certain distinction, according to Scriptural use, between "knowledge "and 
"discernment": for to "discern" skilfully the good from the evil, the Apostle says is a mark of a more perfect 
condition and of "exercised senses(9)," for which reason also he bids us "prove all things(1)," and says that 
"discernment "belongs to the spiritual man(2): but "knowledge" is not always to be understood of skill and 
acquaintance with anything, but of the disposition towards what is agreeable,-as "the Lord knoweth them 
that are His(3)"; and He says to Moses, "I knew thee above all(4)"; while of those condemned in their 
wickedness He Who knows all things says, "I never knew you(5)." 

2. The tree, then, from which comes this fruit of mixed knowledge, is among those things which are forbidden; 
and that fruit is combined of opposite qualities, which has the serpent to commend it, it may be for this 
reason, that the evil is not exposed in its nakedness, itself appearing in its own proper nature-for 
wickedness would surely fail of its effect were it not decked with some fair colour to entice to the desire of it 
him whom it deceives-but now the nature of evil is in a manner mixed, keeping destruction like some snare 
concealed in its depths, and displaying some phantom of good in the deceitfulness of its exterior. The 
beauty of the substance seems good to those who love money: yet "the love of money is a root of all 
evil(6)": and who would plunge into the unsavoury mud of wantonness, were it not that he whom this bait 
hurries into passion thinks pleasure a thing fair and acceptable? so, too, the other sins keep their 
destruction hidden, and seem at first sight acceptable, and some deceit makes them earnestly sought after 
by unwary men instead of what is good. 

3. Now since the majority of men judge the good to lie in that which gratifies the senses, and there is a 
certain identity of name between that which is, and that which appears to be "good, "-for this reason that 
desire which arises towards what is evil, as though towards good, is called by Scripture "the knowledge of 
good and evil;" "knowledge," as we have said, expressing a certain mixed disposition. It speaks of the fruit 
of the forbidden tree not as a thing absolutely evil (because it is decked with good), nor as a thing purely 
good (because evil is latent in it), but as compounded of both, and declares that the tasting of it brings to 
death those who touch it; almost proclaiming aloud the doctrine that the very actual good is in its nature 
simple and uniform, alien from all duplicity or conjunction with its opposite, while evil is many-coloured and 
fairly adorned, being esteemed to be one thing and revealed by experience as another, the knowledge of 
which (that is, its reception by experience) is the beginning and antecedent of death and destruction. 

4. It was because he saw this that the serpent points out the evil fruit of sin, not showing the evil manifestly in 
its own nature (for man would not have been deceived by manifest evil), but giving to what the woman 
beheld the glamour of a certain beauty, and conjuring into its taste the spell of a sensual pleasure, he 
appeared to her to speak convincingly: "and the woman saw," it says, "that the tree was good for food, and 
that it was pleasant to the eyes to behold, and fair to see; and she took of the fruit thereof and did eat(7)," 
and that eating became the mother of death to men. This, then, is that fruit-bearing of mixed character, where 

the passage clearly expresses the sense in which the tree was called "capable of the knowledge of good 
and evil," because, like the evil nature of poisons that are prepared with honey, it appears to be good in so 
far as it affects the senses with sweetness: but in so far as it destroys him who touches it, it is the worst of all 
evil. Thus when the evil poison worked its effect against man's life, then man, that noble thing and name, the 
image of God's nature, was made, as the prophet says, "like unto vanity(8)." 

5. The image, therefore, properly belongs to the better part of our attributes; but all in our life that is painful 
and miserable is far removed from the likeness to the Divine. 

XXI. Thatthe resurrection is looked for as a consequence, not so much from the declaration 
of Scripture as from the very necessity of things(9). 

1. Wickedness, however, is not so strong as to prevail over the power of good; nor is the folly of our nature 
more powerful and more abiding than the wisdom of God: for it is impossible that that which is always 
mutable and variable should be more firm and more abiding than that which always remains the same and 
is firmly fixed in goodness: but it is absolutely certain that the Divine counsel possesses immutability, while 
the changeableness of our nature does not remain settled even in evil. 

2. Now that which is always in motion, if its progress be to good, will never cease moving onwards to what 
lies before it, by reason of the infinity of the course to be traversed:-for it will not find any limit of its object 
such that when it has apprehended it, it will at last cease its motion: but if its bias be in the opposite direction, 
when it has finished the course of wickedness and reached the extreme limit of evil, then that which is ever 
moving, finding no halting point for its impulse natural to itself when it has run through the lengths that can be 
run in wickedness, of necessity turns its motion towards good: for as evil does not extend to infinity, but is 
comprehended by necessary limits, it would appear that good once more follows in succession upon the 
limit of evil and thus, as we have said, the ever-moving character of our nature comes to run its course at the 
last once more back towards good, being taught the lesson of prudence by the memory of its former 
misfortunes, to the end that it may never again be in like case. 

3. Our course, then, will once more lie in what is good, by reason of the fact that the nature of evil is bounded 
by necessary limits. For just as those skilled in astronomy tell us that the whole universe is full of light, and 
that darkness is made to cast its shadow by the interposition of the body formed by the earth; and that this 
darkness is shut off from the rays of the sun, in the shape of a cone, according to the figure of the 
sphere-shaped body, and behind it; while the sun, exceeding the earth by a size many times as great as its 
own, enfolding it round about on all sides with its rays, unites at the limit of the cone the concurrent streams of 
light; so that if (to suppose the case) any one had the power of passing beyond the measure to which the 
shadow extends, he would certainly find himself in light unbroken by darkness ;-even so I think that we 
ought to understand about ourselves, that on passing the limit of wickedness we shall again have our 
conversation in light, as the nature of good, when compared with the measure of wickedness, is incalculably 
superabundant. 

4. Paradise therefore will be restored, that tree will be restored which is in truth the tree of life;-there will be 
restored the grace of the image, and the dignity of rule. It does not seem to me that our hope is one for those 
things which are now subjected by God to man for the necessary uses of life, but one for another kingdom, 
of a description that belongs to unspeakable mysteries. 

XXII. To those who say, "If the resurrection is a thing excellent and good, how is it that it has 
not happened already, but is hoped far in some periods of time ? "(1) 

1 . Let us give our attention, however, to the next point of our discussion. It may be that some one, giving his 
thought wings to soar towards the sweetness of our hope, deems it a burden and a loss that we are not 
more speedily placed in that good state which is above man's sense and knowledge, and is dissatisfied 
with the extension of the time that intervenes between him and the object of his desire. Let him cease to vex 
himself like a child that is discontented at the brief delay of something that gives him pleasure; for since all 
things are governed by reason and wisdom, we must by no means suppose that anything that happens is 
done without reason itself and the wisdom that is therein. 

2. You will say then. What is this reason, in accordance with which the change of our painful life to that which 
we desire does not take place at once, but this heavy and corporeal existence of ours waits, extended to 
some determinate time, for the term of the consummation of all things, that then man's life may be set free as 
it were from the reins, and revert once more, released and free, to the life of blessedness and impassibility? 

3. Well, whether our answer is near the truth of the matter, the Truth Itself may clearly know; but at all events 
what occurs to our intelligence is as follows. I take up then once more in my argument our first text:-God 
says, " Let us make man in our image, after our likeness, and God created man, in the image of God 
created He him(2)." Accordingly, the Image of God, which we behold in universal humanity, had its 

consummation then(3); but Adam as yet was not; for the thing formed from the earth is called Adam, by 
etymological nomenclature, as those tell us who are acquainted with the Hebrew tongue-wherefore also 
the apostle, who was specially learned in his native tongue, the tongue of the Israelites, calls the man "of the 
earth(4)" <greek>koikos</greek>, as though translating the name Adam into the Greek word. 

4. Man, then, was made in the image of God; that is, the universal nature, the thing like God; not part of the 
whole, but all the fulness of the nature together was so made by omnipotent wisdom. He saw. Who holds all 
limits in His grasp, as the Scripture tells us which says, "in His hand are all the corners of the earth(5),"He 
saw, "Who knoweth all things" even "before they be(6)," comprehending them in His knowledge, how great 
in number humanity will be in the sum of its individuals. But as He perceived in our created nature the bias 
towards evil, and the fact that after its voluntary fall from equality with the angels it would acquire a fellowship 
with the lower nature. He mingled, for this reason, with His own image, an element of the irrational (for the 
distinction of male and female does not exist in the Divine and blessed nature);-transferring, I say, to man 
the special attribute of the irrational formation. He bestowed increase upon our race not according to the 
lofty character of our creation; for it was not when He made that which was in His own image that He 
bestowed on man the power of increasing and multiplying; but when He divided it by sexual distinctions, 
then He said, "Increase and multiply, and replenish the earth(7)." For this belongs not to the Divine, but to the 
irrational element, as the history indicates when it narrates that these words were first spoken by God in the 
case of the irrational creatures; since we may be sure that, if He had bestowed on man, before imprinting on 
our nature the distinction of male and female, the power for increase conveyed by this utterance, we should 
not have needed this form of generation by which the brutes are generated. 

5. Now seeing that the full number of men pre-conceived by the operation of foreknowledge will come into 
life by means of this animal generation, God, Who governs all things in a certain order and 
sequence,-since the inclination of our nature to what was beneath it (which He Who beholds the future 
equally with the present saw before it existed) made some such form of generation absolutely necessary for 
mankind,-therefore also foreknew the time coextensive with the creation of men, so that the extent of time 
should be adapted for the entrances of the pre-determined souls, and that the flux and motion of time should 
halt at the moment when humanity is no longer produced by means of it; and that when the generation of 
men is completed, time should cease together with its completion, and then should take place the restitution 
of all things, and with the World-Reformation humanity also should be changed from the corruptible and 
earthly to the impassible and eternal. 

6. And this it seems to me the Divine apostle considered when he declared in his epistle to the Corinthians 
the sudden stoppage of time, and the change of the things that are now moving on back to the opposite end 
where he says, "Behold, I show you a mystery; we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a 
moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump(8)." For when, as I suppose, the full complement of 
human nature has reached the limit of the pre-determined measure, because there is no longer anything to 
be made up in the way of increase to the number of souls, he teaches us that the change in existing things 
will take place in an instant of time, giving to that limit of time which has no parts or extension the names of "a 
moment," and "the twinkling of an eye"; so that it will no more be possible for one who reaches the verge of 
time (which is the last and extreme point, from the fact that nothing is lacking to the attainment of its extremity) 
to obtain by death this change which takes place at a fixed period, but only when the trumpet of the 
resurrection sounds, which awakens the dead, and transforms those who are left in life, after the likeness of 
those who have undergone the resurrection change, at once to incorruptibility; so that the weight of the flesh 
is no longer heavy, nor does its burden hold them down to earth, but they rise aloft through the air-for, "we 
shall be caught up," he tells us, "in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we ever be with the 
Lord(9)." 

7. Let him therefore wait for that time which is necessarily made co-extensive with the development of 
humanity. For even Abraham and the patriarchs, while they had the desire to see the promised good things, 
and ceased not to seek the heavenly country, as the apostle says, are yet even now in the condition of 
hoping for that grace, "God having provided some better thing for us," according to the words of Paul, "that 
they without us should not be made perfect(1)." If they, then, bear the delay who by faith only and by hope 
saw the good things "afar off" and "embraced them(2)," as the apostle bears witness, placing their certainty 
of the enjoyment of the things for which they hoped in the fact that they "judged Him faithful Who has 
promised(3)," what ought most of us to do, who have not, it may be, a hold upon the better hope from the 
character of our lives? Even the prophet's soul fainted with desire, and in his psalm he confesses this 
passionate love, saying that his "soul hath a desire and longing to be in the courts of the Lord(4)," even if he 
must needs be rejected(5) to a place amongst the lowest, as it is a greater and more desirable thing to be 
last there than to be first among the ungodly tents of this life; nevertheless he was patient of the delay, 
deeming, indeed, the life there blessed, and accounting a brief participation in it more desirable than 
"thousands" of time-for he says, "one day in Thy courts is better than thousands(6) "-yet he did not repine 
at the necessary dispensation concerning existing things, and thought it sufficient bliss for man to have 

those good things even by way of hope; wherefore he says at the end of the Psalm, "O Lord of hosts, 
blessed is the man that hopeth in Thee(7)." 

8. Neither, then, should we be troubled at the brief delay of what we hope for, but give diligence that we may 
not be cast out from the object of our hopes; for just as though, if one were to tell some inexperienced 
person beforehand, "the gathering of the crops will take place in the season of summer, and the stores will 
be filled, and the table abundantly supplied with food at the time of plenty," it would be a foolish man who 
should seek to hurry on the coming of the fruit-time, when he ought to be sowing seeds and preparing the 
crops for himself by diligent care; for the fruit-time will surely come, whether he wishes or not, at the 
appointed time; and it will be looked on differently by him who has secured for himself beforehand 
abundance of crops, and by him who is found by the fruit-time destitute of all preparation. Even so I think it is 
one's duty, as the proclamation is clearly made to all that the time of change will come, not to trouble himself 
about times (for He said that "it is not for us to know the times and the seasons(8)"), nor to pursue 
calculations by which he will be sure to sap the hope of the resurrection in the soul; but to make his 
confidence in the things expected as a prop to lean on, and to purchase for himself, by good conversation, 
the grace that is to come. 

XXIII. That he who confesses the beginning of the world's existence must necessarily also 
agree as to its end(9). 

But if some one, beholding the present course of the world, by which intervals of time are marked, going on 
in a certain order, should say that it is not possible that the predicted stoppage of these moving things 
should take place, such a man clearly also does not believe that in the beginning the heaven and the earth 
were made by God; for he who admits a beginning, of motion surely does not doubt as to its also having an 
end; and he who does not allow its end, does not admit its beginning either; but as it is by believing that "we 
understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God," as the apostle says, "so that things which are 
seen were not made of things which do appear(1)," we must use the same faith as to the word of God when 
He foretells the necessary stoppage of existing things. 

2. The question of the "how" must, however, be put beyond the reach of our meddling; for even in the case 
mentioned it was "by faith" that we admitted that the thing seen was framed from things not yet apparent, 
omitting the search into things beyond our reach. And yet our reason suggests difficulties on many points, 
offering no small occasions for doubt as to the things which we believe. 

3. For in that case too, argumentative men might by plausible reasoning upset our faith, so that we should 
not think that statement true which Holy Scripture delivers concerning the material creation, when it asserts 
that all existing things have their beginning of being from God. For those who abide by the contrary view 
maintain that matter is co-eternal with God, and employ in support of their own doctrine some such 
arguments as these. If God is in His nature simple and immaterial, without quantity(2), or size, or 
combination, and removed from the idea of circumscription by way of figure, while all matter is apprehended 
in extension measured by intervals, and does not escape the apprehension of our senses, but becomes 
known to us in colour, and figure, and bulk, and size, and resistance, and the other attributes belonging to it, 
none of which it is possible to conceive in the Divine nature, -what method is there for the production of 
matter from the immaterial, or of the nature that has dimensions from that which is unextended? for if these 
things are believed to have their existence from that source, they clearly come into existence after being in 
Him in some mysterious way; but if material existence was in Him, how can He be immaterial while including 
matter in Himself? and similarly with all the other marks by which the material nature is differentiated; if 
quantity exists in God, how is God without quantity? if the compound nature exists in Him, how is He simple, 
without parts and without combination? so that the argument forces us to think either that He is material, 
because matter has its existence from Him as a source; or, if one avoids this, it is necessary to suppose that 
matter was imported by Him ab extra for the making of the universe. 

4. If, then, it was external to God, something else surely existed besides God, conceived, in respect of 
eternity, together with Him Who exists ungenerately; so that the argument supposes two eternal and 
unbegotten existences, having their being concurrently with each other-that of Him Who operates as an 
artificer, and that of the thing which admits this skilled operation; and if any one under pressure of this 
argument should assume a material substratum for the Creator of all things, what a support will the 
Manichaean find for his special doctrine, who opposes by virtue of ungenerateness a material existence to 
a Good Being. Yet we do believe that all things are of God, as we hear the Scripture say so; and as to the 
question how they were in God, a question beyond our reason, we do not seek to pry into it, believing that all 
things are within the capacity of God's power-both to give existence to what is not, and to implant qualities 
at His pleasure in what is. 

5. Consequently, as we suppose the power of the Divine will to be a sufficient cause to the things that are, for 
their coming into existence out of nothing, so too we shall not repose our belief on anything beyond 

probability in referring tiie World-Reformation to the same power. Moreover, it might perhaps be possible, 
by some skill in the use of words, to persuade those who raise frivolous objections on the subject of matter 
not to think that they can make an unanswerable attack on our statement. 

XXIV. An argument against those who say that matter is co-eternal with God(3). 

1 . For after all that opinion on the subject of matter does not turn out to be beyond what appears consistent, 
which declares that it has its existence from Him Who is intelligible and immaterial. For we shall find all 
matter to be composed of certain qualities, of which if it is divested it can, in itself, be by no means grasped 
by idea. Moreover in idea each kind of quality is separated from the substratum; but idea is an intellectual 
and not a corporeal method of examination. If, for instance, some animal or tree is presented to our notice, 
or any other of the things that have material existence we perceive in our mental discussion of it many things 
concerning the substratum, the idea of each of which is clearly distinguished from the object we 
contemplate: for the idea of colour is one, of weight another; so again that of quantity and of such and such a 
peculiar quality of touch: for "softness," and "two cubits long," and the rest of the attributes we spoke of, are 
not connected in idea either with one another or with the body: each of them has conceived concerning it its 
own explanatory definition according to its being, having nothing in common with any other of the qualities 
that are contemplated in the substratum. 

2.(4) If, then, colour is a thing intelligible, and resistance also is intelligible, and so with quantity and the rest 
of the like properties, while if each of these should be withdrawn from the substratum, the whole idea of the 
body is dissolved; it would seem to follow that we may suppose the concurrence of those things, the 
absence of which we found to be a cause of the dissolution of the body, to produce the material nature: for 
as that is not a body which has not colour, and figure, and resistance, and extension, and weight, and the 
other properties, while each of these in its proper existence is found to be not the body but something else 
besides the body, so, conversely, whenever the specified attributes concur they produce bodily existence. 
Yet if the perception of these properties is a matter of intellect, and the Divinity is also intellectual in nature, 
there is no incongruity in supposing that these intellectual occasions for the genesis of bodies have their 
existence from the incorporeal nature, the intellectual nature on the one hand giving being to the intellectual 
potentialities, and the mutual concurrence of these bringing to its genesis the material nature. 
3. Let this discussion, however, be by way of digression: we must direct our discourse once more to the faith 
by which we accept the statement that the universe took being from nothing, and do not doubt, when we are 
taught by Scripture, that it will again be transformed into some other state. 

XXV. How one even of those who are without may be brought to believe the Scripture when 
teaching of the resurrection(5). 

1 . Some one, perhaps, having regard to the dissolution of bodies, and judging the Deity by the measure of 
his own power, asserts that the idea of the resurrection is impossible, saying that it cannot be that both those 
things which are now in motion should become stationary, and those things which are now without motion 
should rise again. 

2. Let such an one, however, take as the first and greatest evidence of the truth touching the resurrection the 
credibility of the herald who proclaims it. Now the faith of what is said derives its certainty from the result of 
the other predictions: for as the Divine Scripture delivers statements many and various, it is possible by 
examining how the rest of the utterances stand in the matter of falsehood and truth to survey also, in the light 
of them, the doctrine concerning the resurrection. For if in the other matters the statements are found to be 
false and to have failed of true fulfilment, neither is this out of the region of falsehood; but if all the others have 
experience to vouch for their truth, it would seem logical to esteem as true on their account, the prediction 
concerning the resurrection also. Let us therefore recall one or two of the predictions that have been made 
and compare the result with what was foretold, so that we may know by means of them whether the idea has 
a truthful aspect. 

3. Who knows not how the people of Israel flourished of old, raised up against all the powers of the world; 
what were the palaces in the city of Jerusalem, what the walls, the towers, the majestic structure of the 
Temple? things that seemed worthy of admiration even to the disciples of the Lord, so that they asked the 
Lord to take notice of them, in their disposition to marvel, as the Gospel history shows us, saying, "What 
works, and what buildings(6)!" But He indicates to those who wondered at its present state the future 
desolation of the place and the disappearance of that beauty, saying that after a little while nothing of what 
they saw should be left. And, again, at the time of His Passion, the women followed, bewailing the unjust 
sentence against Him,-forthey could not yet see into the dispensation of what was being done:-but He 
bids them be silent as to what is befalling Him, for it does not demand their tears, but to reserve their wailing 
and lamentation for the true time for tears, when the city should be compassed by besiegers, and their 

sufferings reach so great a strait that they should deem him happy who had not been born: and herein He 
foretold also the horrid deed of her who devoured her child, when He said that in those days the womb 
should be accounted blest that never bare(7). Where then are those palaces? where is the Temple? where 
are the walls? where are the defences of the towers? where is the power of the Israelites? were not they 
scattered in different quarters over almost the whole world? and in their overthrow the palaces also were 
brought to ruin. 

4. Now it seems to me that the Lord foretold these things and others like them not for the sake of the matters 
themselves-for what great advantage to the hearers, at any rate, was the prediction of what was about to 
happen? they would have known by experience, even if they had not previously learnt what would 
come;-but in order that by these means faith on their part might follow concerning more important matters: 
for the testimony of facts in the former cases is also a proof of truth in the latter. 

5. For just as though, if a husbandman were explaining the virtue of seeds, it were to happen that some 
person inexperienced in husbandry should disbelieve him, it would be sufficient as proof of his statement for 
the agriculturist to show him the virtue existing in one seed of those in the bushel and make it a pledge of the 
rest-for he who should see the single grain of wheat or barley, or whatever might chance to be the contents 
of the bushel, grow into an ear after being cast into the ground, would by the means of the one cease also to 
disbelieve concerning the others-so the truthfulness which confessedly belongs to the other statements 
seems to me to be sufficient also for evidence of the mystery of the resurrection. 

6. Still more, however, is this the case with the experience of actual resurrection which we have learnt not so 
much by words as by actual facts: for as the marvel of resurrection was great and passing belief. He begins 
gradually by inferior instances of His miraculous power, and 

7. For as a mother who nurses her babe with due care for a time supplies milk by her breast to its mouth 
while still tender and soft; and when it begins to grow and to have teeth she gives it bread, not hard or such 
as it cannot chew, so that the tender and unpractised gums may not be chafed by rough food; but softening it 
with her own teeth, she makes it suitable and convenient for the powers of the eater; and then as its power 
increases by growth she gradually leads on the babe, accustomed to tender food, to more solid 
nourishment; so the Lord, nourishing and fostering with miracles the weakness of the human mind, like some 
babe not fully grown, makes first of all a prelude of the power of the resurrection in the case of a desperate 
disease, which prelude, though it was great in its achievement, yet was not such a thing that the statement of 
it would be disbelieved: for by "rebuking the fever." which was fiercely consuming Simon's wife's mother. He 
produced so great a removal of the evil as to enable her who was already expected to be near death, to 
"minister(8)" to those present. 

8. Next He makes a slight addition to the power, and when the nobleman's son lies in acknowledged 
danger of death (for so the history tells us, that he was about to die, as his father cried, "come down, ere my 
child die(9)"). He again brings about the resurrection of one who was believed about to die; accomplishing 
the miracle with a greater act of power in that He did not even approach the place, but sent life from afar off 
by the force of His command. 

9. Once more in what follows He ascends to higher wonders. For having set out on His way to the ruler of the 
synagogue's daughter, he voluntarily made a halt in His way, while making public the secret cure of the 
woman with an issue of blood, that in this time death might overcome the sick. When, then, the soul had just 
been parted from the body, and those who were wailing over the sorrow were making a tumult with their 
mournful cries. He raises the damsel to life again, as if from sleep, by His word of command, leading on 
human weakness, by a sort of path and sequence, to greater things. 

10. Still in addition to these acts He exceeds them in wonder, and by a more exalted act of power prepares 
for men the way of faith in the resurrection. The Scripture tells us of a city called Nain in Judaea: a widow 
there had an only child, no longer a child in the sense of being among boys, but already passing from 
childhood to man's estate: the narrative calls him "a young man." The story conveys much in few words: the 
very recital is a real lamentation: the dead man's mother, it says, "was a widow." See you the weight of her 
misfortune, how the text briefly sets out the tragedy of her suffering ? for what does the phrase mean? that 
she had no more hope of bearing sons, to cure the loss she had just sustained in him who had departed; for 
the woman was a widow: she had not in her power to look to another instead of to him who was gone; for he 
was her only child; and how great a grief is here expressed any one may easily see who is not an utter 
stranger to natural feeling. Him alone she had known in travail him alone she had nursed at her breast; he 
alone made her table cheerful, he alone was the cause of brightness in her home, in play, in work, in 
learning, in gaiety, at processions, at sports, at gatherings of youth; he alone was all that is sweet and 
precious in a mother's eyes. Now at the age of marriage, he was the stock of her race, the shoot of its 
succession, the staff of her old age. Moreover, even the additional detail of his time of life is another lament: 
for he who speaks of him as "a young man" tells of the flower of his faded beauty, speaks of him as just 
covering his face with down, not yet with a full thick beard, but still bright with the beauty of his cheeks. What 
then, think you, were his mother's sorrows for him? how would her heart be consumed as it were with a flame; 

how bitterly would she prolong her lament over him, embracing the corpse as it lay before her, lengthening 
out her mourning for him as far as possible, so as not to hasten the funeral of the dead, but to have her fill of 
sorrow! Nor does the narrative pass this by: for Jesus "when He saw her," it says, "had compassion"; "and 
He came and touched the bier; and they that bare him stood still;" and He said to the dead, "Young man, I 
say unto thee, arise(1)" "and He delivered him to his mother alive. Observe that no short time had 
intervened since the dead man had entered upon that state, he was all but laid in the tomb; the miracle 
wrought by the Lord is greater, though the command is the same. 

1 1 . His miraculous power proceeds to a still more exalted act, that its display may more closely approach 
that miracle of the resurrection which men doubt. One of the Lord's companions and friends is ill (Lazarus is 
the sick man's name); and the Lord deprecates any visiting of His friend, though far away from the sick man, 
that in the absence of the Life, death might find room and power to do his own work by the agency of 
disease. The Lord informs His disciples in Galilee of what has befallen Lazarus, and also of his own setting 
out to him to raise him up when laid low. They, however, were exceedingly afraid on account of the fury of the 
Jews, thinking it a difficult and dangerous matter to turn again towards Judaea, in the midst of those who 
sought to slay Him: and thus, lingering and delaying, they return slowly from Galilee: but they do return, for 
His command prevailed, and the disciples were led by the Lord to be initiated at Bethany in the preliminary 
mysteries of the general resurrection. Four days had already passed since the event; all due rites had been 
performed for the departed; the body was hidden in the tomb: it was probably already swollen and 
beginning to dissolve into corruption, as the body mouldered in the dank earth and necessarily decayed: 
the thing was one to turn from, as the dissolved body under the constraint of nature changed to 
offensiveness(2). At this point the doubted fact of the general resurrection is brought to proof by a more 
manifest miracle; for one is not raised from severe sickness, nor brought back to life when at the last 
breath-nor is a child just dead brought to life, nor a young man about to be conveyed to the tomb released 
from his bier; but a man past the prime of life, a corpse, decaying, swollen, yea already in a state of 
dissolution, so that even his own kinsfolk could not suffer that the Lord should draw near the tomb by reason 
of the offensiveness of the decayed body there enclosed, brought into life by a single call, confirms the 
proclamation of the resurrection, that is to say, that expectation of it as universal, which we learn by a 
particular experience to entertain. For as in the regeneration of the universe the Apostle tells us that "the 
Lord Himself will descend with a shout, with the voice of the archangel(3)," and by a trumpet sound raise up 
the dead to incorruption-so now too he who is in the tomb, at the voice of command, shakes off death as if it 
were a sleep, and ridding himself from the corruption that had come upon his condition of a corpse, leaps 
forth from the tomb whole and sound, not even hindered in his egress by the bonds of the grave-cloths 
round his feet and hands. 

12. Are these things too small to produce faith in the resurrection of the dead? or dost thou seek that thy 
judgment on this point should be confirmed by yet other proofs? In truth the Lord seems to me not to have 
spoken in vain to them of Capernaum, when He said to Himself, as in the person of men, "Ye will surely say 
unto me this proverb, 'Physician, heal thyself(4).'" For it behoved Him, when He had accustomed men to the 
miracle of the resurrection in other bodies, to confirm His word in His own humanity. Thou sawestthe thing 
proclaimed working in others-those who were about to die, the child which had just ceased to live, the 
young man at the edge of the grave, the putrefying corpse, all alike restored by one command to life. Dost 
thou seek for those who have come to death by wounds and bloodshed? does any feebleness of life-giving 
power hinder the grace in them? Behold Him Whose hands were pierced with nails: behold Him Whose 
side was transfixed with a spear; pass thy fingers through the print of the nails thrust thy hand into the 
spear-wound(5); thou canst surely guess how far within it is likely the point would reach, if thou reckonest the 
passage inwards by the breadth of the external scar; for the wound that gives admission to a man's hand, 
shows to what depth within the iron entered. If He then has been raised, well may we utter the Apostle's 
exclamation, "How say some that there is no resurrection of the dead(6)?" 

13. Since, then, every prediction of the Lord is shown to be true by the testimony of events, while we not only 
have learnt this by His words, but also received the proof of the promise in deed, from those very persons 
who returned to life by resurrection, what occasion is left to those who disbelieve? Shall we not bid farewell 
to those who pervert our simple faith by "philosophy and vain deceit(7)," and hold fast to our confession in 
its purity, learning briefly through the prophet the mode of the grace, by his words, "Thou shalt take away 
their breath and they shall fail, and turn to their dust. Thou shalt send forth Thy Spirit and they shall be 
created, and Thou shalt renew the face of the earth(8);" at which time also he says that the Lord rejoices in 
His works, sinners having perished from the earth: for how shall any one be called by the name of sin, when 
sin itself exists no longer? 

XXVI. Thatthe resurrection is not beyond probability(9). 

1 . There are, however, some who, owing to the feebleness of human reasoning, judging the Divine power 

by the compass of our own, maintain tiiat wiiat is beyond our capacity is not possible even to God. Tiiey 
point to tiie disappearance of tiie dead of old time, and to the remains of those who have been reduced to 
ashes by fire; and further, besides these, they bring forward in idea the carnivorous beasts, and the fish that 
receives in its own body the flesh of the shipwrecked sailor, while this again in turn becomes food for men, 
and passes by digestion into the bulk of him who eats it: and they rehearse many such trivialities, unworthy 
of God's great power and authority, for the overthrow of the doctrine, arguing as though God were not able to 
restore to man his own, by return(1) through the same ways. 

2. But we briefly cut short their long circuits of logical folly by acknowledging that dissolution of the body into 
its component parts does take place, and not only does earth, according to the Divine word, return to earth, 
but air and moisture also revert to the kindred element, and there takes place a return of each of our 
components to that nature to which it is allied; and although the human body be dispersed among 
carnivorous birds, or among the most savage beasts by becoming their food, and although it pass beneath 
the teeth offish, and although it be changed by fire into vapour and dust, wheresoever one may in argument 
suppose the man to be removed, he surely remains in the world; and the world, the voice of inspiration tells 
us, is held by the hand of God. If thou, then, art notignorant of any of the things in thy hand, dost thou deem 
the knowledge of God to be feebler than thine own power, that it should fail to discover the most minute of 
the things that are within the compass of the Divine span? 

XXVII. That it is possible, when the human body is dissolved into the elements of the 
universe, that each should have his own body restored from the common source(2). 

1 . Yet it may be thou thinkest, having regard to the elements of the universe, that it is a hard thing when the air 
in us has been resolved into its kindred element, and the warmth, and moisture, and the earthy nature have 
likewise been mingled with their own kind, that from the common source there should return to the individual 
what belongs to itself. 

2. Dost thou not then judge by human examples that even this does not surpass the limits of the Divine 
power? Thou hast seen surely somewhere among the habitations of men a common herd of some kind of 
animals collected from every quarter: yet when it is again divided among its owners, acquaintance with their 
homes and the marks put upon the cattle serve to restore to each his own. If thou conceivest of thyself also 
something like to this thou wilt not be far from the right way: for as the soul is disposed to cling to and long for 
the body that has been wedded to it, there also attaches to it in secret a certain close relationship and 
power of recognition, in virtue of their commixture, as though some marks had been imprinted by nature, by 
the aid of which the community remains unconfused, separated by the distinctive signs. Now as the soul 
attracts again to itself that which is its own and properly belongs to it, what labour, I pray you, that is involved 
for the Divine power, could be a hindrance to concourse of kindred things when they are urged to their own 
place by the unspeakable attraction of nature, whatever it may be? For that some signs of our compound 
nature remain in the soul even after dissolution is shown by the dialogue in Hades(3), where the bodies had 
been conveyed to the tomb, but some bodily token still remained in the souls by which both Lazarus was 
recognized and the rich man was not unknown. 

3. There is therefore nothing beyond probability in believing that in the bodies that rise again there will be a 
return from the common stock to the individual, especially for any one who examines our nature with careful 
attention. For neither does our being consist altogether in flux and change-for surely that which had by 
nature no stability would be absolutely incomprehensible-but according to the more accurate statement 
some one of our constituent parts is stationary while the rest goes through a process of alteration: for the 
body is on the one hand altered by way of growth and diminution, changing, like garments, the vesture of its 
successive statures, while the form, on the other hand, remains in itself unaltered through every change, not 
varying from the marks once imposed upon it by nature, but appearing with its own tokens of identity in all 
the changes which the body undergoes. 

4. We must except, however, from this statement the change which happens to the form as the result of 
disease: for the deformity of sickness takes possession of the form like some strange mask, and when this 
is removed by the word(4), as in the case of Naaman the Syrian, or of those whose story is recorded in the 
Gospel, the form that had been hidden by disease is once more by means of health restored to sight again 
with its own marks of identity. 

5. Now to the element of our soul which is in the likeness of God it is not that which is subject to flux and 
change by way of alteration, but this stable and unalterable element in our composition that is allied: and 
since various differences of combination produce varieties of forms (and combination is nothing else than 
the mixture of the elements-by elements we mean those which furnish the substratum for the making of the 
universe, of which the human body also is composed), while the form necessarily remains in the soul as in 
the impression of a seal, those things which have received from the seal the impression of its stamp do not 
fail to be recognized by the soul, but at the time of the World-Reformation, it receives back to itself all those 

things which correspond to the stamp of the form: and surely all those things would so correspond which in 
the beginning were stamped by the form; thus it is not beyond probability that what properly belongs to the 
individual should once more return to it from the common source(5). 

6. It is said also that quicksilver, if poured out from the vessel that contains it down a dusty slope, forms small 
globules and scatters itself over the ground, mingling with none of those bodies with which it meets: but if 
one should collect at one place the substance dispersed in many directions, it flows back to its kindred 
substance, if not hindered by anything intervening from mixing with its own kind. Something of the same sort, 

I think, we ought to understand also of the composite nature of man, that if only the power were given it of 
God, the proper parts would spontaneously unite with those belonging to them, without any obstruction on 
their account arising to Him Who reforms their nature. 

7. Furthermore, in the case of plants that grow from the ground, we do not observe any labour on the part of 
nature spent on the wheat or millet or any other seed of grain or pulse, in changing it into stalk or spike or 
ears; for the proper nourishment passes spontaneously, without trouble, from the common source to the 
individuality of each of the seeds. If, then, while the moisture supplied to all the plants is common, each of 
those plants which is nourished by it draws the due supply for its own growth, what new thing is it if in the 
doctrine of the resurrection also, as in the case of the seeds, it happens that there is an attraction on the part 
of each of those who rise, of what belongs to himself? 

8. So that we may learn on all hands, that the preaching of the resurrection contains nothing beyond those 
facts which are known to us experimentally. 

9. And yet we have said nothing of the most notable point concerning ourselves; I mean the first beginning of 
our existence. Who knows not the miracle of nature, what the maternal womb receives-what it produces? 
Thou seest how that which is implanted in the womb to be the beginning of the formation of the body is in a 
manner simple and homogeneous: but what langUage can express the variety of the composite body that 
is framed? and who, if he did not learn such a thing in nature generally, would think that to be possible which 
does take place-that that small thing of no account is the beginning of a thing so great? Great, I say, not only 
with regard to the bodily formation, but to what is more marvellous than this, I mean the soul itself, and the 
attributes we behold in it. 

XXVIII. To those who say that souls existed before bodies, or that bodies were formed 
before souls; wherein there is also a refutation of the fables concerning transmigration of 
souls(6). 

1 . For it is perhaps not beyond our present subject to discuss the question which has been raised in the 
churches touching soul and body. Some of those before our time who have dealt with the question of 
"principles" think it right to say that souls have a previous existence as a people in a society of their own, 
and that among them also there are standards of vice and of virtue, and that the soul there, which abides in 
goodness, remains without experience of conjunction with the body; but if it does depart from its communion 
with good, it falls down to this lower life, and so comes to be in a body. Others, on the contrary, marking the 
order of the making of man as stated by Moses, say, that the soul second to the body in order of time, since 
God first took dust from the earth and formed man, and then animated the being thus formed by His 
breath(7): and by this argument they prove that the flesh is more noble than the soul; that which was 
previously formed than that which was afterwards infused into it: for they say that the soul was made for the 
body, that the thing formed might not be without breath and motion; and that everything that is made for 
something else is surely less precious than that for which it is made, as the Gospel tells us that "the soul is 
more than meat and the body than raiment(8)," because the latter things exist for the sake of the former-for 
the soul was not made for meat nor our bodies for raiment, but when the former things were already in being 
the latter were provided for their needs. 

2. Since then the doctrine involved in both these theories is open to criticism-the doctrine alike of those who 
ascribe to souls a fabulous pre-existence in a special state, and of those who think they were created at a 
later time than the bodies, it is perhaps necessary to leave none of the statements contained in the 
doctrines without examination: yet to engage and wrestle with the doctrines on each side completely, and to 
reveal all the absurdities involved in the theories, would need a large expenditure both of argument and of 
time; we shall, however, briefly survey as best we can each of the views mentioned, and then resume our 
subject. 

3. Those who stand by the former doctrine, and assert that the state of souls is prior to their life in the flesh, 
do not seem to me to be clear from the fabulous doctrines of the heathen which they hold on the subject of 
successive incorporation: for if one should search carefully, he will find that their doctrine is of necessity 
brought down to this. They tell us that one of their sages said that he, being one and the same person, was 
born a man, and afterwards assumed the form of a woman, and flew about with the birds, and grew as a 
bush, and obtained the life of an aquatic creature;-and he who said these things of himself did not, so far as 

I can judge, go far from the truth: for such doctrines as this of saying that one soul passed through so many 
changes are really fitting for the chatter of frogs or jackdaws, or the stupidity of fishes, or the insensibility of 
trees. 

4. And of such absurdity the cause is this-the supposition of the pre-existence of souls for the first principle 
of such doctrine leads on the argument by consequence to the next and adjacent stage, until it astonishes 
us by reaching this point. For if the soul, being severed from the more exalted state by some wickedness 
after having once, as they say, tasted corporeal life, again becomes a man, and if the life in the flesh is, as 
may be presumed, acknowledged to be, in comparison with the eternal and incorporeal life, more subject to 
passion, it naturally follows that that which comes to be in a life such as to contain more occasions of sin, is 
both placed in a region of greater wickedness and rendered more subject to passion than before (now 
passion in the human soul is a conformity to the likeness of the irrational); and that being brought into close 
connection with this, it descends to the brute nature: and that when it has once set out on its way through 
wickedness, it does not cease its advance towards evil even when found in an irrational condition: for a halt 
in evil is the beginning of the impulse towards virtue, and in irrational creatures virtue does not exist. Thus it 
will of necessity be continually changed for the worse, always proceeding to what is more degraded and 
always finding out what is worse than the nature in which it is: and just as the sensible nature is lower than the 
rational, so too there is a descent from this to the insensible. 

5. Now so far in its course their doctrine, even if it does overstep the bounds of truth, at all events derives 
one absurdity from another by a kind of logical sequence: but from this point onwards their teaching takes 
the form of incoherent fable. Strict inference points to the complete destruction of the soul; for that which has 
once fallen from the exalted state will be unable to halt at any measure of wickedness, but will pass by 
means of its relation with the passions from rational to irrational, and from the latter state will be transferred to 
the insensibility of plants; and on the insensible there borders, so to say, the inanimate; and on this again 
follows the non-existent, so that absolutely by this train of reasoning they will have the soul to pass into 
nothing: thus a return once more to the better state is impossible for it: and yet they make the soul return from 
a bush to the man: they therefore prove that the life in a bush is more precious than an incorporeal state(9). 

6. It has been shown that the process of deterioration which takes place in the soul will probably be 
extended downwards; and lower than the insensible we find the inanimate, to which, by consequence, the 
principle of their doctrine brings the soul: but as they will not have this, they either exclude the soul from 
insensibility, or, if they are to bring it back to human life, they must, as has been said, declare the life of a tree 
to be preferable to the original state-if, that is, the fall towards vice took place from the one, and the return 
towards virtue takes place from the other. 

7. Thus this doctrine of theirs, which maintains that souls have a life by themselves before their life in the 
flesh, and that they are by reason of wickedness bound to their bodies, is shown to have neither beginning 
nor conclusion: and as for those who assert that the soul is of later creation than the body, their absurdity 
was already demonstrated above(1). 

8. The doctrine of both, then, is equally to be rejected; but I think that we ought to direct our own doctrine in 
the way of truth between these theories: and this doctrine is that we are not to suppose, according to the 
error of the heathen that the souls that revolve with the motion of the universe weighed down by some 
wickedness, fall to earth by inability to keep up with the swiftness of the motion of the spheres. 

XXIX. A establishment of the doctrine that the cause of the existence of soul and body is one 
and the same. (2) 

1 . Nor again are we in our doctrine to begin by making up man like a clay figure, and to say that the soul 
came into being for the sake of this; for surely in that case the intellectual nature would be shown to be less 
precious than the clay figure. But as man is one, the being consisting of soul and body, we are to suppose 
that the beginning of his existence is one, common to both parts, so that he should not be found to be 
antecedent and posterior to himself, if the bodily element were first in point of time, and the other were a later 
addition; but we are to say that in the power of God's foreknowledge (according to the doctrine laid down a 
little earlier in our discourse), all the fulness of human nature had pre-existence (and to this the prophetic 
writing bears witness, which says that God "knoweth all things before they be(3)"), and in the creation of 
individuals not to place the one element before the other, neither the soul before the body, nor the contrary, 
that man may. not be at strife against himself, by being divided by the difference in point of time. 

2. For as our nature is conceived as twofold, according to the apostolic teaching, made up of the visible 
man and the hidden man, if the one came first and the other supervened, the power of Him that made us will 
be shown to be in some way imperfect, as not being completely sufficient for the whole task at once, but 
dividing the work, and busying itself with each of the halves in turn. 

3. Butjust as wesay that in wheat, or in any other grain, the whole form of the plant is potentially included-the 
leaves, the stalk, the joints, the grain, the beard-and do not say in our account of its nature that any of these 

things has pre-existence, or comes into being before the others, but that the power abiding in the seed is 
manifested in a certain natural order, not by any means that another nature is infused into it-in the same way 
we suppose the human germ to possess the potentiality of its nature, sown with it at the first start of its 
existence, and that it is unfolded and manifested by a natural sequence as it proceeds to its perfect state, 
not employing anything external to itself as a stepping-stone to perfection, but itself advancing its own self in 
due course to the perfect state; so that it is not true to say either that the soul exists before the body, or that 
the body exists without the soul, but that there is one beginning of both, which according to the heavenly view 
was laid as their foundation in the original will of God; according to the other, came into existence on the 
occasion of generation. 

4. For as we cannot discern the articulation of the limbs in that which is implanted for the conception of the 
body before it begins to take form, so neither is it possible to perceive in the same the properties of the soul 
before they advance to operation; and just as no one would doubt that the thing so implanted is fashioned 
into the different varieties of limbs and interior organs, not by the importation of any other power from without, 
but by the power which resides in it transforming(4) it to this manifestation of energy, -so also we may by like 
reasoning equally suppose in the case of the soul that even if it is not visibly recognized by any 
manifestations of activity it none the less is there; for even the form of the future man is there potentially, but is 
concealed because it is not possible that it should be made visible before the necessary sequence of 
events allows it; so also the soul is there, even though it is not visible, and will be manifested by means of its 
own proper and natural operation, as it advances concurrently with the bodily growth. 

5. For since it is not from a dead body that the potentiality for conception is secreted, but from one which is 
animate and alive, we hence affirm that it is reasonable that we should not suppose that what is sent forth 
from a living body to be the occasion of life is itself dead and inanimate; for in the flesh that which is 
inanimate is surely dead; and the condition of death arises by the withdrawal of the soul. Would not one 
therefore in this case be asserting that withdrawal is antecedent to possession-if, that is, he should maintain 
that the inanimate state which is the condition of death is antecedent to the soul(5)? And if any one should 
seek for a still clearer evidence of the life of that particle which becomes the beginning of the living creature 
in its formation, it is possible to obtain an idea on this point from other signs also, by which what is animate is 
distinguished from what is dead. For in the case of men we consider it an evidence of life that one is warm 
and operative and in motion, but the chill and motionless state in the case of bodies is nothing else than 
deadness. 

6. Since then we see that of which we are speaking to be warm and operative, we thereby draw the further 
inference that it is not inanimate; but as, in respect of its corporeal part, we do not say that it is flesh, and 
bones, and hair, and all that we observe in the human being, but that potentially it is each of these things, yet 
does not visibly appear to be so; so also of the part which belongs to the soul, the elements of rationality, 
and desire, and anger, and all the powers of the soul are not yet visible; yet we assert that they have their 
place in it, and that the energies of the soul also grow with the subject in a manner similar to the formation 
and perfection of the body. 

7. For just as a man when perfectly developed has a specially marked activity of the soul, so at the 
beginning of his existence he shows in himself that co-operation of the soul which is suitable and 
conformable to his existing need, in its preparing for itself its proper dwelling-place by means of the 
implanted matter; for we do not suppose it possible that the soul is adapted to a strange building, just as it is 
not possible that the seal impressed on wax should be fitted to an engraving that does not agree with it. 

8. For as the body proceeds from a very small original to the perfect state, so also the operation of the soul, 
growing in correspondence with the subject, gains and increases with it. For at its first formation there comes 
first of all its power of growth and nutriment alone, as though it were some root buried in the ground; for the 
limited nature of the recipient does not admit of more; then, as the plant comes forth to the light and shows its 
shoot to the sun, the gift of sensibility blossoms in addition, but when at last it is ripened and has grown up to 
its proper height, the power of reason begins to shine forth like a fruit, not appearing in its whole vigour all at 
once, but by care increasing with the perfection of the instrument, bearing always as much fruit as the 
powers of the subject allow. 

9. If, however, thou seekestto trace the operation of the soul in the formation of the body, "take heed to 
thyself(6)," as Moses says, and thou wilt read, as in a book, the history of the works of the soul; for nature 
itself expounds to thee, more clearly than any discourse, the varied occupations of the soul in the body, 
alike in general and in particular acts of construction. 

10. But I deem it superfluous to declare at length in words what is to be found in ourselves, as though we 
were expounding some wonder that lay beyond our boundaries:-who that looks on himself needs words to 
teach him his own nature? For it is possible for one who considers the mode of his own life, and learns how 
closely concerned the body is in every vital operation, to know in what the vegetative(7) principle of the soul 
was occupied on the occasion of the first formation of that which was beginning its existence; so that hereby 
also it is clear to those who have given any attention to the matter, that the thing which was implanted by 

separation from the living body fertile production of tlie iiving. being was not a tiling dead or inanimate m 
the laboratory of nature. 

1 1 . IVIoreover we plant in the ground the kernels of fruits, and portions torn from roots, not deprived by death 
of the vital power which naturally resides in them, but preserving in themselves, hidden indeed, yet surely 
living, the property of their prototype; the earth that surrounds them does not implant such a power from 
without, infusing it from itself (for surely then even dead wood would proceed to growth), but it makes that 
manifest which resides in them, nourishing it by its own moisture, perfecting the plant into root, and bark, and 
pith, and shoots of branches, which could not happen were not a natural power implanted with it, which 
drawing to itself from its surroundings its kindred and proper nourishment, becomes a bush, or a tree, or an 
ear of grain, or some plant of the class of shrubs. 

XXX. A brief examination of the construction of our bodies from a medical point of view(8). 

1 . NOW the exact structure of our body each man teaches himself by his experiences of sight and light and 
perception, having his own nature to instruct him; any one too may learn everything accurately who takes up 
the researches which those skilled in such matters have worked out in books. And of these writers some 
learnt by dissection the position of our individual organs; others also considered and expounded the 
reason for the existence of all the parts of the body; so that the knowledge of the human frame which hence 
results is sufficient for students. But if any one further seeks that the Church should be his teacher on all these 
points, so that he may not need for anything the voice of those without (for this is the wont of the spiritual 
sheep, as the Lord says, that they hear not a strange voice(9)), we shall briefly take in hand the account of 
these matters also. 

2. We note concerning our bodily nature three things, for the sake of which our particular pans were formed. 
Life is the cause of some, good life of others, others again are adapted with a view to the succession of 
descendants. All things in us which are of such a kind that without them it is not possible that human life 
should exist, we consider as being in three parts; in the brain, the heart, and the liver. Again, all that are a sort 
of additional blessings, nature's liberality, whereby she bestows on man the gift of living well, are the organs 
of sense; for such things do not constitute our life, since even where some of them are wanting man is often 
none the less in a condition of life; but without these forms of activity it is impossible to enjoy participation in 
the pleasures of life. The third aim regards the future, and the succession of life. There are also certain other 
organs besides these, which help, in common with all the others, to subserve the continuance of life, 
importing by their own means the proper supplies, as the stomach and the lungs, the latter fanning by 
respiration the fire at the heart, the former introducing the nourishment for the internal organs. 

3. Our structure, then, being thus divided, we have carefully to mark that our faculty for life is not supported in 
any one way by some single organ, but nature, while distributing the means for our existence among 
several parts, makes the contribution of each individual necessary for the whole; just as the things which 
nature contrives for the security and beauty of life are also numerous, and differ much among themselves. 

4. We ought, however, I think, first to discuss briefly the first beginnings of the things which contribute to the 
constitution of our life. As for the material of the whole body which serves as a common substratum for the 
particular members, it may for the present be left without remark; for a discussion as to natural substance in 
general will not be of any assistance to Our purpose with regard to the consideration of the parts. 

5. As it is then acknowledged by all that there is in us a share of all that we behold as elements in the 
universe-of heat and cold, and of the other pair of qualities of moisture and dryness-we must discuss them 
severally. 

6. We see then that the powers which control life are three, of which the first by its heat produces general 
warmth, the second by its moisture keeps damp that which is warmed, so that the living being is kept in an 
intermediate condition by the equal balance of the forces exerted by the quality of each of the opposing 
natures (the moist element not being dried up by excess of heat, nor the hot element quenched by the 
prevalence of moisture); and the third power by its own agency holds together the separate members in a 
certain agreement and harmony, connecting them by the ties which it itself furnishes, and sending into them 
all that self-moving and determining force, on the failure of which the member becomes relaxed and 
deadened, being left destitute of the determining spirit. 

7. Or rather, before dealing with these, it is right that we should mark the skilled workmanship of nature in the 
actual construction of the body. For as that which is hard and resistent does not admit the action of the 
senses (as we may see in the instance of our own bones, and in that of plants in the ground, where we 
remark indeed a certain form of life in that they grow and receive nourishment, yet the resistent character of 
their substance does not allow them sensation), for this reason it was necessary that some wax-like 
formation, so to say, should be supplied for the action of the senses, with the faculty of being impressed with 
the stamp of things capable of striking them, neither becoming confused by excess of moisture (for the 
impress would not remain in moist substance), nor resisting by extraordinary solidity (for that which is 

unyielding would not receive any mark from the impressions), but being in a state between softness and 
hardness, in order that the living being might not be destitute of the fairest of all the operations of nature-l 
mean the motion of sense. 

8. Now as a soft and yielding substance, if it had no assistance from the hard parts, would certainly have, 
like molluscs, neither motion nor articulation, nature accordingly mingles in the body the hardness of the 
bones, and uniting these by close connection one to another, and knitting their joints together by means of 
the sinews, thus plants around them the flesh which receives sensations, furnished with a somewhat harder 
and more highly-strung surface than it would otherwise have had. 

9. While resting, then, the whole weight of the body on this substance of the bones, as on some columns that 
carry a mass of building, she did not implant the bone undivided through the whole structure: for in that case 
man would have remained without motion or activity, if he had been so constructed, just like a tree that 
stands on one spot without either the alternate motion of legs to advance its motion or the service of hands 
to minister to the conveniences of life: but now we see that she contrived that the instrument should be 
rendered capable of walking and working by this device, after she had implanted in the body, by the 
determining spirit which extends through the nerves, the impulse and power for motion. And hence is 
produced the service of the hands, so varied and multiform, and answering to every thought. Hence are 
produced, as though by some mechanical contrivance, the turnings of the neck, and the bending and 
raising of the head, and the action of the chin, and the separation of the eyelids, that takes place with a 
thought, and the movements of the other joints, by the tightening or relaxation of certain nerves. And the 
power that extends through these exhibits a sort of independent impulse, working with the spirit of its will by a 
sort of natural management, in each particular part; but the root of all, and the principle of the motions of the 
nerves, is found in the nervous tissue that surrounds the brain. 

10. We consider, then, that we need not spend more time in inquiring in which of the vital members such a 
thing resides, when the energy of motion is shown to be here. But that the brain contributes to life in a special 
degree is shown clearly by the result of the opposite conditions: for if the tissue surrounding it receives any 
wound or lesion, death immediately follows the injury, nature being unable to endure the hurt even for a 
moment; just as, when a foundation is withdrawn, the whole building collapses with the part; and that 
member, from an injury to which the destruction of the whole living being clearly follows, may properly be 
acknowledged to contain the cause of life. 

1 1 . But as furthermore in those who have ceased to live, when the heat that is implanted in our nature is 
quenched, that which has become dead grows cold, we hence recognize the vital cause also in heat: for we 
must of necessity acknowledge that the living being subsists by the presence of that, which failing, the 
condition of death supervenes. And of such a force we understand the heart to be as it were the 
fountain-head and principle, as from it pipe-like passages, growing one from another in many ramifications, 
diffuse in the whole body the warm and fiery spirit. 

12. And since some nourishment must needs also be provided by nature for the element of heat-for it is not 
possible that the fire should last by itself, without being nourished by its proper food-therefore the channels 
of the blood, issuing from the liver as from a fountainhead, accompany the warm spirit everywhere in its way 
throughout the body, that the one may not by isolation from the other become a disease and destroy the 
constitution. Let this instruct those who go beyond the bounds of fairness, as they learn from nature that 
covetousness is a disease that breeds destruction. 

13. But since the Divinity alone is free from needs, while human poverty requires external aid for its own 
subsistence, nature therefore, in addition to those three powers by which we said that the whole body is 
regulated, brings in imported matter from without, introducing by different entrances that which is suitable to 
those powers. 

14. For to the fount of the blood, which is the liver, she furnishes its supply by food: for that which from time to 
time is imported in this way prepares the springs of blood to issue from the liver, as the snow on the 
mountain by its own moisture increases the springs in the low ground, forcing its own fluid deep down to the 
veins below. 

15. The breath in the heart is supplied by means of the neighbouring organ, which is called the lungs, and is 
a receptacle for air, drawing the breath from without through the windpipe inserted in it, which extends to the 
mouth. The heart being placed in the midst of this organ (and itself also moving incessantly in imitation of the 
action of the ever-moving fire), draws to itself, somewhat as the bellows do in the forges, a supply from the 
adjacent air, filling its recesses by dilatation, and while it fans its own fiery element, breathes upon the 
adjoining tubes; and this it does not cease to do, drawing the external air into its own recesses by dilatation, 
and by compression infusing the air from itself into the tubes. 

16. And this seems to me to be the cause of this spontaneous respiration of ours; for often the mind is 
occupied in discourse with others, or is entirely quiescent when the body is relaxed in sleep, but the 
respiration of air does not cease, though the will gives no co-operation to this end. Now I suppose, since the 
heart is surrounded by the lungs, and in the back part of its own structure is attached to them, moving that 

organ by its own dilatations and compressions, tiiat tiie iniialing and exlialing(1) of tiie air is brougiit about 
by tiie lungs: for as they are a lightly built and porous body, and have all their recesses opening at the base 
of the windpipe, when they contract and are compressed they necessarily force out by pressure the air that 
is left in their cavities; and, when they expand and open, draw the air, by their distention, into the void by 
suction. 

17. This then is the cause of this involuntary respiration-the impossibility that the fiery element should 
remain at rest: for as the operation of motion is proper to heat, and we understand that the principle of heat is 
to be found in the heart, the continual motion going on in this organ produces the incessant inspiration and 
exhalation of the air through the lungs: wherefore also when the fiery element is unnaturally augmented, the 
breathing of those fevered subjects becomes more rapid, as though the heart were endeavouring to 
quench the flame implanted in it by more violent(2) breathing. 

18. But since our nature is poor and in need of supplies for its own maintenance from all quarters, it not only 
lacks air of its own, and the breath which excites heat, which it imports from without for the preservation of the 
living being, but the nourishment it finds to fill out the proportions of the body is an importation. Accordingly, it 
supplies the deficiency by food and drink, implanting in the body a certain faculty for appropriating that 
which it requires, and rejecting that which is superfluous, and for this purpose too the fire of the heart gives 
nature no small assistance. 

19. For since, according to the account we have given, the heart which kindles by its warm breath the 
individual parts, is the most important of the vital organs, our Maker caused it to be operative with its 
efficacious power at all points, that no part of it might be left ineffectual or unprofitable for the regulation of the 
whole organism. Behind, therefore, it enters the lungs, and, by its continuous motion, drawing that organ to 
itself, it expands the passages to inhale the air, and compressing them again it brings about the exspiration 
of the imprisoned air; while in front, attached to the space at the upper extremity of the stomach, it warms it 
and makes it respond by motion to its own activity, rousing it, not to inhale air, but to receive its appropriate 
food: for the entrances for breath and food are near one another, extending lengthwise one alongside the 
other, and are terminated in their upper extremity by the same boundary, so that their mouths are contiguous 
and the passages come to an end together in one mouth, from which the entrance of food is effected 
through the one, and that of the breath through the other. 

20. Internally, however, the closeness of the connection of the passages is not maintained throughout; for the 
heart intervening between the base of the two, infuses in the one the powers for respiration, and in the other 
for nutriment. Now the fiery element is naturally inclined to seek for the material which serves as fuel, and this 
necessarily happens with regard to the receptacle of nourishment; for the more it becomes penetrated by 
fire through the neighbouring warmth, the more it draws to itself what nourishes the heat. And this sort of 
impulse we call appetite. 

21 . But if the organ which contains the food should obtain sufficient material, not even so does the activity of 
the fire become quiescent: but it produces a sort of melting of the material just as in a foundry, and, 
dissolving the solids, pours them out and transfers them, as it were from a funnel, to the neighbouring 
passages: then separating the coarser from the pure substance, it passes the fine part through certain 
channels to the entrance of the liver, and expels the sedimentary matter of the food to the wider passages of 
the bowels, and by turning it over in their manifold windings retains the food for a time in the intestines, lest if it 
were easily got rid of by a straight passage it might at once excite the animal again to appetite, and man, 
like the race of irrational animals, might never cease from this sort of occupation. 

22. As we saw, however, that the liver has especial need of the co-operation of heat for the conversion of the 
fluids into blood, while this organ is in position distant from the heart (for it would, I imagine, have been 
impossible that, being one principle or root of the vital power, it should not be hampered by vicinity with 
another such principle), in order that the system may suffer no injury by the distance at which the heat-giving 
substance is placed, a muscular passage (and this, by those skilled in such matters, is called the artery) 
receives the heated air from the heart and conveys it to the liver, making its opening there somewhere 
beside the point at which the fluids enter, and, as it warms the moist substance by its heat, blends with the 
liquid something akin to fire, and makes the blood appear red with the fiery tint it produces. 

23. Issuing thence again, certain twin channels, each enclosing its own current like a pipe, disperse air and 
blood (that the liquid substance may have free course when accompanied and lightened by the motion of 
the heated substance) in divers directions over the whole body, breaking at every part into countless 
branching channels; while as the two principles of the vital powers mingle together (that alike which 
disperses heat, and that which supplies moisture to all parts of the body), they make, as it were, a sort of 
compulsory contribution from the substance with which they deal to the supreme force in the vital economy. 

24. Now this force is that which is considered as residing in the cerebral membranes and the brain, from 
which it comes that every movement of a joint, every contraction of the muscles, every spontaneous 
influence that is exerted upon the individual members, renders our earthen statue active and mobile as 
though by some mechanism. For the most pure form of heat and the most subtle form of liquid, being united 

by their respective forces tiirougii a process of mixture and combination, nourisii and sustain by tiieir 
moisture tiie brain, and i iience in turn, being rarefied to tiie most pure condition, tiie exiialation tiiat 
proceeds from tiiat organ anoints tiie membrane wiiicii encloses tiie brain, wiiicii, reaciiing from above 
downwards lil<e a pipe, extending tiirougii tiie successive vertebrae, is (itself and the marrow which is 
contained in it) conterminous with the base of the spine, itself giving like a charioteer the impulse and power 
to all the meeting-points of bones and joints, and to the branches of the muscles, for the motion or rest of the 
particular parts. 

25. For this cause too it seems to me that it has been granted a more secure defence, being distinguished, 
in the head, by a double shelter of bones round about, and in the vertebrae of the neck by the bulwarks 
formed by the projections of the spine as well as by the diversified interlacings of the very form of those 
vertebrae, by which it is kept in freedom from all harm, enjoying safety by the defence that surrounds it. 

26. So too one might suppose of the heart, that it is itself like some safe house fitted with the most solid 
defences, fortified by the enclosing walls of the bones round about; for in rear there is the spine, 
strengthened on either side by the shoulder-blades, and on each flank the enfolding position of the ribs 
makes that which is in the midst between them difficult to injure; while in front the breast-bone and the juncture 
of the collar-bone serve as a defence, that its safety may be guarded at all points from external causes of 
danger. 

27. As we see in husbandry, when the rain fall from the clouds or the overflow from the river channels causes 
the land beneath it to be saturated with moisture (let us suppose for our argument a garden, nourishing within 
its own compass countless varieties of trees, and all the forms of plants that grow from the ground, and 
whereof we contemplate the figure, quality, and individuality in great variety of detail); then, as these are 
nourished by the liquid element while they are in one spot, the power which supplies moisture to each 
individual among them is one in nature; but the individuality of the plants so nourished changes the liquid 
element into different qualities; for the same substance becomes bitter in wormwood, and is changed into a 
deadly juice in hemlock, and becomes different in different other plants, in saffron, in balsam, in the poppy: 
for in one it becomes hot, in another cold, in another it obtains the middle quality: and in laurel and mastick it 
is scented, and in the fig and the pear it is sweetened, and by passing through the vine it is turned into the 
grape and into wine; while the juice of the apple, the redness of the rose, the radiance of the lily, the blue of 
the violet, the purple of the hyacinthine dye, and all that we behold in the earth, arise from one and the same 
moisture, and are separated into so many varieties in respect of figure and aspect and quality; the same 
sort of wonder is wrought in the animated soil of our being by Nature, or rather by Nature's Lord. Bones, 
cartilages, veins, arteries, nerves, ligatures, flesh, skin, fat, hair, glands, nails, eyes, nostrils; ears, -all such 
things as these, and countless others in addition, while separated from one another by various peculiarities, 
are nourished by the one form of nourishment in ways proper to their own nature, in the sense that the 
nourishment, when it is brought into close relation with any of the subjects, is also changed according to that 
to which it approaches, and becomes adapted and allied to the special nature of the part. For if it should be 
in the neighbourhood of the eye, it blends with the visual part and is appropriately distributed by the 
difference of the coats round the eye, among the single parts; or, if it flow to the auditory parts, it is mingled 
with the auscultatory nature, or if it is in the lip, it becomes lip; and it grows solid in bone, and grows soft in 
marrow, and is made tense with the sinew, and extended with the surface, and passes into the nails, and is 
fined down for the growth of the hair, by correspondent exhalations, producing hair that is somewhat curly or 
wavy if it makes its way through winding passages, while, if the course of the exhalations that go to form the 
hair lies straight, it renders the hair stiff and straight. 

28. Our argument, however, has wandered far from its purpose, going deep into the works of nature, and 
endeavouring to describe how and from what materials our particular organs are formed, those, I mean, 
intended for life and for good life, and any other class which we included with these in our first division. 

29. For our purpose was tO show that the seminal cause of our constitution is neither a soul without body, nor 
a body without soul, but that, from animated and living bodies, it is generated at the first as a living and 
animate being, and that our humanity takes it and cherishes it like a nursling with the resources she herself 
possesses, and it thus grows on both sides and makes its growth manifest correspondingly in either 
part:-for it at once displays, by this artificial and scientific process of formation, the power of soul that is 
interwoven in it, appearing at first somewhat obscurely, but afterwards increasing in radiance concurrently 
with the perfecting of the work. 

30. And as we may see with stone-carvers- for the artist's purpose is to produce in stone the figure of some 
animal; and with this in his mind, he first severs the stone from its kindred matter, and then, by chipping away 
the superfluous parts of it, advances somehow by the intermediate step of his first outline to the imitation 
which he has in his purpose, so that even an unskilled observer may, by what he sees, conjecture the aim of 
his art; again, by working at it, he brings it more nearly to the semblance of the object he has in view; lastly, 
producing in the material the perfect and finished figure, he brings his art to its conclusion, and that which a 
little before was a shapeless stone is a lion, or a man, or whatsoever it may be that the artist has made, not 

by the change of the material into the figure, but by the figure being wrought upon the material. If one 
supposes the like in the case of the soul he is not far from probability; for we say that Nature, the 
all-contriving, takes from its kindred matter the part that comes from the man, and moulds her statue within 
herself. And as the form follows upon the gradual working of the stone, at first somewhat indistinct, but more 
perfect after the completion of the work, so too in the moulding of its instrument the form of the soul is 
expressed in the substratum, incompletely in that which is still incomplete, perfect in that which is perfect; 
indeed it would have been perfect from the beginning had our nature not been maimed by evil. Thus our 
community in that generation which is subject to passion and of animal nature, brings it about that the Divine 
image does not at once shine forth at our formation, but brings man to perfection by a certain method and 
sequence, through those attributes of the soul which are material, and belong rather to the animal creation. 

31 . Some such doctrine as this the great apostle also teaches us in his Epistle to the Corinthians, when he 
says, "When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child; but when I 
became a man I put away childish things(3)"; not that the soul which arises in the man is different from that 
which we know to be in the boy, and the childish intellect fails while the manly intellect takes its being in us; 
but that the same soul displays its imperfect condition in the one, its perfect state in the other. 

32. For we say that those things are alive which spring up and grow, and no one would deny that all things 
that participate in life and natural motion are animate, yet at the same time one cannot say that such life 
partakes of a perfect soul, -for though a certain animate operation exists in plants, it does not attain to the 
motions of sense; and on the other hand, though a certain further animate power exists in the brutes, neither 
does this attain perfection, since it does not contain in itself the grace of reason and intelligence. 

33. And even so we say that the true and perfect soul is the human soul, recognized by every operation; and 
anything else that shares in life we call animate by a sort of customary misuse of language, because in 
these cases the soul does not exist in a perfect condition, but only certain parts of the operation of the soul, 
which in man also (according to Moses' mystical account of man's origin) we learn to have accrued when he 
made himself like this sensuous world. Thus Paul, advising those who were able to hear him to lay hold on 
perfection, indicates also the mode in which they may attain that object, telling them that they must "put off 
the old man," and put on the man "which is renewed after the image of Him that created him 4." 

34. Now may we all return to that Divine grace in which God at the first created man, when He said, "Let us 
make man in our image and likeness"; to Whom be glory and might for ever and ever. Amen. 

ON THE SOULAND THE RESURRECTION 

ARGUMENT 

THE mind, in times of bereavement, craves a certainty gained by reasoning as to tiie existence of tiie soul 

after deatii. 

First, tiien: Virtue will be impossible, if deprived of the life of eternity, her only advantage. 

But this is a moral argument. The case calls for speculative and scientific treatment. 

How is the objection that the nature of the soul, as of real things, is material, to be met? 

Thus; the truth of this doctrine would involve the truth of Atheism; whereas Atheism is refuted by the fact of the 

wise order that reigns in the world. In other words, the spirituality of God cannot be denied: and this proves 

the possibility of spiritual or immaterial existence: and therefore, that of the soul. 

But is God, then, the same thing as the soul? 

No: but man is "a little world in himself;" and we may with the same right conclude from this Microcosm to the 

actual existence of an immaterial soul, as from the phenomena of the world to the reality of God's existence. 

A Definition of the soul is then given, for the sake of clearness in the succeeding discussion. It is a created, 

living, intellectual being, with the power, as long as it is provided with organs, of sensuous perception. For 

"the mind sees," not the eye; take, for instance, the meaning of the phases of the moon. The objection that 

the "organic machine" of the body produces all thought is met by the instance of the water-organ. Such 

machines, if thought were really an attribute of matter, ought to build themselves spontaneously: whereas 

they are a direct proof of an invisible thinking power in man. A work of Art means mind: there is a thing 

perceived, and a thing not perceived. 

But still, what is this thing not perceived? 

If it has no sensible quality whatever-Where is it? 

The answer is, that the same question might be asked about the Deity (Whose existence is not denied). 

Then the Mind and the Deity are identical? 

Not so: in its substantial existence, as separable from matter, the soul is like God; but this likeness does not 

extend to sameness; it resembles God as a copy the original. 

As being "simple and uncompounded" the soul survives the dissolution of the composite body, whose 

scattered elements it will continue to accompany, as if watching over its property till the Resurrection, when it 

will clothe itself in them anew. 

The soul was defined "an intellectual being." But anger and desire are not of the body either. Are there, then, 

two or three souls?-Answer. Anger and desire do not belong to the essence of the soul, but are only among 

its varying states; they are not originally part of ourselves, and we can and must rid ourselves of them, and 

bring them, as long as they continue to mark our community with the brute creation, into the service of the 

good. They are the "tares" of the heart, while they serve any other purpose. 

But where will the soul "accompany its elements"?-Hades is not a particular spot; it means the Invisible; 

those passages in the Bible in which the regions under the earth are alluded to are explained as allegorical, 

although the partizans of the opposite interpretation need not be combated. 

But how will the soul know the scattered elements of the once familiar form? This is answered by two 

illustrations (not analogies). The skill of the painter, the force that has united numerous colours to form a 

single tint, will, if (by some miracle) that actual tint was to fall back into those various colours, be cognizant of 

each one of these last, e. g. the tone and size of the drop of gold, of red, &c.; and could at will recombine 

them. The owner of a cup of clay would know its fragments (by their shape) amidst a mass of fragments of 

clay vessels of other shapes, or even if they were plunged again into their native clay. So the soul knows its 

elements amidst their "kindred dust"; or when each one has flitted back to its own primeval source on the 

confines of the Universe. 

But how does this harmonize with the Parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus? 

The bodies of both were in the grave: and so all that is said of them is in a spiritual sense. But the soul can 

suffer still, being cognizant, not only of the elements of the whole body, but of those that formed each 

member, e. g. the tongue. By the relations of the Rich Man are meant the impressions made on his soul by 

the things of flesh and blood. 

But if we must have no emotions in the next world, how shall there be virtue, and how shall there be love of 

God? For anger, we saw, contributed to the one, desire to the other. 

We shall be like God so far that we shall always contemplate the Beautiful in Him. Now, God, in 

contemplating Himself, has no desire and hope, no regret and memory. The moment of fruition is always 

present, and so His Love is perfect, without the need of any emotion. So will it be with us. God draws "that 

which belongs to Him" to this blessed passionlessness; and in this very drawing consists the torment of a 

passion-laden soul. Severe and long-continued pains in eternity are thus decreed to sinners, not because 

God hates them, nor for the sake alone of punishing them; but "because what belongs to God must at any 

cost be preserved for Him." The degree of pain which must be endured by each one is necessarily 

proportioned to the measure of the wickedness. 

God will thus be "all in all"; yet the loved one's form will then be woven, though into a more ethereal texture, 

of the same elements as before. (This is not Nirvana.) 

Here the doctrine of the Resurrection is touched. The Christian Resurrection and that of the heathen 

philosophies coincide in that the soul is reclothed from some elements of the Universe. But there are fatal 

objections to the latter under its two forms 

Transmigration pure and simple; 

The Platonic Soul-rotation. 

The first-1 . Obliterates the distinction between the mineral or vegetable, and the spiritual, world. 

2. Makes it a sin to eat and drink. 

Both-3. Confuse the moral choice. 

4. Make heaven the cradle of vice, and earth of virtue. 

5. Contradict the truth that they assume, that there is no change in heaven. 

6. Attribute every birth to a vice, and therefore are either Atheist or Manichaean. 

7. Make a life a chapter of accidents. 

8. Contradict facts of moral character. God is the cause of our life, both in body and soul. But when and how 
does the soul come into existence? The how we can never know. 

There are objections to seeking the material for any created thing either in God, or outside God. But we may 

regard the whole Creation as the realized thoughts of God. (Anticipation of Malebranche.) 

The when may be determined. Objections to the existence of soul before body have been given above. But 

soul is necessary to life, and the embryo lives. 

Therefore soul is not born after body. So body and soul are born together. 

As to the number of souls. Humanity itself is a thought of God not yet completed, as these continual 

additions prove. When it is completed, this "progress of Humanity" will cease, by there being no more 

births: and no births, no deaths. 

Before answering objections to the Scriptural doctrine of the Resurrection, the passages that contain it are 

mentioned: especially Psalm cxviii. 27 (LXX.). 

The various objections to it, to the Purgatory to follow, and to the Judgment, are then stated; especially that: 

A man is not the same being (physically) two days together. Which phase of him, then, is to rise again, be 

tortured (if need be), and judged? 

They are all answered by a Definition of the Resurrection, i.e. the restoration of man to his original state. In 

that, there is neither age nor infancy; and the "coats of skins" are laid aside. 

When the process of purification has been completed, the better attributes of the soul 

appear-imperishability, life, honour, grace, glory, power, and, in short, all that belongs to human nature as 

the image of Deity. 

ON THE SOULAND THE RESURRECTION 

BASIL, great amongst the saints, had departed from this life to God; and the impulse to mourn for him was 
shared by all the churches. But his sister the Teacher was still living; and so I journeyed to her(1), yearning 
for an interchange of sympathy over the loss of her brother. My soul was fight sorrow-stricken by this 
grievous blow, and I sought for one who could feel it equally, to mingle my tears with. But when we were in 
each other's presence the sight of the Teacher awakened all my pain; for she too was lying in a state of 
prostration even unto death. Well, she gave in to me for a little while, like a skilful driver, in the ungovernable 
violence of my grief; and then she tried to cheek me by speaking, and to correct with the curb of her 
reasonings the disorder of my soul. She quoted the Apostle's words about the duty of not being "grieved for 
them that sleep" because only "men without hope" have such feelings. With a heart still fermenting with my 
pain, I asked- 

(2)How can that ever be practised by mankind? There is such an instinctive and deep-seated abhorrence 
of death in all! Those who look on a death-bed can hardly bear the sight; and those whom death 
approaches recoil from him all they can. Why, even the law that controls us puts death highest on the list of 
crimes, and highest on the list of punishments. By what device, then, can we bring ourselves to regard as 
nothing a departure from life even in the case of a stranger, not to mention that of relations, when so be they 

cease to live? We see before us the whole course of human life aiming at this one thing, viz. how we may 
continue in this life; indeed it is for this that houses have been invented by us to live in; in order that our 
bodies may not be prostrated in their environments by cold or heat. Agriculture, again, what is it but the 
providing of our sustenance? In fact all thought about how we are to go on living is occasioned by the fear of 
dying. Why is medicine so honoured amongst men? Because it is thought to carry on the combat with death 
to a certain extent by its methods. Why do we have corslets, and long shields, and greaves, and helmets, 
and all the defensive armour, and inclosures of fortifications, and ironbarred gates, except that we fear to 
die? Death then being naturally so terrible to us, how can it be easy for a survivor to obey this command to 
remain unmoved over friends departed? 

Why, what is the especial pain you feel, asked the Teacher, in the mere necessity itself of dying? This 
common talk of unthinking persons is no sufficient accusation. 

What! is there no occasion for grieving, I replied to her, when we see one who so lately lived and spoke 
becoming all of a sudden lifeless and motionless, with the sense of every bodily organ extinct, with no sight 
or hearing in operation, or any other faculty of apprehension that sense possesses; and if you apply fire or 
steel to him, even if you were to plunge a sword into the body, or cast it to the beasts of prey, or if you bury it 
beneath a mound, that dead man is alike unmoved at any treatment? Seeing, then, that this change is 
observed in all these ways, and that principle of life, whatever it might be, disappears all at once out of sight, 
as the flame of an extinguished lamp which burnt on it the moment before neither remains upon the wick nor 
passes to some other place, but completely disappears, how can such a change be borne without emotion 
by one who has no clear ground to rest upon? We hear the departure of the spirit, we see the shell that is left; 
but of the part that has been separated we are ignorant, both as to its nature, and as to the place whither it 
has fled; for neither earth, nor air, nor water, nor any other element can show as residing within itself this force 
that has left the body, at whose withdrawal a corpse only remains, ready for dissolution. 
Whilst I was thus enlarging on the subject, the Teacher signed to me with her hand(4), and said: Surely what 
alarms and disturbs your mind is not the thought that the soul, instead of lasting for ever, ceases with the 
body's dissolution! 

I answered rather audaciously, and without due consideration of what I said, for my passionate grief had not 
yet given me back my judgment. In fact, I said that the Divine utterances seemed to me like mere 
commands compelling us to believe that the soul lasts for ever; not, however, that we were led by them to 
this belief by any reasoning. Our mind within us appears slavishly to accept the opinion enforced, but not to 
acquiesce with a spontaneous impulse. Hence our sorrow over the departed is all the more grievous; we 
do not exactly know whether this vivifying principle is anything by itself; where it is, or how it is; whether, in 
fact, it exists in any way at all anywhere. This uncertainty(5) about the real state of the case balances the 
opinions on either side; many adopt the one view, many the other; and indeed there are certain persons, of 
no small philosophical reputation amongst the Greeks, who have held and maintained this which I have just 
said. 

Away, she cried, with that pagan nonsense! For therein the inventor of lies fabricates false theories only to 
harm the Truth. Observe this, and nothing else; that such a view about the soul amounts to nothing less than 
the abandoning of virtue, and seeking the pleasure of the moment only; the life of eternity, by which alone 
virtue claims the advantage, must be despaired of. 

And pray how, I asked, are we to get a firm and unmovable belief in the soul's continuance? I, too, am 
sensible of the fact that human life will be bereft of the most beautiful ornament that life has to give, I mean 
virtue, unless an undoubting confidence with regard to this be established within us. What, indeed, has virtue 
to stand upon in the case of those persons who conceive of this present life as the limit of their existence, 
and hope for nothing beyond? 

Well, replied the Teacher, we must seek where we may get a beginning for our discussion upon this point; 
and if you please, let the defence of the opposing views be undertaken by yourself; for I see that your mind 
is a little inclined to accept such a brief. Then, after the conflicting belief has been stated, we shall be able to 
look for the truth. 

When she made this request, and I had deprecated the suspicion that I was making the objections in real 
earnest, instead of only wishing to get a firm ground for the belief about the soul by calling into court(6) first 
what is aimed against this view, I began- 

Would not the defenders of the opposite belief say this: that the body, being composite, must necessarily 
be resolved into that of which it is composed? And when the coalition of elements in the body ceases, each 
of those elements naturally gravitates towards its kindred element with the irresistible bias of like to like; the 
heat in us will thus unite with heat, the earthy with the solid, and each of the other elements also will pass 
towards its like. Where, then, will the soul be after that? If one affirm that it is in those elements, one will be 
obliged to admit that it is identical with them, for this fusion could not possibly take place between two things 
of different natures. But this being granted, the soul must necessarily be viewed as a complex thing, fused 
as it is with qualities so opposite. But the complex is not simple, but must be classed with the composite. 

and the composite is necessarily dissoluble; and dissolution means the destruction of the compound; and 
the destructible is not immortal, else the flesh itself, resolvable as it is into its constituent elements, might so 
be called immortal. If, on the other hand, the soul is something other than these elements, where can our 
reason suggest a place for it to be, when it is thus, by virtue of its alien nature, not to be discovered in those 
elements, and there is no other place in the world, either, where it may continue, in harmony with its own 
peculiar character, to exist? But, if a thing can be found nowhere, plainly it has no existence. 
The Teacher sighed gently at these words of mine, and then said; Maybe these were the objections, or 
such as these, that the Stoics and Epicureans collected at Athens made in answer to the Apostle. I hear that 
Epicurus carried his theories in this very direction. The framework of things was to his mind a fortuitous(7) 
and mechanical affair, without a Providence penetrating its operations; and, as a piece with this, he thought 
that human life was like a bubble, existing only as long as the breath within was held in by the enveloping 
substance(8), inasmuch as our body was a mere membrane, as it were, encompassing a breath; and that 
on the collapse of the inflation the imprisoned essence was extinguished. To him the visible was the limit of 
existence; he made our senses the only means of our apprehension of things; he completely dosed the 
eyes of his soul, and was incapable of seeing anything in the intelligible and immaterial world, just as a 
man, who is imprisoned in a cabin whose walls and roof obstruct the view outside, remains without a 
glimpse of all the wonders of the sky. Verily, everything in the universe that is seen to be an object of sense 
is as an earthen wall, forming in itself a barrier between the narrower souls and that intelligible world which is 
ready for their contemplation; and it is the earth and water and fire alone that such behold; whence comes 
each of these elements, in what and by what they are encompassed, such souls because of their 
narrowness cannot detect. While the sight of a garment suggests to any one the weaver of it, and the thought 
of the shipwright comes at the sight of the ship, and the hand of the builder is brought to the mind of him who 
sees the building, these little souls gaze upon the world, but their eyes are blind to Him whom all this that we 
see around us makes manifest; and so they propound their clever and pungent doctrines about the soul's 
evanishment;-body from elements, and elements from body, and, besides, the impossibility of the soul's 
self-existence (if it is not to he one of these elements, or lodged in one); for if these opponents suppose that 
by virtue of the soul not being akin to the elements it is nowhere after death, they must propound, to begin 
with, the absence of the soul from the fleshly life as well, seeing that the body itself is nothing but a 
concourse of those elements; and so they must not tell us that the soul is to be found there either, 
independently vivifying their compound. If it is not possible for the soul to exist after death, though the 
elements do, then, I say, according to this teaching our life as well is proved to be nothing else but death. 
But if on the other hand they do not make the existence of the soul now in the body a question for doubt, how 
can they maintain its evanishment when the body is resolved into its elements? Then, secondly, they must 
employ an equal audacity against the God in this Nature too. For how can they assert that the intelligible 
and immaterial Unseen can be dissolved and diffused into the wet and the soft, as also into the hot and the 
dry, and so hold together the universe in existence through being, though not of a kindred nature with the 
things which it penetrates, yet not thereby incapable of so penetrating them? Let them, therefore, remove 
from their system the very Deity Who upholds the world. 

That is the very point, I said, upon which our adversaries cannot fail to have doubts; viz. that all things 
depend on God and are encompassed by Him, or, that there is any divinity at all transcending the physical 
world. 

It would be more fitting, she cried, to be silent about such doubts, and not to deign to make any answer to 
such foolish and wicked propositions; for there is a Divine precept forbidding us to answer a fool in his folly; 
and he must be a fool, as the Prophet declares, who says that there is no God. But since one needs must 
speak, I will urge upon you an argument which is not mine nor that of any human being (for it would then be of 
small value, whosoever spoke it), but an argument which the whole Creation enunciates by the medium of its 
wonders to the audience(9) of the eye, with a skilful and artistic utterance that reaches the heart. The 
Creation proclaims outright the Creator; for the very heavens, as the Prophet says, declare the glory of God 
with their unutterable words. We see the universal harmony in the wondrous sky and on the wondrous earth; 
how elements essentially opposed to each other are all woven together in an ineffable union to serve one 
common end, each contributing its particular force to maintain the whole; how the unmingling and mutually 
repellent do not fly apart from each other by virtue of their peculiarities, any more than they are destroyed, 
when compounded, by such contrariety; how those elements which are naturally buoyant move downwards, 
the heat of the sun, for instance, descending in the rays, while the bodies which possess weight are lifted by 
becoming rarefied in vapour, so that water contrary to its nature ascends, being conveyed through the air to 
the upper regions; how too that fire of the firmament so penetrates the earth that even its abysses feel the 
heat; how the moisture of the rain infused into the soil generates, one though it be by nature, myriads of 
differing germs, and animates in due proportion each subject of its influence; how very swiftly the polar 
sphere revolves, how the orbits within it move the contrary way, with all the eclipses, and conjunctions, and 
measured intervals(l) of the planets. We see all this with the piercing eyes of mind, nor can we fail to be 

taught by means of such a spectacle that a Divine power, worl<ing with sl<ill and method, is manifesting itself 
in this actual world, and, penetrating each portion, combines those portions with the whole and completes 
the whole by the portions, and encompasses the universe with a single all-controlling force, self-centred and 
self-contained, never ceasing from its motion, yet never altering the position which it holds. 
And pray how, I asked, does this belief in the existence of God prove along with it the existence of the 
human soul? For God, surely, is not the same thing as the soul, so that, if the one were believed in, the other 
must necessarily be believed in. 

She replied: It has been said by wise men that man is a little world(2) in himself and contains all the 
elements which go to complete the universe. If this view is a true one (and so it seems), we perhaps shall 
need no other ally than it to establish the truth of our conception of the soul. And our conception of it is this; 
that it exists, with a rare and peculiar nature of its own, independently of the body with its gross texture. We 
get our exact knowledge of this outer world from the apprehension of our senses, and these sensational 
operations themselves lead us on to the understanding of the super-sensual world of fact and thought, and 
our eye thus becomes the interpreter of that almighty wisdom which is visible in the universe, and points in 
itself to the Being Who encompasses it. Just so, when we look to our inner world, we find no slight grounds 
there also, in the known, for conjecturing the unknown; and the unknown there also is that which, being the 
object of thought and not of sight, eludes the grasp of sense. 

I rejoined. Nay, it may be very possible to infer a wisdom transcending the universe from the skilful and 
artistic designs observable in this harmonized fabric of physical nature; but, as regards the soul, what 
knowledge is possible to those who would trace, from any indications the body has to give, the unknown 
through the known? 

Most certainly, the Virgin replied, the soul herself, to those who wish to follow the wise proverb and know 
themselves, is a competent(3) instructress; of the fact, I mean, that she is an immaterial and spiritual thing, 
working and moving in a way corresponding to her peculiar nature, and evincing these peculiar emotions 
through the organs of the body. For this bodily organization exists the same even in those who have just 
been reduced by death to the state of corpses, but it remains without motion or action because the force of 
the soul is no longer in it. It moves only when there is sensation in the organs, and not only that, but the 
mental force by means of that sensation penetrates with its own impulses and moves whither it will all those 
organs of sensation. 

What then, I asked, is the soul? Perhaps there may be some possible means of delineating its nature; so 
that we may have some comprehension of this subject, in the way of a sketch. 

Its definition, the Teacher replied, has been attempted in different ways by different writers, each according 
to his own bent; but the following is our opinion about it. The soul is an essence created, and living, and 
intellectual, transmitting from itself to an organized and sentient body the power of living and of grasping 
objects of sense, as long as a natural constitution capable of this holds together. 

Saying this she pointed to the physician(4) who was sitting to watch her state, and said There is a proof of 
what I say close by us. How, I ask, does this man, by putting his fingers to feel the pulse, hear in a manner, 
through this sense of touch. Nature calling loudly to him and telling him of her peculiar pain; in fact, that the 
disease in the body is an inflammatory one(5), and that the malady originates in this or that internal organ; 
and that there is such and such a degree of fever? How too is he taught by the agency of the eye other facts 
of this kind, when he looks to see the posture of the patient and watches the wasting of the flesh? As, too, the 
state of the complexion, pale somewhat and bilious, and the gaze of the eyes, as is the case with those in 
pain, involuntarily inclining to sadness, indicate the internal condition, so the ear gives information of the like, 
ascertaining the nature of the malady by the shortness of the breathing and by the groan that comes with it. 
One might say that even the sense of smell in the expert is not incapable of detecting the kind of disorder, 
but that it notices the secret suffering of the vitals in the particular quality of the breath. Could this be so if 
there were not a certain force of intelligence present in each organ of the senses? What would our hand 
have taught us of itself, without thought conducting it from feeling to understanding the subject before it? 
What would the ear, as separate from mind, or the eye or the nostril or any other organ have helped towards 
the settling of the question, all by themselves? Verily, it is most true what one of heathen culture is recorded 
to have said, that it is the mind that sees and the mind that hears(6). Else, if you will not allow this to be true, 
you must tell me why, when you look at the sun, as you have been trained by your instructor to look at him, 
you assert that he is not in the breadth of his disc of the size he appears to the many, but that he exceeds by 
many times the measure of the entire earth. Do you not confidently maintain that it is so, because you have 
arrived by reasoning through phenomena at the conception of such and such a movement, of such 
distances of time and space, of such causes of eclipse? And when you look at the waning and waxing 
moon you are taught other truths by the visible figure of that heavenly body, viz. that it is in itself devoid of 
light, and that it revolves in the circle nearest to the earth, and that it is lit by light from the sun; just as is the 
case with mirrors, which, receiving the sun upon them, do not reflect rays of their own, but those of the sun, 
whose light is given back from their smooth flashing surface. Those who see this, but do not examine it, think 

that the light comes from the moon herself. But that this is not the case is proved by this; that when she is 
diametrically facing the sun she has the whole of the disc that looks our way illuminated; but, as she 
traverses her own circle of revolution quicker from moving in a narrower space, she herself has completed 
this more than twelve times before the sun has once travelled round his; whence it happens that her 
substance is not always covered with light. For her position facing him is not maintained in the frequency of 
her revolutions; but, while this position causes the whole side of the moon which looks to us to be illumined, 
directly she moves sideways her hemisphere which is turned to us necessarily becomes partially 
shadowed, and only that which is turned to him meets his embracing rays; the brightness, in fact, keeps on 
retiring from that which can no longer see the sun to that which still sees him, until she passes right across 
the sun's disc and receives his rays upon her hinder part; and then the fact of her being in herself totally 
devoid of light and splendour causes the side turned to us to be invisible while the further hemisphere is all 
in light; and this is called the completion(7) of her waning. But when again, in her own revolution, she has 
passed the sun and she is transverse to his rays, the side which was dark just before begins to shine a little, 
for the rays move from the illumined part to that so lately invisible. You see what the eye does teach; and yet 
it would never of itself have afforded this insight, without something that looks through the eyes and uses the 
data of the senses as mere guides to penetrate from the apparent to the unseen. It is needless to add the 
methods of geometry that lead us step by step through visible delineations to truths that lie out of sight, and 
countless other instances which all prove that apprehension is the work of an intellectual essence deeply 
seated in our nature, acting through the operation of our bodily senses. 

But what, I asked, if, insisting on the great differences which, in spite of a certain quality of matter shared 
alike by all elements in their visible form, exist between each particular kind of matter (motion, for instance, is 
not the same in all, some moving up, some down; nor form, nor quality either), some one were to say that 
there was in the same manner incorporated in, and belonging to, these elements a certain force(8) as well 
which effects these intellectual insights and operations by a purely natural effort of their own (such effects, for 
instance, as we often see produced by the mechanists, in whose hands matter, combined according to the 
rules of Art, thereby imitates Nature, exhibiting resemblance not in figure alone but even in motion, so that 
when the piece of mechanism sounds in its resonant part it mimics a human voice, without, however, our 
being able to perceive anywhere any mental force working out the particular figure, character, sound, and 
movement); suppose, I say, we were to affirm that all this was produced as well in the organic machine of 
our natural bodies, without any intermixture of a special thinking substance but owing simply to an inherent 
motive power of the elements within us accomplishing(9) by itself these operations-to nothing else, in fact, 
but an impulsive movement working for the cognition of the object before us; would not then the fact stand 
proved of the absolute nonexistence(l) of that intellectual and impalpable Being, the soul, which you talk 
of? 

Your instance, she replied, and your reasoning upon it, though belonging to the counter-argument, may both 
of them be made allies of our statement, and will contribute not a little to the confirmation of its truth. 
Why, how can you say that? 

Because, you see, so to understand, manipulate, and dispose the soulless matter, that the art which is 
stored away in such mechanisms becomes almost like a soul to this material, in all the various ways in 
which it mocks movement, and figure, and voice, and so on, may be turned into a proof of there being 
something in man whereby he shows an innate fitness to think out within himself, through the contemplative 
and inventive faculties, such thoughts, and having prepared such mechanisms in theory, to put them into 
practice by manual skill, and exhibit in matter the product of his mind. First, for instance, he saw, by dint of 
thinking, that to produce any sound there is need of some wind; and then, with a view to produce wind in the 
mechanism, he previously ascertained by a course of reasoning and close observation of the nature of 
elements, that there is no vacuum at all in the world, but that the lighter is to be considered a vacuum only by 
comparison with the heavier; seeing that the air itself, taken as a separate subsistence, is crowded quite full. 
It is by an abuse of language that a jar is said to be "empty"; for when it is empty of any liquid it is none the 
less, even in this state, full, in the eyes of the experienced. A proof of this is that a jar when put into a pool of 
water is not immediately filled, but at first floats on the surface, because the air it contains helps to buoy up 
its rounded sides; till at last the hand of the drawer of the water forces it down to the bottom, and, when there, 
it takes in water by its neck; during which process it is shown not to have been empty even before the water 
came; for there is the spectacle of a sort of combat going on in the neck between the two elements, the 
water being forced by its weight into the interior, and therefore streaming in; the imprisoned air on the other 
hand being straitened for room by the gush of the water along the neck, and so rushing in the contrary 
direction; thus the water is checked by the strong current of air, and gurgles and bubbles against it. Men 
observed this, and devised in accordance with this property of the two elements a way of introducing air to 
work their mechanism(2). They made a kind of cavity of some hard stuff, and prevented the air in it from 
escaping in any direction; and then introduced water into this cavity through its mouth, apportioning the 
quantity of water according to requirement; next they allowed an exit in the opposite direction to the air, so 

that it passed into a pipe placed ready to iiand, and in so doing, being violently constrained by the water, 
became a blast; and this, playing on the structure of the pipe, produced a note. Is it not clearly proved by 
such visible results that there is a mind of some kind in man, something other than that which is visible, 
which, by virtue of an invisible thinking nature of its own, first prepares by inward invention such devices, and 
then, when they have been so matured, brings them to the light and exhibits them in the subservient matter? 
For if it were possible to ascribe such wonders, as the theory of our opponents does, to the actual 
constitution of the elements, we should have these mechanisms building themselves spontaneously; the 
bronze would not wait for the artist, to be made into the likeness of a man, but would become such by an 
innate force; the air would not require the pipe, to make a note, but would sound spontaneously by its own 
fortuitous flux and motion; and the jet of the water upwards would not be, as it now is the result of an artificial 
pressure forcing it to move in an unnatural direction, but the water would rise into the mechanism of its own 
accord, finding in that direction a natural channel. But if none of these results are produced spontaneously 
by elemental force, but, on the contrary, each element is employed at will by artifice; and if artifice is a kind 
of movement and activity of mind, will not the very consequences of what has been urged by way of 
objection show us Mind as something other than the thing perceived? 

That the thing perceived, I replied, is not the same as the thing not perceived, I grant; but I do not discover 
any answer to our question in such a statement; it is not yet dear to me what we are to think that thing 
not-perceived to be; all I have been shown by your argument is that it is not anything material; and I do not 
yet know the fitting name for it. I wanted especially to know what it is, not what it is not. 
We do learn, she replied, much about many things by this very same method, inasmuch as, in the very act 
of saying a thing is "not so and so," we by implication interpret the very nature of the thing in question(3). For 
instance, when we say a "guileless," we indicate a good man; when we say "unmanly," we have expressed 
that a man is a coward; and it is possible to suggest a great many things in like fashion, wherein we either 
convey the idea of goodness by the negation of badness(4), or vice versa. Well, then, if one thinks so with 
regard to the matter now before us, one will not fail to gain a proper conception of it. The question is,-What 
are we to think of Mind in its very essence? Now granted that the inquirer has had his doubts set at rest as to 
the existence of the thing in question, owing to the activities which it displays to us, and only wants to know 
what it is, he will have adequately discovered it by being told that it is not that which our senses perceive, 
neither a colour, nor a form, nor a hardness, nor a weight, nor a quantity, nor a cubic dimension, nor a point, 
nor anything else perceptible in matter; supposing, that is, (5) that there does exist a something beyond all 
these. 

Here I interrupted her discourse: If you leave all these out of the account I do not see how you can possibly 
avoid cancelling along with them the very thing which you are in search of. I cannot at present conceive to 
what, as apart from these, the perceptive activity is to cling. For on all occasions in investigating with the 
scrutinizing intellect the contents of the world, we must, so far as we put our hand(6) at all on what we are 
seeking, inevitably touch, as blind men feeling along the walls for the door, some one of those things 
aforesaid; we must come on colour, or form, or quantity, or something else on your list; and when it comes to 
saying that the thing is none of them, our feebleness of mind induces us to suppose that it does not exist at 
all. 

Shame on such absurdity! said she, indignantly interrupting. A fine conclusion this narrow-minded, grovelling 
view of the world brings us to! If all that is not cognizable by sense is to be wiped out of existence, the 
all-embracing Power that presides over things is admitted by this same assertion not to be; once a man has 
been told about the non-material and invisible nature of the Deity, he must perforce with such a premise 
reckon it as absolutely non-existent. If, on the other hand, the absence of such characteristics in His case 
does not constitute any limitation of His existence, how can the Mind of man be squeezed out of existence 
along with this withdrawal one by one of each property of matter? 

Well, then, I retorted, we only exchange one paradox for another by arguing in this way; for our reason will be 
reduced to the conclusion that the Deity and the Mind of man are identical, if it be true that neither can be 
thought of, except by the withdrawal of all the data of sense. 

Say not so, she replied; to talk so also is blasphemous. Rather, as the Scripture tells you, say that the one is 
like the other. For that which is "made in the image" of the Deity necessarily possesses a likeness to its 
prototype in every respect; it resembles it in being intellectual, immaterial, unconnected with any notion of 
weight(7), and in eluding any measurement of its dimensions(8); yet as regards its own peculiar nature it is 
something different from that other. Indeed, it would be no longer an "image," if it were altogether identical 
with that other; but(9) where we have A in that uncreate prototype we have a in the image; just as in a minute 
particle of glass, when it happens to face the light, the complete disc of the sun is often to be seen, not 
represented thereon in proportion to its proper size, but so far as the minuteness of the particle admits of its 
being represented at all. Thus do the reflections of those ineffable qualities of Deity shine forth within the 
narrow limits of our nature; and so our reason, following the leading of these reflections, will not miss 
grasping the Mind in its essence by clearing away from the question all corporeal qualities; nor on the other 

hand will it bring the pure(1) and infinite Existence to the level of that which is perishable and little; it will 
regard this essence of the Mind as an object of thought only, since it is the "image" of an Existence which is 
such; but it will not pronounce this image to be identical with the prototype. Just, then, as we have no doubts, 
owing to the display of a Divine mysterious wisdom in the universe, about a Divine Being and a Divine 
Power existing in it all which secures its continuance (though if you required a definition of that Being you 
would therein find the Deity completely sundered from every object in creation, whether of sense or thought, 
while in these last, too, natural distinctions are admitted), so, too, there is nothing strange in the soul's 
separate existence as a substance (whatever we may think that substance to be) being no hindrance to her 
actual existence, in spite of the elemental atoms of the world not harmonizing with her in the definiton of her 
being. In the case of our living bodies, composed as they are from the blending of these atoms, there is no 
sort of communion, as has been just said, on the score of substance, between the simplicity and invisibility 
of the soul, and the grossness of those bodies; but, notwithstanding that, there is not a doubt that there is in 
them the soul's vivifying influence exerted by a law which it as beyond the human understanding to 
comprehend(l). Not even then, when those atoms have again been dissolved(3) into themselves, has that 
bond of a vivifying influence vanished; but as, while the framework of the body still holds together, each 
individual part is possessed of a soul which penetrates equally every component member, and one could 
not call that soul hard and resistent though blended with the solid, nor humid, or cold, or the reverse, though it 
transmits life to all and each of such parts, so, when that framework is dissolved, and has returned to its 
kindred elements, there is nothing against probability that that simple and incomposite essence which has 
once for all by some inexplicable law grown with the growth of the bodily framework should continually 
remain beside the atoms with which it has been blended, and should in no way be sundered from a union 
once formed. For it does not follow that because the composite is dissolved the incomposite must be 
dissolved with it(4). 

That those atoms, I rejoined, should unite and again be separated, and that this constitutes the formation 
and dissolution of the body, no one would deny. But we have to consider this. There are great intervals 
between these atoms; they differ from each other, both in position, and also in qualitative distinctions and 
peculiarities. When, indeed, these atoms have all converged upon the given subject, it is reasonable that 
that intelligent and undimensional essence which we call the soul should cohere with that which is so united; 
but once these atoms are separated from each other, and have gone whither their nature impels them, what 
is to become of the soul when her vessel s is thus scattered in many directions? As a sailor, when his ship 
has been wrecked and gone to pieces, cannot float upon all the pieces at once(6) which have been 
scattered this way and that over the surface of the sea (for he seizes any bit that comes to hand, and lets all 
the rest drift away), in the same way the soul, being by nature incapable of dissolution along with the atoms, 
will, if she finds it hard to be parted from the body altogether, cling to some one of them; and if we take this 
view, consistency will no more allow us to regard her as immortal for living in one atom than as mortal for not 
living in a number of them. 

But the intelligent and undimensional, she replied, is neither contracted nor diffused(7) (contraction and 
diffusion being a property of body only); but by virtue of a nature which is formless and bodiless it is present 
with the body equally in the contraction and in the diffusion of its atoms, and is no more narrowed by the 
compression which attends the uniting of the atoms than it is abandoned by them when they wander off to 
their kindred, however wide the interval is held to be which we observe between alien atoms. For instance, 
there is a great difference between the buoyant and light as contrasted with the heavy and solid; between 
the hot as contrasted with the cold; between the humid as contrasted with its opposite; nevertheless it is no 
strain to an intelligent essence to be present in each of those elements to which it has once cohered; this 
blending with opposites does not split it up. In locality, in peculiar qualities, these elemental atoms are held 
to be far removed from each other; but an undimensional nature finds it no labour to cling to what is locally 
divided, seeing that even now it is possible for the mind at once to contemplate the heavens above us and 
to extend its busy scrutiny beyond the horizon, nor is its contemplative power at all distracted by these 
excursions into distances so great. There is nothing, then, to hinder the soul's presence in the body's atoms, 
whether fused in union or decomposed in dissolution. Just as in the amalgam of gold and silver a certain 
methodical force is to be observed which has fused the metals, and if the one be afterwards smelted out of 
the other, the law of this method nevertheless continues to reside in each, so that while, the amalgam is 
separated this method does not suffer division along with it (for you cannot make fractions out of the 
indivisible), in the same way this intelligent essence of the soul is observable in the concourse of the atoms, 
and does not undergo division when they are dissolved; but it remains with them, and even in their 
separation it is co-extensive with them, yet not itself dissevered nor discounted(8) into sections to accord 
with the number of the atoms. Such a condition belongs to the material and spacial world, but that which is 
intelligent and undimensional is not liable to the circumstances of space. Therefore the soul exists in the 
actual atoms which she has once animated, and there is no force to tear her away from her cohesion with 
them. What cause for melancholy, then, is there herein, that the visible is exchanged for the invisible; and 

wherefore is it tiiat your mind lias conceived sucii a iiatred of deatii? 

Upon tiiis I recurred to tiie definition wiiicii siie iiad previously given of tiie soul, and I said that to my thinking 
her definition had not indicated(9) distinctly enough all the powers of the soul which are a matter of 
observation. It declares the soul to be an intellectual essence which imparts to the organic body a force of 
life by which the senses operate. Now the soul is not thus operative only in our scientific and speculative 
intellect; it does not produce results in that world only, or employ the organs of sense only for this their 
natural work. On the contrary, we observe in our nature many emotions of desire and many of anger; and 
both these exist in us as qualities of our kind, and we see both of them in their manifestations displaying 
further many most subtle differences. There are many states, for instance, which are occasioned by desire; 
many others which on the other hand proceed from anger; and none of them are of the body; but that which 
is not of the body is plainly intellectual. Now(1) our definition exhibits the soul as something intellectual; so 
that one of two alternatives, both absurd, must emerge when we follow out this view to this end; either anger 
and desire are both second souls in us, and a plurality of souls must take the place of the single soul, or the 
thinking faculty in us cannot be regarded as a soul either (if they are not), the intellectual element adhering 
equally to all of them and stamping them all as souls, or else excluding every one of them equally from the 
specific qualities of soul. 

You are quite justified, she replied, in raising this question, and it has ere this been discussed by many 
elsewhere; namely, what we are to think of the principle of desire and the principle of anger within us. Are 
they consubstantial with the soul, inherent in the soul's very self from her first organization(2), or are they 
something different, accruing to us afterwards? In fact, while all equally allow that these principles are to be 
detected in the soul, investigation has not yet discovered exactly what we are to think of them so as to gain 
some fixed belief with regard to them. The generality of men still fluctuate in their opinions about this, which 
are as erroneous as they are numerous. As for ourselves, if the Gentile philosophy, which deals 
methodically with all these points, were really adequate for a demonstration, it would certainly be 
superfluous to add(3) a discussion on the soul to those speculations. But while the latter proceeded, on the 
subject of the soul, as far in the direction of supposed consequences as the thinker pleased, we are not 
entitled to such licence, I mean that of affirming what we please; we make the Holy Scriptures the rule and 
the measure of every tenet; we necessarily fix our eyes upon that, and approve that alone which may be 
made to harmonize with the intention of those writings. We must therefore neglect the Platonic chariot and 
the pair of horses of dissimilar forces yoked to it, and their driver, whereby the philosopher allegorizes these 
facts about the soul; we must neglect also all that is said by the philosopher who succeeded him and who 
followed out probabilities by rules of art(4), and diligently investigated the very question now before us, 
declaring that the soul was mortal s by reason of these two principles; we must neglect all before and since 
their time, whether they philosophized in prose or in verse, and we will adopt, as the guide of our reasoning, 
the Scripture, which lays it down as an axiom that there is no excellence in the soul which is not a property as 
well of the Divine nature. For he who declares the soul to be God's likeness asserts that anything foreign to 
Him is outside the limits of the soul; similarity cannot be retained in those qualities which are diverse from 
the original. Since, then, nothing of the kind we are considering is included in the conception of the Divine 
nature, one would be reasonable in surmising that such things are not consubstantial with the soul either. 
Now to seek to build up our doctrine by rule of dialectic and the science which draws and destroys 
conclusions, involves a species of discussion which we shall ask to be excused from, as being a weak and 
questionable way of demonstrating truth. Indeed, it is clear to every one that that subtle dialectic possesses 
a force that may be turned both ways, as well for the overthrow of truth(6) as for the detection of falsehood; 
and so we begin to suspect even truth itself when it is advanced in company with such a kind of artifice, and 
to think that the very ingenuity of it is trying to bias our judgment and to upset the truth. If on the other hand any 
one will accept a discussion which is in a naked unsyllogistic form, we will speak upon these points by 
making our study of them so far as we can follow the chain(7) of Scriptural tradition. What is it, then, that we 
assert? We say that the fact of the reasoning animal man being capable of understanding and knowing is 
most surely(8) attested by those outside our faith; and that this definition would never have sketched our 
nature so, if it had viewed anger and desire and all such-like emotions as consubstantial with that nature. In 
any other case, one would not give a definition of the subject in hand by putting a generic instead of a 
specific quality; and so, as the principle of desire and the principle of anger are observed equally in rational 
and irrational natures, one could not rightly mark the specific quality by means of this generic one. But how 
can that which, in defining a nature, is superfluous and worthy of exclusion be treated as a part of that nature, 
and, so, available for falsifying the definition? Every definition of an essence looks to the specific quality of 
the subject in hand; and whatever is outside that speciality is set aside as having nothing to do with the 
required definition. Yet, beyond question, these faculties of anger and desire are allowed to be common to 
all reasoning and brute natures anything common is not identical with that which is peculiar; it is imperative 
therefore that we should not range these faculties amongst those whereby humanity is exclusively meant: 
but just as one may perceive the principle(9) of sensation, and that of nutrition and growth in man, and yet not 

shake thereby the given definition of his soul (for the quality A being in the soul does not prevent the quality 
B being in it too), so, when one detects in humanity these emotions of anger and desire, one cannot on that 
account fairly quarrel with this definition, as if it fell short of a full indication of man's nature. 
What then, I asked the Teacher, are we to think about this? For I cannot yet see how we can fitly repudiate 
faculties which are actually within us. 

You see, she replied, there is a battle of the reason with them and a struggle to rid the soul of them; and 
there are men in whom this struggle has ended in success; it was so with Moses, as we know; he was 
superior both to anger and to desire; the history testifying of him in both respects, that he was meek beyond 
all men (and by meekness it indicates the absence of all anger and a mind quite devoid of resentment), and 
that he desired none of those things about which we see the desiring faculty in the generality so active. This 
could not have been so, if these faculties were nature, and were referable to the contents of man's 
essence(1). For it is impossible for one who has come quite outside of his nature to be in Existence at all. 
But if Moses was at one and the same time in Existence and not in these conditions, then(2) it follows that 
these conditions are something other than nature and not nature itself. For if, on the one hand, that is truly 
nature in which the essence of the being is found, and, on the other, the removal of these conditions is in our 
power, so that their removal not only does no harm, but is even beneficial to the nature, it is clear that these 
conditions are to be numbered amongst externals, and are affections, rather than the essence, of the nature; 
for the essence is that thing only which it is. As for anger, most think it a fermenting of the blood round the 
heart; others an eagerness to inflict pain in return for a previous pain; we would take it to be the impulse to 
hurt one who has provoked us. But none of these accounts of it tally with the definition of the soul. Again, if we 
were to define what desire is in itself, we should call it a seeking for that which is wanting, or a longing for 
pleasurable enjoyment, or a pain at not possessing that upon which the heart is set, or a state with regard to 
some pleasure which there is no opportunity of enjoying. These and such-like descriptions all indicate 
desire, but they have no connection with the definition of the soul. But it is so with regard to all those other 
conditions also which we see to have some relation to the soul, those, I mean, which are mutually opposed 
to each other, such as cowardice and courage, pleasure and pain, fear and contempt, and so on; each of 
them seems akin to the principle of desire or to that of anger, while they have a separate definition to mark 
their own peculiar nature. Courage and contempt, for instance, exhibit a certain phase of the irascible 
impulse; the dispositions arising from cowardice and fear exhibit on the other hand a diminution and 
weakening of that same impulse. Pain, again, draws its material both from anger and desire. For the 
impotence of anger, which consists in not being able to punish one who has first given pain, becomes itself 
pain; and the despair of getting objects of desire and the absence of things upon which the heart is set 
create in the mind this same sullen state. Moreover, the opposite to pain, I mean the sensation of 
pleasure(3), like pain, divides itself between anger and desire; for pleasure is the leading motive of them 
both. All these conditions, I say, have some relation to the soul, and yet they are not the soul(4), but only like 
warts growing out of the soul's thinking part, which are reckoned as parts of it because they adhere to it, and 
yet are not that actual thing which the soul is in its essence. 

And yet, I rejoined to the virgin, we see no slight help afforded for improvement to the virtuous from all these 
conditions. Daniel's desire was his glory; and Phineas' anger pleased the Deity. We have been told, too, 
that fear is the beginning of wisdom, and learnt from Paul that salvation is the goal of the "sorrow after a 
godly sort." The Gospel bids us have a contempt for danger; and the "not being afraid with any amazement" 
is nothing else but a describing of courage, and this last is numbered by Wisdom amongst the things that 
are good. In all this Scripture shows that such conditions are not to be considered weaknesses; 
weaknesses would not have been so employed for putting virtue into practice. 

I think, replied the Teacher, that I am myself responsible for this confusion arising from different accounts of 
the matter; for I did not state it as distinctly as I might have, by introducing a certain order of consequences 
for our consideration. Now, however, some such order shall, as far as it is possible, be devised, so that our 
essay may advance in the way of logical sequence and so give no room for such contradictions. We 
declare, then, that the speculative, critical, and world-surveying faculty of the soul is its peculiar property by 
virtue of its very nature(5), and that thereby the soul preserves within itself the image of the divine grace; 
since our reason surmises that divinity itself, whatever it may be in its inmost nature, is manifested in these 
very things,-universal supervision and the critical discernment between good and evil. But all those 
elements of the soul which lie on the border-land(6) and are capable from their peculiar nature of inclining to 
either of two opposites (whose eventual determination to the good or to the bad depends on the kind of use 
they are put to), anger, for instance, and fear, and any other such-like emotion of the soul divested of which 
human nature(7) cannot be studied-all these we reckon as accretions from without, because in the Beauty 
which is man's prototype no such characteristics are to be found. Now let the following statement s be 
offered as a mere exercise (in interpretation). I pray that it may escape the sneers of cavilling hearers. 
Scripture informs us that the Deity proceeded by a sort of graduated and ordered advance to the creation of 
man. After the foundations of the universe were laid, as the history records, man did not appear on the earth 

at once; but the creation of the brutes preceded his, and the plants preceded them. Thereby Scripture 
shows that the vital forces blended with the world of matter according to a gradation; first, it infused itself into 
insensate nature; and in continuation of this advanced into the sentient world; and then ascended to 
intelligent and rational beings. Accordingly, while all existing things must be either corporeal or spiritual, the 
former are divided into the animate and inanimate. By animate, I mean possessed of life: and of the things 
possessed of life, some have it with sensation, the rest have no sensation. Again, of these sentient things, 
some have reason, the rest have not. Seeing, then, that this life of sensation could not possibly exist apart 
from the matter which is the subject of it, and the intellectual life could not be embodied, either, without 
growing in the sentient, on this account the creation of man is related as coming last, as of one who took up 
into himself every single form of life, both that of plants and that which is seen in brutes. His nourishment and 
growth he derives from vegetable life; for even in vegetables such processes are to be seen when aliment 
is being drawn in by their roots and given off in fruit and leaves. His sentient organization he derives from the 
brute creation. But his faculty of thought and reason is incommunicable(9), and is a peculiar gift in our nature, 
to be considered by itself. However, just as this nature has the instinct acquisitive of the necessaries to 
material existence-an instinct which, when manifested in us men, we call Appetite-and as we admit this 
appertains to the vegetable form of life, since we can notice it there too like so many impulses working 
naturally to satisfy themselves with their kindred aliment and to issue in germination, so all the peculiar 
conditions of the brute creation are blended with the intellectual part of the soul. To them, she continued, 
belongs anger; to them belongs fear; to them all those other opposing activities within us; everything except 
the faculty of reason and thought. That alone, the choice product, as has been said, of all our life, bears the 
stamp of the Divine character. But since, according to the view which we have just enunciated, it is not 
possible for this reasoning faculty to exist in the life of the body without existing by means of sensations, and 
since sensation is already found subsisting in the brute creation, necessarily as it were, by reason of this 
one condition, our soul has touch with the other things which are knit up with it(1); and these are all those 
phaenomena within us that we call "passions"; which have not been allotted to human nature for any bad 
purpose at all (for the Creator would most certainly be the author of evil, if in them, so deeply rooted as they 
are in our nature, any necessities of wrong-doing were found), but according to the use which our free will 
puts them to, these emotions of the soul become the instruments of virtue or of vice. They are like the iron 
which is being fashioned according to the volition of the artificer, and receives whatever shape the idea 
which is in his mind prescribes, and becomes a sword or some agricultural implement. Supposing, then, that 
our reason, which is our nature's choicest part, holds the dominion over these imported emotions (as 
Scripture allegorically declares in the command to men to rule over the brutes), none of them will be active 
in the ministry of evil; fear will only generate within us obedience(2), and anger fortitude, and cowardice 
caution; and the instinct of desire will procure for us the delight that is Divine and perfect. But if reason drops 
the reins and is dragged behind like a charioteer who has got entangled in his car, then these instincts are 
changed into fierceness, just as we see happens amongst the brutes. For since reason does not preside 
over the natural impulses that are implanted(3) in them, the more irascible animals, under the generalship of 
their anger, mutually destroy each other; while the bulky and powerful animals get no good themselves from 
their strength, but become by their want of reason slaves of that which has reason. Neither are the activities 
of their desire for pleasure employed on any of the higher objects; nor does any other instinct to be 
observed in them result in any profit to themselves. Thus too, with ourselves, if these instincts are not turned 
by reasoning into the fight direction, and if our feelings get the mastery of our mind, the man is changed from 
a reasoning into an unreasoning being, and from godlike intelligence sinks by the force of these passions 
to the level of the brute. 

Much moved by these words, I said: To any one who reflects indeed, your exposition, advancing as it does 
in this consecutive manner, though plain and unvarnished, bears sufficiently upon it the stamp of correctness 
and hits the truth. And to those who are expert only in the technical methods of proof a mere demonstration 
suffices to convince; but as for ourselves, we were agreed(4) that there is something more trustworthy than 
any of these artificial conclusions, namely, that which the teachings of Holy Scripture point to: and so I deem 
that it is necessary to inquire, in addition to what has been said, whether this inspired teaching harmonizes 
with it all. 

And who, she replied, could deny that truth is to be found only in that upon which the seal of Scriptural 
testimony is set? So, if it is necessary that something from the Gospels should be adduced in support of our 
view, a study of the Parable of the Wheat and Tares will not be here out of place. The Householder there 
sowed good seed; (and we are plainly the "house"). But the "enemy," having watched for the time when men 
slept, sowed that which was useless in that which was good for food, setting the tares in the very middle of 
the wheat. The two kinds of seed grew up together; for it was not possible that seed put into the very middle 
of the wheat should fail to grow up with it. But the Superintendent of the field forbids the servants to gather up 
the useless crop, on account of their growing at the very root of the contrary sort; so as not to root up s the 
nutritious along with that foreign growth. Now we think that Scripture means by the good seed the 

corresponding impulses of tiie soul, each one of which, if only they are cultured for good, necessarily puts 
forth the fruit of virtue within us. But since there has been scattered(6) amongst these the bad seed of the 
error of judgment as to the true Beauty which is alone in its intrinsic nature such, and since this last has been 
thrown into the shade by the growth of delusion which springs up along with it (for the active principle of 
desire does not germinate and increase in the direction of that natural Beauty which was the object of its 
being sown in us, but it has changed its growth so as to move towards a bestial and unthinking states this 
very error as to Beauty carrying its impulse towards this result; and in the same way the seed of anger does 
not steel us to be brave, but only arms us to fight with our own people; and the power of loving deserts its 
intellectual objects and becomes completely mad for the immoderate enjoyment of pleasures of sense; 
and so in like manner our other affections put forth the worse instead of the better growths),-on account of 
this the wise Husbandman leaves this growth that has been introduced amongst his seed to remain there, 
so as to secure our not being altogether stripped of better hopes by desire having been rooted out along 
with that good-for-nothing growth. If our nature suffered such a mutilation, what will there be to lift us up to 
grasp the heavenly delights? If love is taken from us, how shall we be united to God? If anger is to be 
extinguished, what arms shall we possess against the adversary? Therefore the Husbandman leaves 
those bastard seeds within us, not for them always to overwhelm the more precious crop, but in order that 
the land itself (for so, in his allegory, he calls the heart) by its native inherent power, which is that of 
reasoning, may wither up the one growth and may render the other fruitful and abundant: but if that is not 
done, then he commissions the fire to mark the distinction in the crops. If, then, a man indulges these 
affections in a due proportion and holds them in his own power instead of being held in theirs, employing 
them for an instrument as a king does his subjects' many hands, then efforts towards excellence more 
easily succeed for him. But should he become theirs, and, as when any slaves mutiny against their master, 
get enslaved (7) by those slavish thoughts and ignominiously bow before them; a prey to his natural 
inferiors, he will be forced to turn to those employments which his imperious masters command. This being 
so, we shall not pronounce these emotions of the soul, which lie in the power of their possessors for good or 
ill, to be either virtue or vice. But, whenever their impulse is towards what is noble, then they become matter 
for praise, as his desire did to Daniel, and his anger to Phineas, and their grief to those who nobly mourn. 
But if they incline to baseness, then these are, and they are called, bad passions. 

She ceased after this statement and allowed the discussion a short interval, in which I reviewed mentally all 
that had been said; and reverting to that former course of proof in her discourse, that it was not impossible 
that the soul after the body's dissolution should reside in its atoms, I again addressed her. Where is that 
much-talked-of and renowned Hades(8), then? The word is in frequent circulation both in the intercourse of 
daily life, and in the writings of the heathens and in our own; and all think that into it, as into a place of 
safe-keeping, souls migrate from here. Surely you would not call your atoms that Hades. 
Clearly, replied the Teacher, you have not quite attended to the argument. In speaking of the soul's 
migration from the seen to the unseen, I thought I had omitted nothing as regards the question about Hades. 
It seems to me that, whether in the heathen or in the Divine writings, this word for a place in which souls are 
said to be means nothing else but a transition to that Unseen world of which we have no glimpse. 
And how, then, I asked, is it that some think that by the underworld(9) is meant an actual place, and that it 
harbours within itself(1) the souls that have at last flitted away from human life, drawing them towards itself as 
the right receptacle for such natures? 

Well, replied the Teacher, our doctrine will be in no ways injured by such a supposition. For if it is true, what 
you say(2), and also that the vault of heaven prolongs itself so uninterruptedly that it encircles all things with 
itself, and that the earth and its surroundings are poised in the middle, and that the motion of all the revolving 
bodies(3) is round this fixed and solid centre, then, I say, there is an absolute necessity that, whatever may 
happen to each one of the atoms on the upper side of the earth, the same will happen on the opposite side, 
seeing that one single substance encompasses its entire bulk. As, when the sun shines above the earth, the 
shadow is spread over its lower part, because its spherical shape makes it impossible for it to be clasped 
all round at one and the same time by the rays, and necessarily, on whatever side the sun's rays may fall on 
some particular point of the globe, if we follow a straight diameter, we shall find shadow upon the opposite 
point, and so, continuously, at the opposite end of the direct line of the rays shadow moves round that globe, 
keeping pace with the sun, so that equally in their turn both the upper half and the under half of the earth are 
in light and darkness; so, by this analogy, we have reason to be certain that, whatever in our hemisphere is 
observed to befall the atoms, the same will befall them in that other. The environment of the atoms being 
one and the same on every side of the earth, I deem it right neither to contradict nor yet to favour those who 
raise the objection that we must regard either this or the lower region as assigned to the souls released. As 
long as this objection does not shake our central doctrine of the existence of those souls after the life in the 
flesh, there need be no controversy about the whereabouts to our mind, holding as we do that place is a 
property of body only, and that soul, being immaterial, is by no necessity of its nature detained in any place. 
But what, I asked, if your opponent should shield himself(4) behind the Apostle, where he says that every 

reasoning creature, in tiie restitution of all things, is to look towards Him Who presides over the whole? In 
that passage in the Epistle to the Philippians(5) he makes mention of certain things that are "under the earth" 
"every knee shall bow" to Him "of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth." 
We shall stand by our doctrine, answered the Teacher, even if we should hear them adducing these words. 
For the existence of the soul (after death) we have the assent of our opponent, and so we do not make an 
objection as to the place, as we have just said. 

But if some were to ask the meaning of the Apostle in this utterance, what is one to say? Would you remove 
all signification of place from the passage? 

I do not think, she replied, that the divine Apostle divided the intellectual world into localities, when he 
named part as in heaven, part as on earth, and part as under the earth. There are three states in which 
reasoning creatures can be: one from the very first received an immaterial life, and we call it the angelic: 
another is in union with the flesh, and we call it the human: a third is released by death from fleshly 
entanglements, and is to be found in souls pure and simple. Now I think that the divine Apostle in his deep 
wisdom looked to this, when he revealed the future concord of all these reasoning beings in the work of 
goodness; and that he puts the unembodied angel-world "in heaven," and that still involved with a body "on 
earth," and that released from a body "under the earth"; or, indeed, if there is any other world to be classed 
under that which is possessed of reason (it is not left out); and whether any one choose to call this last 
"demons" or "spirits," or anything else of the kind, we shall not care. We certainly believe, both because of 
the prevailing opinion, and still more of Scripture teaching, that there exists another world of beings besides, 
divested of such bodies as ours are, who are opposed to that which is good and are capable of hurting the 
lives of men, having by an act of will lapsed from the nobler view(6), and by this revolt from goodness 
personified in themselves the contrary principle; and this world is what, some say, the Apostle adds to the 
number of the "things under the earth," signifying in that passage that when evil shall have been some day 
annihilated in the long revolutions of the ages, nothing shall be left outside the world of goodness, but that 
even from those evil spirits(7) shall rise in harmony the confession of Christ's Lordship. If this is so, then no 
one can compel us to see any spot of the underworld in the expression, "things under the earth"; the 
atmosphere spreads equally over every part of the earth, and there is not a single corner of it left unrobed 
by this circumambient air. 

When she had finished, I hesitated a moment, and then said: I am not yet satisfied about the thing which we 
have been inquiring into; after all that has been said my mind is still in doubt; and I beg that our discussion 
may be allowed to revert to the same line of reasoning as before(8), omitting only that upon which we are 
thoroughly agreed. I say this, for I think that all but the most stubborn controversialists will have been 
sufficiently convinced by our debate not to consign the soul after the body's dissolution to annihilation and 
nonentity, nor to argue that because it differs substantially from the atoms it is impossible for it to exist 
anywhere in the universe; for, however much a being that is intellectual and immaterial may fail to coincide 
with these atoms, it is in no ways hindered (so far) from existing in them; and this belief of ours rests on two 
facts: firstly, on the soul's existing in our bodies in this present life, though fundamentally different from them: 
and secondly, on the fact that the Divine being, as our argument has shown, though distinctly something 
other than visible and material substances, nevertheless pervades each one amongst all existences, and 
by this penetration of the whole keeps the world in a state of being; so that following these analogies we 
need not think that the soul, either, is out of existence, when she passes from the world of forms to the 
Unseen. But how, I insisted, after the united whole of the atoms has assumed(9), owing to their mixing 
together, a form quite different-the form in fact with which the soul has been actually domesticated-by what 
mark, when this form, as we should have expected, is effaced along with the resolution of the atoms, shall 
the soul follow along (them), now that that familiar form ceases to persist? 

She waited a moment and then said: Give me leave to invent a fanciful simile in order to illustrate the matter 
before us: even though that which I suppose may be outside the range of possibility. Grant it possible, then, 
in the art of painting not only to mix opposite colours, as painters are always doing, to represent a particular 
tint(1), but also to separate again this mixture and to restore to each of the colours its natural dye. If then 
white, or black, or red, or golden colour, or any other colour that has been mixed to form the given tint, were 
to be again separated from that union with another and remain by itself, we suppose that our artist will none 
the less remember the actual nature of that colour, and that in no case will he show forgetfulness, either of 
the red, for instance, or the black, if after having become quite a different colour by composition with each 
other they each return to their natural dye. We suppose, I say, that our artist remembers the manner of the 
mutual blending of these colours, and so knows what sort of colour was mixed with a given colour and what 
sort of colour was the result, and how, the other colour being ejected from the composition, (the original 
colour) in consequence of such release resumed its own peculiar hue; and, supposing it were required to 
produce the same result again by composition, the process will be all the easier from having been already 
practised in his previous work. Now, if reason can see any analogy in this simile, we must search the matter 
in hand by its light. Let the soul stand for this Art of the painter(2); and let the natural atoms stand for the 

colours of his art; and let the mixture of that tint compounded of the various dyes, and the return of these to 
their native state (which we have been allowed to assume), represent respectively the concourse, and the 
separation of the atoms. Then, as we assume in the simile that the painter's Art tells him the actual dye of 
each colour, when it has returned after mixing to its proper hue, so that he has an exact knowledge of the 
red, and of the black, and of any other colour that went to form the required tint by a specific way of uniting 
with another kind-a knowledge which includes its appearance both in the mixture, and now when it is in its 
natural state, and in the future again, supposing all the colours were mixed over again in like fashion-so, we 
assert, does the soul know the natural peculiarities of those atoms whose concourse makes the frame of the 
body in which it has itself grown, even after the scattering of those atoms. However far from each other their 
natural propensity and their inherent forces of repulsion urge them, and debar each from mingling with its 
opposite, none the less will the soul be near each by its power of recognition, and will persistently cling to 
the familiar atoms, until their concourse after this division again takes place in the same way, for that fresh 
formation of the dissolved body which will properly be, and be called, resurrection. 
You seem, I interrupted, in this passing remark to have made an excellent defence of the faith in the 
Resurrection. By it, I think, the opponents of this doctrine might be gradually led to consider it not as a thing 
absolutely impossible that the atoms should again coalesce and form the same man as before. 
That is very true, the Teacher replied. For we may hear these opponents urging the following difficulty. "The 
atoms are resolved, like to like, into the universe; by what device, then, does the warmth, for instance, 
residing in such and such a man, after joining the universal warmth, again dissociate itself from this 
connection with its kindred(3), so as to form this man who is being 'remoulded'? For if the identical individual 
particle does not return and only something that is homogeneous but not identical is fetched, you will have 
something else in the place of that first thing, and such a process will cease to be a resurrection and will be 
merely the creation of a new man. But if the same man is to return into himself, he must be the same entirely, 
and regain his original formation in every single atom of his elements." 

Then to meet such an objection, I rejoined, the above opinion about the soul will, as I said, avail; namely, 
that she remains after dissolution in those very atoms in which she first grew up, and, like a guardian placed 
over private property, does not abandon them when they are mingled with their kindred atoms, and by the 
subtle ubiquity of her intelligence makes no mistake about them, with all their subtle minuteness, but diffuses 
herself along with those which belong to herself when they are being mingled with their kindred dust, and 
suffers no exhaustion in keeping up with the whole number of them when they stream back into the universe, 
but remains with them, no matter in what direction or in what fashion Nature may arrange them. But should the 
signal be given by the All-disposing Power for these scattered atoms to combine again, then, just as when 
every one of the various ropes that hang from one block answer at one and the same moment(4) to the pull 
from that centre, so, following this force of the soul which acts upon the various atoms, all these, once so 
familiar with each other, rush simultaneously together and form the cable of the body by means of the soul, 
each single one of them being wedded to its former neighbour and embracing an old acquaintance. 
The following illustration also, the Teacher went on, might be very properly added to those already brought 
forward, to show that the soul has not need of much teaching in order to distinguish its own from the alien 
amongst the atoms. Imagine a potter with a supply of clay; and let the supply be a large one; and let part of it 
have been already moulded to form finished vessels, while the rest is still waiting to be moulded; and 
suppose the vessels themselves not to be all of similar shape, but one to be a jug, for instance, and another 
a wine-jar, another a plate, another a cup or any other useful vessel; and further, let not one owner possess 
them all, but let us fancy for each a special owner. Now as long as these vessels are unbroken they are of 
course recognizable by their owners, and none the less so, even should they be broken in pieces; for from 
those pieces each will know, for instance, that this belongs to a jar(5), and, again, what sort of fragment 
belongs to a cup. And if they are plunged again into the unworked clay, the discernment between what has 
been already worked and that clay will be a more unerring one still. The individual man is as such a vessel; 
he has been moulded out of the universal matter, owing to the concourse of his atoms; and he exhibits in a 
form peculiarly his own a marked distinction from his kind; and when that form has gone to pieces the soul 
that has been mistress of this particular vessel will have an exact knowledge of it, derived even from its 
fragments; nor will she leave this property, either, in the common blending with all the other fragments, or if it 
be plunged into the still formless part of the matter from which the atoms have come(6); she always 
remembers her own as it was when compact in bodily form, and after dissolution she never makes any 
mistake about it, led by marks still clinging to the remains. 

I applauded this as well devised to bring out the natural features of the case before us; and I said: It is very 
well to speak like this and to believe that it is so; but suppose some one were to quote against it our Lord's 
narrative about those who are in hell, as not harmonizing with the results of our inquiry, how are we to be 
prepared with an answer? 

The Teacher answered: The expressions of that narrative of the Word are certainly material; but still many 
hints are interspersed in it to rouse the skilled inquirer to a more discriminating study of it. I mean that He 

Who parts the good from the bad by a great gulf, and makes the man in torment crave for a drop to be 
conveyed by a finger, and the man who has been ill-treated in this life rest on a patriarch's bosom, and Who 
relates their previous death and consignment to the tomb, takes an intelligent searcher of His meaning far 
beyond a superficial interpretation. For what sort of eyes has the Rich Man to lift up in hell, when he has left 
his bodily eyes in that tomb? And how can a disembodied spirit feel any flame? And what sort of tongue can 
he crave to be cooled with the drop of water, when he has lost his tongue of flesh? What is the finger that is to 
convey to him this drop? What sort of place is the "bosom" of repose? The bodies of both of them are in the 
tomb, and their souls are dis-embodied, and do not consist of parts either; and so it is impossible to make 
the framework of the narrative correspond with the truth, if we understand it literally; we can do that only by 
translaflng each detail into an equivalent in the world of ideas. Thus we must think of the gulf as that which 
parts ideas which may not be confounded from running together, not as a chasm of the earth. Such a chasm, 
however vast it were, could be traversed with no difficulty by a disembodied intelligence; since intelligence 
can in no flme (7) be wherever it will. What then, I asked, are the fire and the gulf and the other features in the 
picture? Are they not that which they are said to be? I think, she replied, that the Gospel signifles by means 
of each of them certain doctrines with regard to our quesflon of the soul. For when the patriarch first says to 
the Rich Man, "Thou in thy lifeflme receivedst thy good things," and in the same way speaks of the Poor 
Man, that he, namely, has done his duty in bearing his share of life's evil things, and then, after that, adds with 
regard to the gulf that it is a barrier between them, he evidently by such expressions inflmates a very 
important truth; and, to my thinking, it is as follows. Once man's life had but one character; and by that I mean 
that it was to be found only in the category of the good and had no contact with evil. The flrst of God's 
commandments attests the truth of this; that, namely, which gave to man unsflnted enjoyment of all the 
blessings of Paradise, forbidding only that which was a mixture of good and evil and so composed of 
contraries, but making death the penalty for transgressing in that particular. But man, acflng freely by a 
voluntary impulse, deserted the lot that was unmixed with evil, and drew upon himself that which was a 
mixture of contraries. Yet Divine Providence did not leave that recklessness of ours without a corrective. 
Death indeed, as the flxed penalty for breaking the law, necessarily fell upon its transgressors; but God 
divided the life of man into two parts, namely, this present life, and that "out of the body" hereafter; and He 
placed on the first a limit of the briefest possible time, while He prolonged the other into eternity; and in His 
love for man He gave him his choice, to have the one or the other of those things, good or evil, I mean, in 
which of the two parts he liked: either in this short and transitory life, or in those endless ages, whose limit is 
infinity. Now these expressions "good" and "evil are equivocal; they are used in two senses, one relaflng to 
mind and the other to sense; some classify as good whatever is pleasant to feeling: others are confldent 
that only that which is perceptible by intelligence is good and deserves that name. Those, then, whose 
reasoning powers have never been exercised and who have never had a glimpse of the better way soon 
use up on gluttony in this fleshly life the dividend of good which their constitution can claim, and they reserve 
none of it for the after life; but those who by a discreet and sober-minded calculation economize the powers 
of living are afflicted by things painful to sense here, but they reserve their good for the succeeding life, and 
so their happier lot is lengthened out to last as long as that eternal life. This, in my opinion, is the "gulf; which 
is not made by the parting of the earth, but by those decisions in this life which result in a separaflon into 
opposite characters. The man who has once chosen pleasure in this life, and has not cured his 
inconsiderateness by repentance, places the land of the good beyond his own reach; for he has dug 
against himself the yawning impassable abyss of a necessity that nothing can break through. This is the 
reason, I think, that the name of Abraham's bosom is given to that good situaflon of the soul in which 
Scripture makes the athlete of endurance repose. For it is related of this patriarch flrst, of all up to that flme 
born, that he exchanged the enjoyment of the present for the hope of the future; he was stripped of all the 
surroundings in which his life at flrst was passed, and resided amongst foreigners, and thus purchased by 
present annoyance future blessedness. As then figuratively (8) we call a particular circuit of the ocean a 
"bosom," so does Scripture seem to me to express the idea of those measureless blessings above by the 
word "bosom," meaning a place into which all virtuous voyagers of this life are, when they have put in from 
hence, brought to anchor in the waveless harbour of that gulf of blessings (9). Meanwhile the denial of these 
blessings which they witness becomes in the others a flame, which burns the soul and causes the craving 
for the refreshment of one drop out of that ocean of blessings wherein the saints are affluent; which 
nevertheless they do not get. If, too, you consider the "tongue," and the "eye," and the "finger," and the other 
names of bodily organs, which occur in the conversation between those disembodied souls, you will be 
persuaded that this conjecture of ours about them chimes in with the opinion we have already stated about 
the soul. Look closely into the meaning of those words. For as the concourse of atoms forms the substance 
of the entire body, so it is reasonable to think that the same cause operates to complete the substance of 
each member of the body. If, then, the soul is present with the atoms of the body when they are again 
mingled with the universe, it will not only be cognizant of the enflre mass which once came together to form 
the whole body, and will be present with it, but, besides that, will not fail to know the particular materials of 

each one of the members, so as to remember by what divisions amongst the atoms our limbs were 
completely formed. There is, then, nothing improbable in supposing that what is present in the complete 
mass is present also in each division of the mass. If one, then, thinks of those atoms in which each detail of 
the body potentially inheres, and surmises that Scripture means a "finger" and a "tongue" and an "eye" and 
the rest as existing, after dissolution, only in the sphere of the soul, one will not miss the probable truth. 
Moreover, if each detail carries the mind away from a material acceptation of the story, surely the "hell" 
which we have just been speaking of cannot reasonably be thought a place so named; rather we are there 
told by Scripture about a certain unseen and immaterial situation in which the soul resides. In this story of the 
Rich and the Poor Man we are taught another doctrine also, which is intimately connected with our former 
discoveries. The story makes the sensual pleasure-loving man, when he sees that his own case is one that 
admits of no escape, evince forethought for his relations on earth; and when Abraham tells him that the life of 
those still in the flesh is not unprovided with a guidance, for they may find it at hand, if they will, in the Law and 
the Prophets, he sflll conflnues entreaflng that Just x Patriarch, and asks that a sudden and convincing 
message, brought by some one risen from the dead, may be sent to them. What then, I asked, is the 
doctrine here? Why, seeing that Lazarus' soul is occupied (2) with his present blessings and turns round to 
look at nothing that he has left, while the rich man is sflll attached, with a cement as it were, even after death, 
to the life of feeling, which he does not divest himself of even when he has ceased to live, sflll keeping as he 
does flesh and blood in his thoughts (for in his entreaty that his kindred may be exempted from his sufferings 
he plainly shows that he is not freed yet from fleshly feeling), - in such details of the story (she conflnued) I 
think our Lord teaches us this; that those sflll living in the flesh must as much as ever they can separate and 
free themselves in a way from its attachments by virtuous conduct, in order that after death they may not 
need a second death to cleanse them from the remnants that are owing to this cement (3) of the flesh, and, 
when once the bonds are loosed from around the soul, her soaring (4) up to the Good may be swift and 
unimpeded, with no anguish of the body to distract her. For if any one becomes wholly and thoroughly 
carnal in thought, such an one, with every moflon and energy of the soul absorbed in fleshly desires, is not 
parted from such attachments, even in the disembodied state; just as those who have lingered long in 
noisome places do not part with the unpleasantness contracted by that lengthened stay, even when they 
pass into a sweet atmosphere. So (5) it is that, when the change is made into the impalpable Unseen, not 
even then will it be possible for the lovers of the flesh to avoid dragging away with them under any 
circumstances some fleshly foulness; and thereby their torment will be intensifled, their soul having been 
materialized by such surroundings. I think too that this view of the matter harmonizes to a certain extent with 
the assertion made by some persons that around their graves shadowy phantoms of the departed are often 
seen 6. If this is really so, an inordinate attachment of that particular soul to the life in the flesh is proved to 
have existed, causing it to be unwilling, even when expelled from the flesh, to fly clean away and to admit the 
complete change of its form into the impalpable; it remains near the frame even after, the dissoluflon of the 
frame, and though now outside it, hovers regretfully over the place where its material is and conflnues to 
haunt it. 

Then, after a moment's reflecflon on the meaning of these latter words, I said: I think that a contradicflon now 
arises between what you have said and the result of our former examinaflon of the passions. For if, on the 
one hand, the activity of such movements within us is to be held as arising from our kinship with the brutes, 
such movements I mean as were enumerated in our previous discussion (7), anger, for instance, and fear, 
desire of pleasure, and so on, and, on the other hand, it was affirmed that virtue consists in the good 
employment of these movements, and vice in their bad employment, and in addiflon to this we discussed 
the actual contribuflon of each of the other passions to a virtuous life, and found that through desire above all 
we are brought nearer God, drawn up, by its chain as it were, from earth towards Him, - I think (I said) that 
that part of the discussion is in a way opposed to that which we are now aiming at. 
How so? she asked. 

Why, when every unreasoning instinct is quenched within us after our purgaflon, this principle of desire will 
not exist any more than the other principles; and this being removed, it looks as if the striving after the better 
way would also cease, no other emotion remaining in the soul that can stir us up to the appetence of Good. 
To that objecflon, she replied, we answer this. The speculative and critical faculty is the property of the 
soul's godlike part; for it is by these that we grasp the Deity also. If, then whether by forethought here, or by 
purgaflon hereafter, our soul becomes free from any emotional connecflon with the brute creation, there will 
be nothing to impede its contemplation of the Beautiful; for this last is essenflally capable of attracting in a 
certain way every being that looks towards it. If, then, the soul is purified of every vice, it will most certainly be 
in the sphere of Beauty. The Deity is in very substance Beauflful; and to the Deity the soul will in its state of 
purity have afflnity, and will embrace It as like itself. Whenever this happens, then, there will be no longer 
need of the impulse of Desire to lead the way to the Beauflful. Whoever passes his flme in darkness, he it is 
who will be under the influence of a desire for the light; but whenever he comes into the light, then enjoyment 
takes the place of desire, and the power to enjoy renders desire useless and out of date. It will therefore be 

no detriment to our participation in tiie Good, tiiat tiie soul siiould be free from sucii emotions, and turning 
bacl< upon iierself siiould know herself accurately what her actual nature is, and should behold the Original 
Beauty reflected in the mirror and in the figure of her own beauty. For truly herein consists the real 
assimilation to the Divine; viz. in making our own life in some degree a copy of the Supreme Being. For a 
Nature like that, which transcends all thought and is far removed from all that we observe within ourselves, 
proceeds in its existence in a very different manner to what we do in this present life. Man, possessing a 
constitution whose law it is to be moving, is carried in that particular direction whither the impulse of his will 
directs: and so his soul is not affected in the same way towards what lies before it (8), as one may say, as to 
what it has left behind; for hope leads the forward movement, but it is memory that succeeds that movement 
when it has advanced to the attainment of the hope; and if it is to something intrinsically good that hope thus 
leads on the soul, the print that this exercise of the will leaves upon the memory is a bright one; but if hope 
has seduced the soul with some phantom only of the Good, and the excellent Way has been missed, then 
the memory that succeeds what has happened becomes shame, and an intestine war is thus waged in the 
soul between memory and hope, because the last has been such a bad leader of the will. Such in fact is the 
state of mind that shame gives expression to; the soul is stung as it were at the result; its remorse for its 
ll-considered attempt is a whip that makes it feel to the quick, and it would bring in oblivion to its aid against 
ts tormentor. Now in our case nature, owing to its being indigent of the Good, is aiming always at this which 
s still wanting to it, and this aiming at a still missing thing is this very habit of Desire, which our constitution 
displays equally, whether it is baulked of the real Good, orwins that which it is good to win. But a nature that 
surpasses every idea that we can form of the Good and transcends all other power, being in no want of 
anything that can be regarded as good, is itself the plenitude of every good; it does not move in the sphere 
of the good by way of participation in it only , but if is itself the substance of the Good (whatever we imagine 
the Good to be); it neither gives scope for any rising hope (for hope manifests activity in the direction of 
something absent; but "what a man has, why doth he yet hope for?" as the Apostle asks), nor is it in want of 
the activity of the memory for the knowledge of things; that which is actually seen has no need of being 
remembered. Since, then, this Divine nature is beyond any particular good (9), and to the good the good is 
an object of love, it follows that when It looks within Itself (1), It wishes for what It contains and contains that 
which It wishes, and admits nothing external. Indeed there is nothing external to It, with the sole exception of 
evil, which, strange as it may seem to say, possesses an existence in not existing at all. For there is no other 
origin of evil except the negation of the existent, and the truly-existent forms the substance of the Good. That 
therefore which is not to be found in the existent must be in the non-existent. Whenever the soul, then, having 
divested itself of the multifarious emotions incident to its nature, gets its Divine form and, mounting above 
Desire, enters within that towards which it was once incited by that Desire, it offers no harbour within itself 
either for hope or for memory. It holds the object of the one; the other is extruded from the consciousness by 
the occupation in enjoying all that is good: and thus the soul copies the life that is above, and is conformed 
to the peculiar features of the Divine nature; none of its habits are left to it except that of love, which clings by 
natural affinity to the Beautiful. For this is what love is; the inherent affection towards a chosen object. When, 
then, the soul, having become simple and single in form and so perfectly godlike, finds that perfectly simple 
and immaterial good which is really worth enthusiasm and love (2), it attaches itself to it and blends with it by 
means of the movement and activity of love, fashioning itself according to that which it is continually finding 
and grasping. Becoming by this assimilation to the Good all that the nature of that which it participates is, the 
soul will consequently, owing to there being no lack of any good in that thing itself which it participates, be 
itself also in no lack of anything, and so will expel from within the activity and the habit of Desire; for this 
arises only when the thing missed is not found. For this teaching we have the authority of God's own Apostle, 
who announces a subduing (3) and a ceasing of all other activities, even for the good, which are within us, 
and finds no limit for love alone. Prophecies, he says, shall fail; forms of knowledge shall cease; but "charity 
never faileth;" which is equivalent to its being always as it is: and though (4) he says that faith and hope have 
endured so far by the side of love, yet again he prolongs its date beyond theirs, and with good reason too; 
for hope is in operation only so long as the enjoyment of the things hoped for is not to be had; and faith in the 
same way is a support (5) in the uncertainty about the things hoped for; for so he defines it - " the substance 
(6) of things hoped for"; but when the thing hoped for actually comes, then all other faculties are reduced to 
quiescence (7), and love alone remains active, finding nothing to succeed itself. Love, therefore, is the 
foremost of all excellent achievements and the first of the commandments of the law. If ever, then, the soul 
reach this goal, it will be in i no need of anything else; it will embrace that plenitude of things which are, 
whereby alone (8) it seems in any way to preserve within itself the stamp of God's actual blessedness. For 
the life of the Supreme Being is love, seeing that the Beautiful is necessarily lovable to those who recognize 
it, and the Deity does recognize it, and so this recognition becomes love, that which He recognizes being 
essentially beautiful. This True Beauty the insolence of satiety cannot touch (9); and no satiety interrupting 
this continuous capacity to love the Beautiful, God's life will have its activity in love; which life is thus in itself 
beautiful, and is essentially of a loving disposition towards the Beautiful, and receives no check to this 

activity of love. In fact, in the Beautiful no limit is to be found so that love should have to cease with any limit 
of 'the Beautiful. This last can be ended only by its opposite; but when you have a good, as here, which is in 
its essence incapable of a change for the worse, then that good will go on unchecked into infinity. Moreover, 
as every being is capable of attracting its like, and humanity is, in a way, like God, as bearing within itself 
some resemblances to its Prototype, the soul is by a strict necessity attracted to the kindred Deity. In fact 
what belongs to God must by all means and at any cost be preserved for Him. If, then, on the one hand, the 
soul is unencumbered with superfluities and no trouble connected with the body presses it down, its 
advance towards Him Who draws it to Himself is sweet and congenial. But suppose (1), on the other hand, 
that it has been transfixed with the nails of propension (2) so as to be held down to a habit connected with 
material things, - a case like that of those in the ruins caused by earthquakes, whose bodies are crushed 
by the mounds of rubbish; and let us imagine by way of illustration that these are not only pressed down by 
the weight of the ruins, but have been pierced as well with some spikes and splinters discovered with them 
in the rubbish. What then, would naturally be the plight of those bodies, when they were being dragged by 
relatives from the ruins to receive the holy rites of burial, mangled and torn entirely, disfigured in the most 
direful manner conceivable, with the nails beneath the heap harrowing them by the very violence necessary 
to pull them out? Such I think is the plight of the soul as well when the Divine force, for God's very love of 
man, drags that which belongs to Him from the ruins of the irrational and material. Not in hatred or revenge 
for a wicked life, to my thinking, does God bring upon sinners those painful dispensations; He is only 
claiming and drawing to Himself whatever, to please Him, came into existence. But while He for a noble end 
is attracting the soul to Himself, the Fountain of all Blessedness, it is the occasion necessarily to the being 
so attracted of a state of torture. Just as those who refine gold from the dross which it contains not only get 
this base alloy to melt in the fire, but are obliged to melt the pure gold along with the alloy, and then while this 
last is being consumed the gold remains, so, while evil is being consumed in the purgatorial (3) fire, the soul 
that is welded to this evil must inevitably be in the fire too, until the spurious material alloy is consumed and 
annihilated by this fire. If a clay of the more tenacious kind is deeply plastered round a rope, and then the 
end of the rope is put through a narrow hole, and then some one on the further side violently pulls it by that 
end, the result must be that, while the rope itself obeys the force exerted, the clay that has been plastered 
upon it is scraped off it with this violent pulling and is left outside the hole, and, moreover, is the cause why 
the rope does not run easily through the passage, but has to undergo a violent tension at the hands of the 
puller. In such a manner, I think, we may figure to ourselves the agonized struggle of that soul which has 
wrapped itself up in earthy material passions, when God is drawing it. His own one, to Himself, and the 
foreign matter, which has somehow grown into its substance, has to be scraped from it by main force, and 
so occasions it that keen intolerable anguish. 

Then it seems, I said, that it is not punishment chiefly and principally that the Deity, as Judge, afflicts sinners 
with; but He operates, as your argument has shown, only to get the good separated from the evil and to 
attract it into the communion of blessedness. 

That, said the Teacher, is my meaning; and also that the agony will be measured by the amount of evil there 
is in each individual. For it would not be reasonable to think that the man who has remained so long as we 
have supposed in evil known to be forbidden, and the man who has fallen only into moderate sins, should 
be tortured to the same amount in the judgment upon their vicious habit; but according to the quantity of 
material will be the longer or shorter time that that agonizing flame will be burning; that is, as long as there is 
fuel to feed it. In the case of the man who has acquired a heavy weight of material, the consuming fire must 
necessarily be very searching; but where that which the fire has to feed upon (4) has spread less far, there 
the penetrating fierceness of the punishment is mitigated, so far as the subject itself, in the amount of its evil, 
is diminished. In any and every case evil must be removed out of existence, so that, as we said above, the 
absolutely non-existent should cease to be at all. Since it is not in its nature that evil should exist outside the 
will, does it not follow that when it shall be that every will rests in God, evil will be reduced to complete 
annihilation, owing to no receptacle being left for it? 

But, said I, what help can one find in this devout hope, when one considers the greatness of the evil in 
undergoing torture even for a single year; and if that intolerable anguish be prolonged for the interval of an 
age, what grain of comfort is left from any subsequent expectation to him whose purgation is thus 
commensurate with an entire age? (5) 

Why (6), either we must plan to keep the soul absolutely untouched and free from any stain of evil; or, if our 
passionate nature makes that quite impossible, then we must plan that our failures in excellence consist 
only in mild and easily-curable derelictions. For the Gospel in its teaching distinguishes between (7) a 
debtor of ten thousand talents and a debtor of five hundred pence, and of fifty pence and of a farthing (8), 
which is "the uttermost" of coins; it proclaims that God's just judgment reaches to all, and enhances the 
payment necessary as the weight of the debt increases, and on the other hand does not overlook the very 
smallest debts. But the Gospel tells us that this payment of debts was not effected by the refunding of 
money, but that the indebted man was delivered to the tormentors until he should pay the whole debt; and 

that means nothing else than paying in the coin of torment (9) the inevitable recompense, the recompense, I 
mean, that consists in taking the share of pain incurred during his lifetime, when he inconsiderately chose 
mere pleasure, undiluted with its opposite; so that having put off from him all that foreign growth which sin is, 
and discarded the shame of any debts, he might stand in liberty and fearlessness. Now liberty is the coming 
up to a state which owns no master and is self-regulating (1); it is that with which we were gifted by God at the 
beginning, but which has been obscured by the feeling of shame arising from indebtedness. Liberty too is in 
all cases one and the same essentially; it has a natural attraction to itself. It follows, then, that as everything 
that is free will be united with its like, and as virtue is a thing that has no master, that is, is free, everything that 
is free will be united with virtue. But, further, the Divine Being is the fountain of all virtue. Therefore, those who 
have parted with evil will be united with Him; and so, as the Apostle says, God will be "all in all (2)"; for this 
utterance seems to me plainly to confirm the opinion we have already arrived at, for it means that God will 
be instead of all other things, and in all. For while our present life is active amongst a variety of multiform 
conditions, and the things we have relations with are numerous, for instance, time, air, locality, food and 
drink, clothing, sunlight, lamplight, and other necessities of life, none of which, many though they be, are 
God, - that blessed state which we hope for is in need of none of these things, but the Divine Being will 
become all, and instead of all, to us, distributing Himself proportionately to every need of that existence. It is 
plain, too, from the Holy Scripture that God becomes, to those who deserve it, locality, and home, and 
clothing, and food, and drink, and light, and riches, and dominion, and everything thinkable and nameable 
that goes to make our life happy. But He that becomes "all" things will be "in all" things too; and herein it 
appears to me that Scripture teaches the complete annihilation of evil (3). If, that is, God will be "in all" 
existing things, evil; plainly, will not then be amongst them; for if any one was to assume that it did exist then, 
how will the belief that God will be "in all" be kept intact? The excepting of that one thing, evil, mars the 
comprehensiveness of the term "all." But He that will be "in all" will never be in that which does not exist. 
What then, I asked, are we to say to those whose hearts fail at these calamities (4)? 
We will say to them, replied the Teacher, this. "It is foolish, good people, for you to fret and complain of the 
chain of this fixed sequence of life's realities; you do not know the goal towards which each single 
dispensation of the universe is moving. You do not know that all things have to be assimilated to the Divine 
Nature in accordance with the artistic plan of their author, in a certain regularity and order. Indeed, it was for 
this that intelligent beings came into existence; namely, that the riches of the Divine blessings should not lie 
idle. The All-creating Wisdom fashioned these souls, these receptacles with free wills, as vessels as it 
were, for this very purpose, that there should be some capacities able to receive His blessings and 
become continually larger with the inpouring of the stream. Such are the wonders (5) that the participation in 
the Divine blessings works: it makes him into whom they come, larger and more capacious ; from his 
capacity to receive it gets for the receiver an actual increase in bulk as well, and he never stops enlarging. 
The fountain of blessings wells up unceasingly, and the partaker's nature, finding nothing superfluous and 
without a use in that which it receives, makes the whole influx an enlargement of its own proportions, and 
becomes at once more wishful to imbibe the nobler nourishment and more capable of containing it; each 
grows along with each, both the capacity which is nursed in such abundance of blessings and so grows 
greater, and the nurturing supply which comes on in a flood answering to the growth of those increasing 
powers. It is likely, therefore, that this bulk will mount to such a magnitude as (6) there is no limit to check, so 
that we should not grow into it. With such a prospect before us, are you angry that our nature is advancing to 
its goal along the path appointed for us? Why, our career cannot be run thither-ward, except that which 
weighs us down, I mean this encumbering load of earthiness, be shaken off the soul; nor can we be 
domiciled in Purity with the corresponding part of our nature, unless we have cleansed ourselves by a better 
training from the habit of affection which we have contracted in life towards this earthiness. But if there be in 
you any clinging to this body (7), and the being unlocked from this darling thing give you pain, let not this, 
either, make you despair. You will behold this bodily envelopment, which is now dissolved in death, woven 
again out of the same atoms, not indeed into this organization with its gross and heavy texture, but with its 
threads worked up into something more subtle and ethereal, so that you will not only h.ave near you that 
which you love, but it will be restored to you with a brighter and more entrancing beauty (8)." 
But it somehow seems to me now, I said, that the doctrine of the Resurrection necessarily comes on for our 
discussion; a doctrine which I think is even at first sight true as well as credible (9), as it is told us in Scripture; 
so that that will not come in question between us: but since the weakness of the human understanding is 
strengthened still farther by any arguments that are intelligible to us, it would be well not to leave this part of 
the subject, either, without philosophical examination. Let us consider, then, what ought to be said about it. 
As for the thinkers, the Teacher went on, outside our own system of thought, they have, with all their diverse 
ways of looking at things, one in one point, another in another, approached and touched the doctrine of the 
Resurrection: while they none of them exactly coincide with us, they have in no case wholly abandoned 
such an expectation. Some indeed make human nature vile in their comprehensiveness, maintaining that a 
soul becomes alternately that of a man and of something irrational; that it trans-migrates into various bodies. 

changing at pleasure from the man into fowl, fish, or beast, and then returning to human kind. While some 
extend this absurdity even to trees (1) and shrubs, so that they consider their wooden life as corresponding 
and akin to humanity, others of them hold only thus much-thatthe soul exchanges one man for another man, 
so that the life of humanity is continued always by means of the same souls, which, being exactly the same 
in number, are being born perpetually first in one generation, then in another. As for ourselves, we take our 
stand upon the tenets of the Church, and assert that it will be well to accept only so much of these 
speculations as is sufficient to show that those who indulge in them are to a certain extent in accord with the 
doctrine of the Resurrection. Their statement, for instance, that the soul after its release from this body 
insinuates itself into certain other bodies is not absolutely out of harmony with the revival which we hope for. 
For our view, which maintains that the body, both now, and again in the future, is composed of the atoms of 
the universe, is held equally by these heathens. In fact, you cannot imagine any constitution of the body 
independent of a concourse (2) of these atoms. But the divergence lies in this: we assert that the same 
bodyagainas before, composed of the same atoms, is compacted around the soul;, they suppose that the 
soul alights on other bodies, not only rational, but irrational and even insensate; and while all are agreed 
that these bodies which the soul resumes derive their substance from the atoms of the universe, they part 
company from us in thinking that they are not made out of identically the same atoms as those which in this 
mortal life grew around the soul. Let then, this external testimony stand for the fact that it is not contrary to 
probability that the soul should again inhabit a body; after that however, it is incumbent upon us to make a 
survey of the inconsistencies of their position, and it will be easy thus, by means of the consequences that 
arise as we follow out the consistent view, to bring the truth to light. What, then, is to be said about these 
theories? This that those who would have it that the soul migrates into natures divergent from each other 
seem to me to obliterate all natural distinctions; to blend and confuse together, in every possible respect, 
the rational, the irrational, the sentient, and the insensate; if, that is, all these are to pass into each other, with 
no distinct natural order (3) secluding them from mutual transition. To say that one and the same soul, on 
account of a particular environment of body, is at one time a rational and intellectual soul, and that then it is 
caverned along with the reptiles, or herds with the birds, or is a beast of burden, or a carnivorous one, or 
swims in the deep; or even drops down to an insensate thing, so as to strike out roots or become a 
complete tree, producing buds on branches, and from those buds a flower, or a thorn, or a fruit edible or 
noxious-to say this, is nothing short of making all things the same and believing that one single nature runs 
through all beings; that there is a connexion between them which blends and confuses hopelessly all the 
marks by which one could be distinguished from another. The philosopher who asserts that the same thing 
may be born in anything intends no less than that all things are to be one; when the observed differences in 
things are for him no obstacle to mixing together things which are utterly incongruous. He makes it 
necessary that, even when one sees one of the creatures that are venom-darting or carnivorous, one 
should regard it, in spite of appearances, as of the same tribe, nay even of the same family, as oneself. With 
such beliefs a man will look even upon hemlock as not alien to his own nature, detecflng, as he does, 
humanity in the plant. The grape-bunch itself (4), produced though it be by cultivation for the purpose of 
sustaining life, he will not regard without suspicion; for it too comes from a plant (5): and we find even the fruit 
of the ears of corn upon which we live are plants; how, then, can one put in the sickle to cut them down; and 
how can one squeeze the bunch, or pull up the thistle from the fleld, or gather flowers, or hunt birds, or set fire 
to the logs of the funeral pyre: it being all the while uncertain whether we are not laying violent hands on 
kinsmen, or ancestors, or fellow-country-men, and whether it is not through the medium of some body of 
theirs that the fire is being kindled, and the cup mixed, and the food prepared? To think that in the case of 
any single one of these things a soul of a man has become a plant or animal (6), while no marks are 
stamped upon them to indicate what sort of plant or animal it is that has been a man, and what sort has 
sprung from other beginnings,-such a conception as this will dispose him who has entertained it to feel an 
equal amount of interest in everything: he must perforce either harden himself against actual human beings 
who are in the land of the living, or, if his nature inclines him to love his kindred, he will feel alike towards 
every kind of life, whether he meet it in repflles or in wild beasts. Why, if the holder of such an opinion go into 
a thicket of trees, even then he will regard the trees as a crowd of men. What sort of life will his be, when he 
has to be tender towards everything on the ground of kinship, or else hardened towards mankind on 
account of his seeing no difference between them and the other creatures? From what has been already 
said, then, we must reject this theory: and there are many other consideraflons as well which on the grounds 
of mere consistency lead us away from it. For I have heard persons who hold these opinions (7) saying that 
whole nations of souls are hidden away somewhere in a realm of their own, living a life analogous to that of 
the embodied soul; but such is the fineness and buoyancy of their substance that they themselves' roll 
round along with the revoluflon of the universe; and that these souls, having individually lost their wings 
through some gravitation towards evil, become embodied; first this takes place in men; and after that, 
passing from a human life, owing to bruflsh affinities of their passions, they are reduced (8) to the level of 
brutes; and, leaving that, drop down to this insensate life of pure nature (9) which you have been hearing so 

much of; so that that inherently fine and buoyant thing that the soul is first becomes weighted and downward 
tending in consequence of some vice, and so migrates to a human body; then its reasoning powers are 
extinguished, and it goes on living in some brute; and then even this gift of sensation is withdrawn, and it 
changes into the insensate plant life; but after that mounts up again by the same gradations until it is 
restored to its place in heaven. Now this doctrine will at once be found, even after a very cursory survey, to 
have no coherency with itself. For, first, seeing that the soul is to be dragged down from its life in heaven, on 
account of evil there, to the condition of a tree, and is then from this point, on account of virtue exhibited there, 
to return to heaven, their theory will be unable to decide which is to have the preference, the life in heaven, or 
the life in the tree. A circle, in fact, of the same sequences will be perpetually traversed, where the soul, at 
whatever point it may be, has no resting-place. If it thus lapses from the disembodied state to the embodied, 
and thence to the insensate, and then springs back to the disembodied, an inextricable confusion of good 
and evil must result in the minds of those who thus teach. For the life in heaven will no more preserve its 
blessedness (since evil can touch heaven's denizens), than the life in trees will be devoid of virtue (since it 
is from this, they say, that the rebound of the soul towards the good begins, while from there it begins the evil 
life again). Secondly (1), seeing that the soul as it moves round in heaven is there entangled with evil and is 
in consequencedragged down to live in mere matter, from whence, however, it is lifted again into its 
residence on high, it follows that those philosophers establish the very contrary (2) of their own views; they 
establish, namely, that the life in matter is the purgation of evil, while that undeviating revolution along with 
the stars (3) is the foundation and cause of evil in every soul: if it is here that the soul by means of virtue 
grows its wing and then soars upwards, and there that those wings by reason of evil fall off, so that it 
descends and clings to this lower world and is commingled with the grossness of material nature. But the 
untenableness of this view does not stop even in this, namely, that it contains assertions diametrically 
opposed to each other. Beyond this, their fundamental conception (4) itself cannot stand secure on every 
side. They say, for instance, that a heavenly nature is unchangeable. How then, can there be room for any 
weakness in the unchangeable? If, again, a lower nature is subject to infirmity, how in the midst of this 
infirmity can freedom from it be achieved? They attempt to amalgamate two things that can never be joined 
together: they descry strength in weakness, passionlessness in passion. But even to this last view they are 
not faithful throughout; for they bring home the soul from its material life to that very place whence they had 
exiled it because of evil there, as though the life in that place was quite safe and uncontaminated; 
apparently quite forgetting the fact that the soul was weighted with evil there, before it plunged down into this 
lower world. The blame thrown on the life here below, and the praise of the things in heaven, are thus 
interchanged and reversed; for that which was once blamed conducts in their opinion to the brighter life, 
while that which was taken for the better state gives an impulse to the soul's propensity to evil. Expel, 
therefore, from amongst the doctrines of the Faith all erroneous and shifting suppositions about such 
matters! We must not follow, either, as though they had bit the truth those who suppose that souls pass from 
women's bodies to live in men (5), or, reversely (6), that souls that have parted with men's bodies exist in 
women: or even if they only say that they pass from men into men, or from women into women. As for the 
former theory (7), not only has it been rejected for being shifting and illusory, and for landing us in opinions 
diametrically opposed to each other; but it must be rejected also because it is a godless theory, 
maintaining as it does that nothing amongst the things in nature is brought into existence without deriving its 
peculiar constitution from evil as its source. If, that is, neither men nor plants nor cattle can be born unless 
some soul from above has fallen into them, and if this fall is owing to some tendency to evil, then they 
evidently think that evil controls the creation of all beings. In some mysterious way, too, both events are to 
occur at once; the birth of the man in consequence of a marriage, and the fall of the soul (synchronizing as it 
must with the proceedings at that marriage). A greater absurdity even than this is involved: if, as is the fact, 
the large majority of the brute creation copulate in the spring, are we, then, to say that the spring brings it 
about that evil is engendered in the revolving world above, so that, at one and the same moment, there 
certain souls are impregnated with evil and so fall, and here certain brutes conceive? And what are we to 
say about the husbandman who sets the vine-shoots in the soil? How does his hand manage to have 
covered in a human soul along with the plant, and how does the moulting of wings last simultaneously with 
his employment in planting? The same absurdity, it is to be observed, exists in the other of the two theories 
as well; in the direction, I mean, of thinking that the soul must be anxious about the intercourses of those 
living in wedlock, and must be on the look-out for the times of bringing forth, in order that it may insinuate 
itself into the bodies then produced. Supposing the man refuses the union, or the woman keeps herself 
clear of the necessity of becoming a mother, will evil then fail to weigh down that particular soul? Will it be 
marriage, in consequence, that sounds up above the first note of evil in the soul, or will this reversed state 
invade the soul quite independently of any marriage? But then, in this last case, the soul will have to wander 
about in the interval like a houseless vagabond, lapsed as it has from its heavenly surroundings, and yet, 
as it may happen in some cases, still without a body to receive it. But how, after that, can they imagine that 
the Deity exercises any superintendence over the world, referring as they do the beginnings of human lives 

to this casual and meaningless descent of a soul. For all that follows must necessarily accord with the 
beginning; and so, if a life begins in consequence of a chance accident, the whole course of it (8) becomes 
at once a chapter of accidents, and the attempt to make the whole world depend on a Divine power is 
absurd, when it is made by these men, who deny to the individualities in it a birth from the fiat of the Divine 
Will and refer the several origins of beings to encounters that come of evil, as though there could never 
have existed such a thing as a human life, unless a vice had struck, as it were, its leading note. If the 
beginning is like that, a sequel will most certainly be set in motion in accordance with that beginning. None 
would dare to maintain that what is fair can come out of what is foul, any more than from good can come its 
opposite. We expect fruit in accordance with the nature of the seed. Therefore this blind movement of 
chance is to rule the whole of life, and no Providence is any more to pervade the world. 
Nay, even the forecasting by our calculations will be quite useless; virtue will lose its value; and to turn from 
evil will not be worth the while. Everything will be entirely under the control of the driver. Chance; and our 
lives will differ not at all from vessels devoid of ballast, and will drift on waves of unaccountable 
circumstances, now to this, now to that incident of good or of evil. The treasures of virtue will never be found 
in those who owe their constitution to causes quite contrary to virtue. If God really superintends our life, then, 
confessedly, evil cannot begin it. But if we do owe our birth to evil, then we must go on living in complete 
uniformity with it. Thereby it will be shOWn that it is folly to talk about the "houses of correction" which await 
us after this life is ended, and the "just recompenses," and all the other things there asserted, and believed 
in too, that tend to the suppression of vice: for how can a man, owing, as he does, his birth to evil, be outside 
its pale? How can he, whose very nature has its rise in a vice, as they assert, possess any deliberate 
impulse towards a life of virtue? Take any single one of the brute creation; it does not attempt to speak like 
a human being, but in using the natural I kind of utterance sucked in, as it were, with its mother's milk (9), it 
deems it no loss to be deprived of articulate speech. Just in the same way those who believe that a vice 
was the origin and the cause of their being alive will never bring themselves to have a longing after virtue, 
because it will be a thing quite foreign to their nature. But, as a fact (1), they who by reflecting have cleansed 
the vision of their soul do all of them desire and strive after a life of virtue. Therefore it is by that fact clearly 
proved that vice is not prior in time to the act of beginning to live, and that our nature did not thence derive its 
source, but that the all-disposing wisdom of God was the Cause of it: in short, that the soul issues on the 
stage of life in the manner which is pleasing to its Creator, and then (but not before), by virtue of its power of 
willing, is free to choose that which is to its mind, and so, whatever it may wish to be, becomes that very 
thing. We may understand this truth by the example of the eyes. To see is their natural state; but to fail to see 
results to them either from choice or from disease. This unnatural state may supervene instead of the 
natural, either by wilful shutting of the eyes or by deprivation of their sight through disease. With the like truth 
we may assert that the soul derives its constitution from God, and that, as we cannot conceive of any vice in 
Him, it is removed from arty necessity of being vicious; that nevertheless, though this is the condition in 
which it came into being, it can be attracted of its own free will in a chosen direction, either wilfully shutting its 
eyes to the Good, or letting them he damaged (2) by that insidious foe whom we have taken home to live 
with us, and so passing through life in the darkness of error; or, reversely, preserving un-dimmed its sight of 
the Truth and keeping far away from all weaknesses that could darken it. -But then some one will ask, 
"When and how did it come into being?"' Now as for the question, how any single thing came into existence, 
we must banish it altogether from our discussion. Even in the case of things which are quite within the grasp 
of our understanding and of which we have sensible perception, it would be impossible for the speculative 
reason (3) to grasp the "how" of the production of the phenomenon; so much so, that even inspired and 
saintly men have deemed such questions insoluble. For instance, the Apostle says, "Through faith we 
understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things which are seen are not made of 
things which do appear (4)." He would not, I take it, have spoken like that, if he had thought that the question 
could be settled by any efforts of the reasoning powers. While the Apostle affirms that it is an object of his 
faith s that it was by the will of God that the world itself and all which is therein was framed (whatever this 
"world" be that involves the idea of the whole visible and invisible creation), he has on the other hand left out 
of the investigation the "how" of this framing. Nor do I think that this point can ever be reached by any 
inquirers. The question presents, on the face of it, many insuperable difficulties. How, for instance, can a 
world of movement come from one that is at rest? how from the simple and undimensional that which shows 
dimension and compositeness? Did it come actually out of the Supreme Being? But the fact that this world 
presents a difference in kind to that Being militates against (6) such a supposition. Did it then come from 
some other quarter? Yet Faith (7) can contemplate nothing as quite outside the Divine Nature; for we should 
have to believe in two distinct and separate Principles, if outside the Creative Cause we are to suppose 
something else, which the Artificer, with all His skill, has to put under contribution for the formative processes 
of the Universe. Since, then, the Cause of all things is one, and one only, and yet the existences produced 
by that Cause are not of the same nature as its transcendent quality, an inconceivability of equal magnitude 
(5) arises in both our suppositions, i.e. both that the creation comes straight out of the Divine Being, and that 

the universe owes its existence to some cause otiier tiian Him; for if created tilings are to be of tlie same 
nature as God, we must consider Him to be invested witli tlie properties belonging to His creation; or else a 
world of matter, outside the circle of God's substance, and equal, on the score of the absence in it of all 
beginning, to the eternity of the Self-existent One, will have to be ranged against Him: and this is in fact what 
the followers of Manes, and some of the Greek philosophers who held opinions of equal boldness with his, 
did imagine; and they raised this imagination into a system. In order, then, to avoid falling into either of these 
absurdities, which the inquiry into the origin of things involves, let us, following the example of the Apostle, 
leave the question of the "how" in each created thing, without meddling with it at all, but merely observing 
incidentally that the movement t of God's Will becomes at any moment that He pleases a fact, and the 
intention becomes at once realized in Nature (9); for Omnipotence does not leave the plans of its fa-seeing 
skill in the state of unsubstantial wishes: and the actualizing of a wish is Substance. In short, the whole world 
of existing things falls into two divisions: i.e. that of the intelligible, and that of the corporeal: and the 
intelligible creation does not, to begin with, seem to be in any way at variance with a spiritual Being, but on 
the contrary to verge closely upon Him, exhibiting as it does that absence of tangible form and of dimension 
which we rightly attribute to His transcendent nature. The corporeal creation (1), on the other hand, must 
certainly be classed amongst specialities that have nothing in common with the Deity; and it does offer this 
supreme difficulty to the Reason; namely, that the Reason cannot see how the visible comes out of the 
invisible, how the hard solid comes out of the intangible, how the finite comes out of the infinite, how that 
which is circumscribed by certain proportions, where the idea of quantity comes in, can come from that 
which has no size, no proportions, and so on through each single circumstance of body. But even about this 
we can say so much: i.e. that not one of those things which we attribute to body is itself body; neither figure, 
nor colour, nor weight, nor extension, nor quantity, nor any other qualifying notion whatever; but every one of 
them is a category; it is the combination of them all into a single whole that constitutes body. Seeing, then, 
that these several qualifications which complete the particular body are grasped by thought alone, and not 
by sense, and that the Deity is a thinking being, what trouble can it be to such a thinking agent to produce the 
thinkables whose mutual combination generates for us the substance of that body? All this discussion, 
however, lies outside our present business. The previous question was, -If some souls exist anterior to their 
bodies, when and how do they come into existence? and of this question (2), again, the part about the how, 
has been left out of our examination and has not been meddled with, as presenting impenetrable difficulties. 
There remains the question of the when of the soul's commencement of existence: it follows immediately on 
that which we have already discussed. For if we were to grant that the soul has lived previous to its body (3) 
in some place of resort peculiar to itself, then we cannot avoid seeing some force in all that fantastic 
teaching lately discussed, which would explain the soul's habitation of the body as a consequence of some 
vice. Again, on the other hand, no one who can reflect will imagine an after-birth of the soul, i.e. that it is 
younger than the moulding of the body; for every one can see for himself that not one amongst all the things 
that are inanimate or soulless possesses any power of motion or of growth; whereas there is no question 
about that which is bred in the uterus both growing and moving from place to place. It remains therefore that 
we must think that the point of commencement of existence is one and the same for body and soul. Also we 
affirm that, just as the earth receives the sapling from the hands of the husbandman and makes a tree of it, 
without itself imparting the power of growth to its nursling, but only lending it, when placed within itself, the 
impulse to grow, in this very same way that which is secreted from a man for the planting of a man is itself to 
a certain extent a living being as much gifted with a soul and as capable of nourishing itself as that from 
which it comes (4). If this offshoot, in its diminutiveness, cannot contain at first all the activities and the 
movements of the soul, we need not be surprised; for neither in the seed of corn is there visible all at once 
the ear. How indeed could anything so large be crowded into so small a space? But the earth keeps on 
feeding it with its congenial aliment, and so the grain becomes the ear, without changing its nature while in 
the clod, but only developing it and bringing it to perfection under the stimulus of that nourishment. As, then, 
in the case of those growing seeds the advance to perfection is a graduated one (5), so in man's formation 
the forces of his soul show themselves in proportion to the size to which his body has attained. They dawn 
first in the foetus, in the shape of the power of nutrition and of development: after that, they introduce into the 
organism that has come into the light the gift of perception: then, when this is reached, they manifest a certain 
measure of the reasoning faculty, like the fruit of some matured plant, not growing all of it at once, but in a 
continuous progress along with the shooting up of that plant. Seeing, then, that that which is secreted from 
one living being to lay the foundations of another living being cannot itself be dead (for a state of deadness 
arises from the privation of life, and it cannot be that privation should precede the having), we grasp from 
these considerations the fact that in the compound which results from the joining of both (soul and body) 
there is a simultaneous passage of both into existence; the one does not come first, any more than the other 
comes after. But as to the number of souls, our reason must necessarily contemplate a stopping some day 
of its increase; so that Nature's stream may not flow on for ever, pouring forward in her successive births and 
never staying that onward movement. The reason for our race having some day to come to a standstill is as 

follows, in our opinion: since every intellectual reality is fixed in a plenitude of its own, it is reasonable to 
expect that humanity (6) also will arrive at a goal (for in this respect also humanity is not to be parted from the 
intellectual world (7)); so that we are to believe that it will not be visible for ever only in defect, as it is now: for 
this continual addition of after generations indicates that there is something deficient in our race. 
Whenever, then, humanity shall have reached the plenitude that belongs to it, this on-streaming movement 
of production will altogether cease; it will have touched its destined bourn, and a new order of things quite 
distinct from the present precession of births and deaths will carry on the life of humanity. If there is no birth, it 
follows necessarily that there will be nothing to die. Composition must precede dissolution (and by 
composition I mean the coming I into this world by being born); necessarily, therefore, if this synthesis does 
not precede, no dissolution will follow. Therefore, if we are to go upon probabilities, the life after this is shown 
to us beforehand as something that is fixed and imperishable, with no birth and no decay to change it. 
The Teacher finished her exposition; and to the many persons sitting by her bedside the whole discussion 
seemed now to have arrived at a fitting conclusion. Nevertheless, fearing that if the Teacher's illness took a 
fatal turn (such as did actually happen), we should have no one amongst us to answer the objections of the 
unbelievers to the Resurrection (8), I still insisted. 

The argument has not yet touched the most vital of all the questions relating to our Faith. I mean, that the 
inspired Writings, both in the New and in the Old Testament, declare most emphatically not only that, when 
our race has completed the ordered chain of its existence as the ages lapse through their complete circle 
(9), this current streaming onward as generation succeeds generation will cease altogether, but also that 
then, when the completed Universe no longer admits of further increase, all the souls in their entire number 
will come back out of their invisible and scattered condition into tangibility and light, the identical atoms 
(belonging to each soul) reassembling together in the same order as before; and this reconstitution of 
human life is called, in these Writings which contain God's teaching, the Resurrection, the entire movement 
of the atoms receiving the same term as the raising up of that which is actually prostrate on the ground (1). 
But, said she, which of these points has been left unnoticed in what has been said? 
Why, the actual doctrine of the Resurrection, I replied. 

And yet, she answered, much in our long and detailed discussion pointed to that. 

Then are you not aware, I insisted, of all the objections, a very swarm of them, which our antagonists bring 
against us in connection with that hope of yours? 

And I at once tried to repeat all the devices hit upon by their captious champions to upset the doctrine of the 
Resurrection. 

She, however, replied. First, I think, we must briefly run over the scattered proclamations of this doctrine in 
Holy Scripture; they shall give the flnishing touch to our discourse. Observe, then, that I can hear David, in 
the midst of his praises in the Divine Songs, saying at the end of the hymnody of the hundred and third 
(104th) Psalm, where he has taken for his theme God's administration of the world, "Thou shalt take away 
their breath, and they shall die, and return to their dust: Thou shalt send forth Thy Spirit, and they shall be 
created: and Thou shalt renew the face of the earth." He says that a power of the Spirit which works in all 
vivifies the beings into whom it enters, and deprives those whom He abandons of their life. Seeing, then, that 
the dying is declared to occur at the Spirit's departure, and the renewal of these dead ones at His 
appearance, and seeing moreover that in the order of the statement the death ofthose who are to be thus 
renewed comes first, we hold that in these words that mystery of the Resurrection is proclaimed to the 
Church, and that David in the spirit of prophecy expressed this very gift which you are asking about. You will 
find this same prophet in another place (2) also saying that "the God of the world, the Lord of everything that 
is, hath showed Himself to us, that we may keep the Feast amongst the decorators;" by that mention of 
"decoration" with boughs, he means the Feast of Tabernacle-fixing, which, in accordance with Moses' 
injunction, has been observed from of old. That lawgiver, I take it, adopting a prophet's spirit, predicted 
therein things still to come; for though the decoration was always going on it was never finished. The truth 
indeed was foreshadowed under the type and riddle of those Feasts that were always occurring, but the true 
Tabernacle-fixing was not yet come; and on this account "the God and Lord of the whole world," according 
to the Prophet's declaration, "hath showed Himself to us, that the Tabernacle-fixing of this our tenement that 
has been dissolved may be kept for human kind"; a material decoration, that is, may be begun again by 
means of the concourse of our scattered atoms. For that word <greek>pukaomos</greek> in its peculiar 
meaning signifles the Temple-circuit and the decoration which completes it. Now this passage from the 
Psalms runs as follows: "God and Lord hath showed Himself to us; keep the Feast amongst the decorators 
even unto the horns of the altar;" and this seems to me to proclaim in metaphors the fact that one single feast 
is to be kept by the whole rational creation, and that in that assembly of the saints tire inferiors are to join the 
dance with their superiors. For in the case of the fabric of that Temple which was the Type it was not allowed 
to all who were on the outside of its circuit (3) to come within, but everything that was Gentile and alien was 
prohibited from entering; and ofthose, further, who had entered, all were not equally privileged to advance 
towards the centre; but only those who had consecrated themselves by a holier manner of life, and by 

certain sprinklings; and, again, not every one amongst tiiese last might set foot within the interior of the 
Temple; the priests alone had the right of entering within the Curtain, and that only for the service of the 
sanctuary; while even to the priests the darkened shrine of the Temple, where stood the beautiful Altar with 
its jutting horns, was forbidden, except to one of them, who held the highest office of the priesthood, and who 
once a year, on a stated day, and unattended, passed within it, carrying an offering more than usually 
sacred and mystical. Such being the differences in connection with this Temple which you know of, it was 
clearly (4) a representation and an imitation of the condition of the spirit-world, the lesson taught by these 
material observances being this, that it is not the whole of the rational creation that can approach the temple 
of God, or, in other words, the adoration of the Almighty; but that those who are led astray by false 
persuasions are outside the precinct of the Deity; and that from the number of those who by virtue of this 
adoration have been preferred to the rest and admitted within it, some by reason of sprinklings and 
purifications have still further privileges; and again amongst these last those who have been consecrated 
priests have privileges further still, even to being admitted to the mysteries of the interior. And, that one may 
bring into still clearer light the meaning of the allegory, we may understand the Word here as teaching this, 
that amongst all the Powers endued with reason some have been fixed like a Holy Altar in the inmost shrine 
of the Deity; and that again of these last some jut forward like horns, for their eminence, and that around them 
others are arranged first or second, according to a prescribed sequence of rank; that the race of man, on 
the contrary, on account of indwelling evil was excluded from the Divine precinct, but that purified with lustral 
water it re-enters it; and, since all the further barriers by which our sin has fenced us off from the things within 
the veil are in the end to be taken down, whenever the time comes that the tabernacle of our nature is as it 
were to be fixed up again in the Resurrection, and all the inveterate corruption of sin has vanished from the 
world, then a universal feast will be kept around the Deity by those who have decorated themselves in the 
Resurrection; and one and the same banquet will be spread for all, with no differences cutting off any 
rational creature from an equal participation in it; for those who are now excluded by reason of their sin will at 
last be admitted within the Holiest places of God's blessedness, and will bind themselves to the horns of the 
Altar there, that is, to the most excellent of the transcendental Powers. The Apostle says the same thing 
more plainly when he indicates the final accord of the whole Universe with the Good: "That" to Him "every 
knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth: And that every tongue 
should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father": instead of the "horns," speaking of 
that which is angelic and "in heaven," and by the other terms signifying ourselves, the creatures whom we 
think of next to that; one festival of united voices shall occupy us all; that festival shall be the confession and 
the recognition of the Being Who truly Is. One might (she proceeded) select many other passages of Holy 
Scripture to establish the doctrine of the Resurrection. For instance, Ezekiel leaps in the spirit of prophecy 
over all the intervening time, with its vast duration; he stands, by his powers of foresight, in the actual moment 
of the Resurrection, and, as if he had really gazed on what is still to come, brings it in his description before 
our eyes. He saw a mighty plain (5), unfolded to an endless distance before him, and vast heaps of bones 
upon it flung at random, some this way, some that; and then under an impulse from God these bones began 
to move and group themselves with their fellows that they once owned, and adhere to the familiar sockets, 
and then clothe themselves with muscle, flesh, and skin (which was the process called "decorating" in the 
poetry of the Psalms); a Spirit in fact was giving life and movement to everything that lay there. But as 
regards our Apostle's description of the wonders of the Resurrection, why should one repeat it, seeing that it 
can easily be found and read? how, for instance, "with a shout" and the "sound of trumpets" (in the language 
of the Word) all dead and prostrate things shall be "changed (6) in the twinkling of an eye" into immortal 
beings. The expressions in the Gospels also I will pass over; for their meaning is quite clear to every one; 
and our Lord does not declare in word alone that the bodies of the dead shall be raised up again; but He 
shows in action the Resurrection itself, making a beginning of this work of wonder from things more within our 
reach and less capable of being doubted. First, that is. He displays His life-giving power in the case of the 
deadly forms of disease, and chases those maladies by one word of command; then He raises a little girt 
just dead; then He makes a young man, who is already being carried out, sit up on his bier, and delivers him 
to his mother; after that He calls forth from his tomb the four-days-dead and already decomposed Lazarus, 
vivifying the prostrate body with His commanding voice; then after three days He raises from the dead His 
own human body, pierced though it was with the nails and spear, and brings the print of those nails and the 
spear-wound to witness to the Resurrection. But I think that a detailed mention of these things is not 
necessary; for no doubt about them lingers in the minds of those who have accepted the written accounts of 
them. 

But that, said I, was not the point in question. Most of your hearers will assent to the fact that there will some 
day be a Resurrection, and that man will be brought before the incorruptible tribunal (7); on account both of 
the Scripture proofs, and also of our previous examination of the question. But still the question remains (8): 
Is the state which we are to expect to be like the present state of the body? Because if so, then, as I was 
saying (9), men had better avoid hoping for any Resurrection at all. For if our bodies are to be restored to 

life again in tiie same sort of condition as tiiey are in wiien tiiey cease to breatiie, tiien all that man can look 
forward to in the Resurrection is an unending calamity. For what spectacle is more piteous than when in 
extreme old age our bodies shrivel up (1) and change into something repulsive and hideous, with the flesh 
all wasted in the length of years, the skin dried up about the bones till it is all in wrinkles, the muscles in a 
spasmodic state from being no longer enriched with their natural moisture, and the whole body 
consequently shrunk, the hands on either side powertess to perform their natural work, shaken with an 
involuntary trembling? What a sight again are the bodies of persons in a long consumption! They differ from 
bare bones only in giving the appearance of being covered with a worn-out veil of skin. What a sight too are 
those of persons swollen with the disease of dropsy! What words could describe the unsightly disfigurement 
of sufferers from leprosy (2)? Gradually over all their limbs and organs of sensation rottenness spreads and 
devours them. What words could describe that of persons who have been mutilated in earthquake, battle, or 
by any other visitation, and live on in such a plight for a long time before their natural deaths? Or of those 
who from an injury have grown up from infancy with their limbs awry! What can one say of them? What is one 
to think about the bodies of newborn infants who have been either exposed, or strangled, or died a natural 
death, if they are to be brought to life again just such as they were? Are they to continue in that infantine 
state? What condition could be more miserable than that? Or are they to come to the flower of their age? 
Well, but what sort of milk has Nature got to suckle them again with? It comes then to this: that, if our bodies 
are to live again in every respect the same as before, this thing that we are expecting is simply a calamity; 
whereas if they are not the same, the person raised up will be another than he who died. If, for instance, a 
little boy was buried, but a grown man rises again, or reversely, how can we say that the dead in his very 
self is raised up, when he has had some one substituted for him by virtue of this difference in age? Instead of 
the child, one sees a grown-up man. Instead of the old man, one sees a person in his prime. In fact, instead 
of the one person another entirely. The cripple is changed into the able-bodied man; the consumptive 
sufferer into a man whose flesh is firm; and so on of all possible cases, not to enumerate them for fear of 
being prolix. If, then, the body will not come to life again just such in its attributes as it was when it mingled 
with the earth, that dead body will not rise again; but on the contrary the earth will be formed into another 
man. How, then, will the Resurrection affect myself, when instead of me some one else will come to life? 
Some one else, I say; for how could I recognize myself when, instead of what was once myself, I see some 
one not myself? It cannot really be I, unless it is in every respect the same as myself. Suppose, for instance, 
in this life I had in my memory the traits of some one; say he was bald, had prominent lips, a somewhat flat 
nose, a fair complexion, grey eyes, white hair, wrinkled skin; and then went to look for such an one, and met 
a young man with a fine head of hair, an aquiline nose, a dark complexion, and in all other respects quite 
different in his type of countenance; am I likely in seeing the latter to think of the former? But why dwell longer 
on these the less forcible objections to the Resurrection, and neglect the strongest one of all? For who has 
not heard that human life is like a stream, moving from birth to death at a certain rate of progress, and then 
only ceasing from that progressive movement when it ceases also to exist? This movement indeed is not 
one of spacial change; our bulk never exceeds itself; but it makes this advance by means of internal 
alteration; and as long as this alteration is that which its name implies, it never remains at the same stage 
(from moment to moment); for how can that which is being altered be kept in any sameness? The fire on the 
wick, as far as appearance goes, certainly seems always the same, the continuity of its movement giving it 
the look of being an uninterrupted and self-centred whole; but in reality it is always passing itself along and 
never remains the same; the moisture which is extracted by the heat is burnt up and changed into smoke the 
moment it has burst into flame and this alterative force effects the movement of the flame, working by itself 
the change of the subject-matter into smoke; just, then, as it is impossible for one who has touched that 
flame twice on the same place, to touch twice the very same flame (3) (for the speed of the alteration is too 
quick; it does not wait for that second touch, however rapidly it may be effected; the flame is always fresh 
and new; it is always being produced, always transmitting itself, never remaining at one and the same 
place), a thing of the same kind is found to be the case with the constitution of our body. There is influx and 
afflux going on in it in an alterative progress until the moment that it ceases to live; as long as it is living it has 
no stay; for it is either being replenished, or it is discharging in vapour, or it is being kept in motion by both of 
these processes combined. If, then, a particular man is not the same even as he was yesterday (4), but is 
made different by this transmutation, when so be that the Resurrection shall restore our body to life again, 
that single man will become a crowd of human beings, so that with his rising again there will be found the 
babe, the child, the boy, the youth, the man, the father, the old man, and all the intermediate persons that he 
once was. But further (5); chastity and profligacy are both carried on in the flesh; those also who endure the 
most painful tortures for their religion, and those on the other hand who shrink from such, both one class and 
the other reveal their character in relation to fleshly sensations; how, then, can justice be done at the 
Judgment (6)? Or take the case of one and the same man first sinning and then cleansing himself by 
repentance, and then, it might so happen, relapsing into his sin; in such a case both the defiled and the 
undefiled body alike undergoes a change, as his nature changes, and neither of them continue to the end 

the same; which body, then, is the profligate to be tortured in? In that which is stiffened with old age and is 
near to death? But this is not the same as that which did the sin. In that, then, which defiled itself by giving way 
to passion? But where is the old man, in that case? This last, in fact, will not rise again, and the Resurrection 
will not do a complete work; or else he will rise, while the criminal will escape. Let me say something else 
also from amongst the objections made by unbelievers to this doctrine. No part, they urge, of the body is 
made by nature without a function. Some parts, for instance, are the efficient causes within us of our being 
alive; without them our life in the flesh could not possibly be carried on; such are the heart, liver, brain, lungs, 
stomach, and the other vitals; others are assigned to the activities of sensation; others to those of handing 
and walking (7); others are adapted for the transmission of a posterity. Now if the life to come is to be in 
exactly the same circumstances as this, the supposed change in us is reduced to nothing; but if the report is 
true, as indeed it is, which represents marriage as forming no part of the economy of that after-life, and 
eating and drinking as not then preserving its continuance, what use will there be for the members of our 
body, when we are no longer to expect in that existence any of the activities for which our members now 
exist? If, for the sake of marriage, there are now certain organs adapted for marriage, then, whenever the 
latter ceases to be, we shall not need those organs: the same may be said of the hands for working with, the 
feet for running with, the mouth for taking food with, the teeth for grinding it with, the organs of the stomach for 
digesting, the evacuating ducts forgetting rid of that which has become superfluous. When therefore, all 
those operations will be no more how or wherefore will their instruments exist? So that necessarily, if the 
things that are not going to contribute in any way to that other life are not to surround the body, none of the 
parts which at present constitute the body would (8) exist either. That life (9), then, will be carried on by other 
instruments; and no one could call such a state of things a Resurrection, where the particular members are 
no longer present in the body, owing to their being useless to that life. But if on the other hand our 
Resurrection will be represented in every one of these; then the Author of the Resurrection will fashion things 
in us of no use and advantage to that life. And yet we must believe, not only that there is a Resurrection, but 
also that it will not be an absurdity. We must, therefore, listen attentively to the explanation of this, so that, for 
every part of this truth we may have its probability saved to the last (10). 

When I had finished, the Teacher thus replied. You have attacked the doctrines connected with the 
Resurrection with some spirit, in the way of rhetoric as it is called; you have coursed round and round the 
truth with plausibly subversive arguments; so much so, that those who have not very carefully considered 
this mysterious truth might possibly be affected in their view of it by the likelihood of those arguments, and 
might think that the difficulty started against what has been advanced was not altogether beside the point. 
But, she proceeded, the truth does not lie in these arguments, even though we may find it impossible to give 
a rhetorical answer to them, couched in equally strong language. The true explanation of all these questions 
is still stored up in the hidden treasure-rooms of Wisdom, and will not come to the light until that moment 
when we shall be taught the mystery of the Resurrection by the reality of it; and then there will be no more 
need of phrases to explain the things which we now hope for. Just as many questions might be started for 
debate amongst people sitting up at night as to the kind of thing that sunshine is, and then the simple 
appearing of it in all its beauty would render any verbal description superfluous, so every calculation that 
tries to arrive conjecturally at the future state will be reduced to nothingness by the object of our hopes, when 
it comes upon us. But since it is our duty not to leave the arguments brought against us in any way 
unexamined, we will expound the truth as to these points as follows. First let us get a clear notion as to the 
scope of this doctrine; in other words, what is the end that Holy Scripture has in view in promulgating it and 
creating the belief in it. Well, to sketch the outline of so vast a truth and to embrace it in a definition, we will 
say that the Resurrection is "the reconstitution of our nature in its original form (1)." But in that form of life, of 
which God Himself was the Creator, it is reasonable to believe that there was neither age nor infancy nor 
any of the sufferings arising from our present various infirmities, nor any kind of bodily affliction whatever. It is 
reasonable, I say, to believe that God was the Creator of none of these things, but that man was a thing 
divine before his humanity got within reach of the assault of evil; that then, however, with the inroad of evil, all 
these afflictions also broke in upon him. Accordingly a life that is free from evil is under no necessity 
whatever of being passed amidst the things that result from evil. It follows that when a man travels through 
ice he must get his body chilled; or when he walks in a very hot sun that he must get his skin darkened; but if 
he has kept clear of the one or the other, he escapes these results entirely, both the darkening and the 
chilling; no one, in fact, when a particular cause was removed, would be justified in looking for the effect of 
that particular cause. Just so our nature, becoming passional, had to encounter all the necessary results of 
a life of passion: but when it shall have started back to that state of passionless blessedness, it will no 
longer encounter the inevitable results of evil tendencies. Seeing, then, that all the infusions of the life of the 
brute into our nature were not in us before our humanity descended through the touch of evil into passions, 
most certainly, when we abandon those passions, we shall abandon all their visible results. No one, 
therefore, will be justified in seeking in that other life for the consequences in us of any passion. Just as if a 
man, who, clad in a ragged tunic, has divested himself of the garb, feels no more its disgrace upon him, so 

we too, when we have cast off that dead unsightly tunic made from the sl<ins of brutes and put upon us (for I 
tal<e the "coats of sl<ins" to mean that conformation belonging to a brute nature with which we were clothed 
when we became familiar with passionate indulgence), shall, along with the casting off of that tunic, fling from 
us all the belongings that were round us of that skin of a brute; and such accretions are sexual intercourse, 
conception, parturition, impurities, suckling, feeding, evacuation, gradual growth to full size, prime of life, old 
age, disease, and death. If that skin is no longer round us, how can its resulting consequences be left 
behind within us? It is folly, then, when we are to expect a different state of things in the life to come, to object 
to the doctrine of the Resurrection on the ground of something that has nothing to do with it. I mean, what has 
thinness or corpulence, a state of consumption or of plethora, or any other condition supervening in a nature 
that is ever in a flux, to do with the other life, stranger as it is to any fleeting and transitory passing such as 
that? One thing, and one thing only, is required for the operation of the Resurrection; viz. that a man should 
have lived, by being born; or, to use rather the Gospel words, that "a man should be born (2) into the world"; 
the length or briefness of the life, the manner, this or that, of the death, is an irrelevantsubject of inquiry in 
connection with that operation. Whatever instance we take, howsoever we suppose this to have been, it is 
all the same; from these differences in life there arises no difficulty, any more than any facility, with regard to 
the Resurrection. He who has once begun to live must necessarily go on having once lived (3), after his 
intervening dissolution in death has been repaired in the Resurrection. As to the how and the when of his 
dissolution, what do they matter to the Resurrection? Consideration of such points belongs to another line of 
inquiry altogether. For instance, a man may have lived in bodily comfort, or in affliction, virtuously or 
viciously, renowned or disgraced; he may have passed his days miserably, or happily. These and 
such-like results must be obtained from the length of his life and the manner of his living; and to be able to 
pass a judgment on the things done in his life, it will be necessary for the judge to scrutinize his indulgences, 
as the case may be, or his losses, or his disease, or his old age, or his prime, or his youth, or his wealth, or 
his poverty: how well or ill a man, placed in either of these, concluded his destined career; whether he was 
the recipient of many blessings, or of many ills in a length of life; or tasted neither of them at all, but ceased 
to live before his mental powers were formed. But whenever the time come that God shall have brought our 
nature back to the primal state of man, it will be useless to talk of such things then, and to imagine that 
objections based upon such things can prove God's power to be impeded in arriving at His end. His end is 
one, and one only; it is this: when the complete whole of our race shall have been perfected from the first 
man to the last, - some having at once in this life been cleansed from evil, others having afterwards in the 
necessary periods been healed by the Fire, others having in their life here been unconscious equally of 
good and of evil, - to offer to every one of us participation in the blessings which are in Him, which, the 
Scripture tells us, "eye hath not seen, nor ear heard," nor thought ever reached. But this is nothing else, as I 
at least understand it, but to be in God Himself; for the Good which is above hearing and eye and heart must 
be that Good which transcends the universe. But the difference between the virtuous and the vicious life led 
at the present time (4) will be illustrated in this way; viz. in the quicker or more tardy participation of each in 
that promised blessedness. According to the amount of the ingrained wickedness of each will be computed 
the duration of his cure. This cure consists in the cleansing of his soul, and that cannot be achieved without 
an excruciating condition, as has been expounded in our previous discussion. But any one would more fully 
comprehend the futility and irrelevancy of all these objections by trying to fathom the depths of our Apostle's 
wisdom. When explaining this mystery to the Corinthians, who, perhaps, themselves were bringing forward 
the same objections to it as its impugners to-day bring forward to overthrow our faith, he proceeds on his 
own authority to chide the audacity of their ignorance, and speaks thus: "Thou wilt say, then, to me. How are 
the dead raised up, and with what body do they come? Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, 
except it die; And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bare grain, it may 
chance of wheat or of some other grain; But God giveth it a body as it hath pleased Him." In that passage, 
as it seems to me, he gags the mouths of men who display their ignorance of the fitting proportions in 
Nature, and who measure the Divine power by their own strength, and think that only so much is possible to 
God as the human understanding can take in, but that what is beyond it surpasses also the Divine ability. 
For the man who had asked the Apostle, "how are the dead raised up?" evidently implies that it is 
impossible when once the body's atoms have been scattered that they should again come in concourse 
together; and this being impossible, and no other possible form of body, besides that arising from such a 
concourse, being left, he, after the fashion of clever controversialists, concludes the truth of what he wants to 
prove, by a species of syllogism, thus: If a body is a concourse of atoms, and a second assemblage of 
these is impossible, what sort of body will those get who rise again? This conclusion, involved seemingly in 
this artful contrivance of premisses, the Apostle calls "folly," as coming from men who riled to perceive in 
other parts of the creation the masterliness of the Divine power. For, omitting the sublimer miracles of God's 
hand, by which it would have been easy to place his hearer in a dilemma (for instance he might have asked 
"how or whence comes a heavenly body, that of the sun for example, or that of the moon, or that which is 
seen in the constellations; whence the firmament, the air, water, the earth?"), he, on the contrary, convicts the 

objectors of inconsiderateness by means of objects which grow alongside of us and are very familiar to all. 
"Does not even husbandry teach thee," he asks, "that the man who in calculating the transcendent powers 
of the Deity limits them by his own is a fool?" Whence do seeds get the bodies that spring up from them? 
What precedes this springing up? Is it not a death that precedes (5)? At least, if the dissolution of a 
compacted whole is a death; for indeed it cannot be supposed that the seed would spring up into a shoot 
unless it had been dissolved in the soil, and so become spongy and porous to such an extent as to mingle 
its own qualities with the adjacent moisture of the soil, and thus become transformed into a root and shoot; 
not stopping even there, but changing again into the stalk with its intervening knee-joints that gird it up like so 
many clasps, to enable it to carry with figure erect the ear with its load of corn. Where, then, were all these 
things belonging to the grain before its dissolution in the soil? And yet this result sprang from that grain; if that 
grain had not existed first, the ear would not have arisen. Just, then, as the "body" of the ear comes to light 
out of the seed, God's artistic touch of power producing it all out ofthat single thing, and just as it is neither 
entirely the same thing as that seed nor something altogether different, so (she insisted) by these miracles 
performed on seeds you may now interpret the mystery of the Resurrection. The Divine power, in the 
superabundance of Omnipotence, does not only restore you that body once dissolved, but makes great 
and splendid additions to it, whereby the human being is furnished in a manner still more magnificent. "It is 
sown," he says, "in corruption; it is raised in incorruption: it is sown in weakness; it is raised in power: it is 
sown in dishonour; it is raised in glory: it is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body." The grain of 
wheat, after its dissolution in the soil, leaves behind the slightness of its bulk and the peculiar quality of its 
shape, and yet it has not left and lost itself, but, still self-centred, grows into the ear, though in many points it 
has made an advance upon itself, viz. in size, in splendour, in complexity, in form. In the same fashion the 
human being deposits in death all those peculiar surroundings which it has acquired from passionate 
propensities; dishonour, I mean, and corruption and weakness and characteristics of age; and yet the 
human being does not lose itself. It changes into an ear of corn as it were; into incorruption, that is, and glory 
and honour and power and absolute perfection; into a condition in which its life is no longer carried on in the 
ways peculiar to mere nature, but has passed into a spiritual and passionless existence. For it is the 
peculiarity of the natural body to be always moving on a stream, to be always altering from its state for the 
moment and changing into something else; but none of these processes, which we observe not in man only 
but also in plants and brutes will be found remaining in the life that shall be then. Further, it seems to me that 
the words of the Apostle in every respect harmonize with our own conception of what the Resurrection is. 
They indicate the very same thing that we have embodied in our own definition of it, wherein we said that the 
Resurrection is no other thing than "the re-constitution of our nature in its original form." For, whereas we 
learn from Scripture in the account of the first Creation (6), that first the earth brought forth "the green herb" (as 
the narrative says), and that then from this plant seed was yielded, from which, when it was shed on the 
ground, the same form of the original plant again sprang up, the Apostle, it is to be observed, declares that 
this very same thing happens in the Resurrection also; and so we learn from him the fact, not only (7) that our 
humanity will be then changed into something nobler, but also that what we have therein to expect is nothing 
else than that which was at the beginning. In the beginning, we see, it was not an ear rising from a grain, but a 
grain coming from an ear, and, after that, the ear grows round the grain: and so the order indicated in this 
similitude (8) clearly shows that all that blessed state, which arises for us by means of the Resurrection is 
only a return to our pristine state of grace. We too, in fact, were once in a fashion a full ear (9); but the burning 
heat of sin withered us up, and then on our dissolution by death the earth received us: but in the spring of the 
Resurrection she will reproduce this naked grain (1) of our body in the form of an ear, tall, well-proportioned, 
and erect, reaching to the heights of heaven, and, for blade and beard, resplendent in incorruption, and with 
all the other godlike marks. For "this corruptible must put on incorruption"; and this incorruption and glory 
and honour and power are those distinct and acknowledged marks of Deity which once belonged to him 
who was created in God's image, and which we hope for hereafter. The first man Adam, that is, was the first 
ear; but with the arrival of evil human nature was diminished into a mere multitude (2); and, as happens to the 
grain (3) on the ear, each individual man was denuded of the beauty ofthat primal ear, and mouldered in the 
soil: but in the Resurrection we are born again in our original splendour; only instead ofthat single primitive 
ear we become the countless myriads of ears in the cornfields. The virtuous life as contrasted with that of 
vice is distinguished thus: those who while living have by virtuous conduct exercised husbandry on 
themselves are at once revealed in all the qualities of a perfect ear, while those whose bare grain (that is 
the forces of their natural soul) has become through evil habits degenerate, as it were, and hardened by the 
weather (as the so-called "hornstruck" seeds (4), according to the experts in such things, grow up), will, 
though they live again in the Resurrection, experience very great severity from their Judge, because they 
do not possess the strength to shoot up into the full proportions of an ear, and thereby become that which we 
were before our earthly falls. The remedy offered by the Overseer of the produce is to collect together the 
tares and the thorns, which have grown up with the good seed, and into whose bastard life all the secret 
forces that once nourished its root have passed, so that it not only has had to remain without its nutriment, but 

has been choked and so rendered unproductive by this unnatural growth. When from the nutritive part within 
them everything that is the reverse or the counterfeit of it has been picl<ed out, and has been committed to 
the fire that consumes everything unnatural, and so has disappeared, then in this class also their humanity 
will thrive and will ripen into fruit-bearing, owing to such husbandry, and some day after long courses of ages 
will get back again that universal form which God stamped upon us at the beginning. Blessed are they, 
indeed, in whom the full beauty of those ears shall be developed directly they are born in the Resurrection. 
Yet we say this without implying that any merely bodily distinctions will be manifest between those who have 
lived virtuously and those who have lived viciously in this life, as if we ought to think that one will be imperfect 
as regards his material frame, while another will win perfection as regards it. The prisoner and the free, here 
in this present world, are just alike as regards the constitutions of their two bodies; though as regards 
enjoyment and suffering the gulf is wide between them. In this way, I take it, should we reckon the difference 
between the good and the bad in that intervening time (6). For the perfection of bodies that rise from that 
sowing of death is, as the Apostle tells us, to consist in incorruption and glory and honour and power; but 
any diminution in such excellences does not denote a corresponding bodily mutilation of him who has risen 
again, but a withdrawal and estrangement from each one of those things which are conceived of as 
belonging to the good. Seeing, then, that one or the other of these two diametrically opposed ideas, I mean 
good and evil, must any way attach to us, it is clear that to say a man is not included in the good is a 
necessary demonstration that he is included in the evil. But then, in connection with evil, we find no honour, 
no glory, no incorruption, no power; and so we are forced to dismiss all doubt that a man who has nothing to 
do with these last-mentioned things must be connected with their opposites, viz. with weakness, with 
dishonour, with corruption, with everything of that nature, such as we spoke of in the previous parts of the 
discussion, when we said how many were the passions, sprung from evil, which are so hard for the soul to 
get rid of, when they have infused themselves into the very substance of its entire nature and become one 
with it. When such, then, have been purged from it and utterly removed by the healing processes worked out 
by the Fire, then every one of the things which make up our conception of the good will come to take their 
place; incorruption, that is, and life, and honour, and grace, and glory, and everything else that we 
conjecture is to be seen in God, and in His Image, man as he was made.
