Hippolytus, The Refutation of All Heresies
Translation: Roberts-Donaldson 1885 (Ante-Nicene Fathers), Public Domain
Source: https://archive.org/details/EarlyChurchFathers38Volumes

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES 

BOOK IV. 

CHAP. I. -SYSTEM OF THE ASTROLOGERS; SIDEREAL INFLUENCE; CONFIGURATION OF 
THE STARS. 

BUT in each zodiacal sign they call limits of the stars those in which each of the stars, from any one quarter 
to another, can exert the greatest amount of influence; in regard of which there is among them, according to 
their writings, no mere casual divergency of opinion. But they say that the stars are attended as if by 
satellites when they are in the midst of other stars, in continuity with the signs of the Zodiac; as if, when any 
particular star may have occupied the first portions of the same sign of the Zodiac, and another the last, and 
another those portions in the middle, that which is in the middle is said to be guarded by those holding the 
portions at the extremities. And they are said to look upon one another, and to be in conjunction with one 
another, as if appearing in a triangular or quadrangular figure. They assume, therefore, the figure of a 
triangle, and look upon one another, which have an intervening distance(1) extending for three zodiacal 
signs; and they assume the figure of a square those which have an interval extending for two signs. But as 
the underlying parts smpathize with the head, and the head with the underlying parts, (2) so also things 
terrestrial with superlunar objects. (3) But there is of these a certain difference and want of sympathy, so that 
they do not involve one and the same point of juncture. 

CHAP. II. -DOCTRINES CONCERNING AEONS; THE CHALDEAN ASTROLOGY; HERESY 
DERIVABLE FROM IT. 

Employing these (as analogies), Euphrates the Peratic, and Acembes 4 the Carystian, and the rest of the 
crowd of these (speculators), imposing names different from the doctrine of the truth, speak of a sedition of 
AEons, and of a revolt of good powers over to evil (ones), and of the concord of good with wicked (AEons), 
calling them Taparchai and Proastioi, and very many other names. But the entire of this heresy, as 
attempted by them, I shall explain and refute when we come to treat of the subject of these (AEons). But now, 
lest any one suppose the opinions propounded by the Chaldeans respecting astrological doctrine to be 
trustworthy and secure, we shall not hesitate to furnish a brief refutation respecting these, establishing that 
the futile art is calculated both to deceive and blind the soul indulging in vain expectations, rather than to 
profit it. And we urge our case with these, not according to any experience of the art, but from knowledge 
based on practical principles. Those who have cultivated the art, becoming disciples of the Chaldeans, and 
communicating mysteries as if strange and astonishing to men, having changed the names (merely), have 
from this source concocted their heresy. But since, estimating the astrological art as a powerful one, and 
availing themselves of the testimonies adduced by its patrons, they wish to gain reliance for their own 
attempted conclusions, we shall at present, as it has seemed expedient, prove the astrological art to be 
untenable, as our intention next is to invalidate also the Peratic system, as a branch growing out of an 
unstable root. 

CHAP. III. -THE HOROSCOPE THE FOUNDATION OF ASTROLOGY; INDISCOVERABILITY 
OF THE HOROSCOPE; THEREFORE THE FUTILITY OF THE CHALDEAN ART. 

The originating principle, (5) and, as it were, foundation, of the entire art, is fixing(6) the horoscope. (1) For 
from this are derived the rest of the cardinal points, as well as the declinations and ascensions, the triangles 
and squares, and the configurations of the stars in accordance with these; and from all these the predictions 
are taken. Whence, if the horoscope be removed, it necessarily follows that neither any celestial object is 
recognisable in the meridian, or at the horizon, or in the point of the heavens opposite the meridian; but if 
these be not comprehended, the entire system of the Chaldeans vanishes along with (them). But that the 
sign of the horoscope is indiscoverable by them, we may show by a variety of arguments. For in order that 
this (horoscope) may be found, it is first requisite that the (time of) birth of the person falling under inspection 

should be firmly fixed; and secondly, that the horoscope which is to signify this should be infallible; and 
thirdly, that the ascension(2) of the zodiacal sign should be observed with accuracy. For from(3) (the 
moment) of birth(4) the ascension of the zodiacal sign rising in the heaven should be closely watched, (5) 
since the Chaldeans, determining (from this) the horoscope, frame the configuration of the stars in 
accordance with the ascension (of the sign); and they, term this-disposition, in accordance with which they 
devise their predictions. But neither is it possible to take the birth of persons, falling under consideration, as I 
shall explain, nor is the horoscope infallible, nor is the rising zodiacal sign apprehended with accuracy. 
How it is, then, that the system of the Chaldeans(6) is unstable, let us now declare. Having, then, previously 
marked it out for investigation, they draw the birth of persons falling under consideration from, 
unquestionably, the depositing of the seed, and (from) conception or from parturition. And if one will attempt 
to take (the horoscope) from conception, the accurate account of this is incomprehensible, the time 
(occupied) passing quickly, and naturally (so). For we are not able to say whether conception takes place 
upon the transference(7) of the seed or not. For this can happen even as quick as thought, just also as 
leaven, when put into heated jars, immediately is reduced to a glutinous state. But conception can also 
(take place) after a lapse of duration. For there being an interval from the mouth of the womb to the 
fundament, where physicians(8) say conceptions take place, it is altogether the nature of the seed 
deposited to occupy some time in traversing(9) this interval. The Chaldeans, therefore, being ignorant of the 
quantity of duration to a nicety, never will comprehend the (moment of) conception; the seed at one time 
being injected straight forward, and falling at one spot upon actual parts of the womb well disposed for 
conception, and at another time dropping into it dispersedly, and being collected into one place by uterine 
energies. Now, while these matters are unknown, (namely), as to when the first takes place, and when the 
second, and how much time is spent in that particular conception, and how much in this; while, I say, 
ignorance on these points prevails on the part of these (astrologers), an accurate comprehension of 
conception is put out of the question. (10) And if, as some natural philosophers have asserted, the seed, 
remaining stationary first, and undergoing alteration in the womb, then enters the (womb's) opened 
blood-vessels, as the seeds of the earth(11) sink into the ground; from this it will follow, that those who are 
not acquainted with the quantity of time occupied by the change, will not be aware of the precise moment of 
conception either. And, moreover, as women(12) differ from one another in the other parts of the body, both 
as regards energy and in other respects, so also (it is reasonable to suppose that they differ from one 
another) in respect of energy of womb, some conceiving quicker, and others slower. And this is not strange, 
since also women, when themselves compared with themselves, at times are observed having a strong 
disposition towards conception, but at times with no such tendency. And when this is so, it is impossible to 
say with accuracy when the deposited seed coalesces, in order that from this time the Chaldeans may fix 
the horoscope of the birth. 

CHAP. IV.--IMPOSSIBILITY OF FIXING THE HOROSCOPE; FAILURE OF AN ATTEMPT TO 
DO THIS AT THE PERIOD OF BIRTH. 

For this reason it is impossible to fix the horoscope from the (period of) conception. But neither can this be 
done from (that of) birth. For, in the first place, there exists the difficulty as to when it can be declared that 
there is a birth; whether it is when the foetus begins to incline towards the orifice, (1 3) or when it may project a 
little, or when it may be borne to the ground. Neither is it in each of these cases possible to comprehend the 
precise moment of parturition, (1) or to define the time. For also on account of disposition of soul, and on 
account of suitableness of body, and on account of choice of the parts, and on account of experience in the 
midwife, and other endless causes, the time is not the same at which the foetus inclines towards the orifice, 
when the membranes are ruptured, or when it projects a little, or is deposited on the ground; but the period is 
different in the case of different individuals. And when the Chaldeans are not able definitely and accurately 
to calculate this, they will fail, as they ought, to determine the period of emergence. 
That, then, the Chaldeans profess to be acquainted with the horoscope at the periods of birth, (1) but in 
reality do not know it, is evident from these considerations. But that neither is their horoscope infallible, it is 
easy to conclude. For when they allege that the person sitting beside the woman in travail at the time of 
parturition gives, by striking a metallic rim, a sign to the Chaldean, who from an elevated place is 
contemplating the stars, and he, looking towards heaven, marks down the rising zodiacal sign; in the first 
place, we shall prove to them, that when parturition happens indefinitely, as we have shown a little before, 
neither is it easy(2) to signify this (birth) by striking the metallic rim. However, grant that the birth is 
comprehensible, yet neither is it possible to signify this at the exact time; for as the noise of the metallic plate 
is capable of being divided by a longer time and one protracted, in reference to perception, it happens that 
the sound is carried to the height (with proportionate delay). And the following proof may be observed in the 
case of those felling timber at a distance. For a sufficiently long time after the descent of the axe, the sound 
of the stroke is heard, so that it takes a longer time to reach the listener. And for this reason, therefore, it is 

not possible for the Chaldeans accurately to take the time of the rising zodiacal sign, and consequently the 
time when one can make the horoscope with truth. And not only does more time seem to elapse after 
parturition, when he who is sitting beside the woman in labour strikes the metallic plate, and next after the 
sound reaches the listener, that is, the person who has gone up to the elevated position; but also, while he is 
glancing around and looking to ascertain in which of the zodiacal signs is the moon, and in which appears 
each of the rest of the stars, it necessarily follows that there is a different position in regard of the stars, the 
motion(3) of the pole whiffing them on with incalculable velocity, before what is seen in the heavens(4) is 
carefully adjusted to the moment when the person is born. 

CHAP. V. --ANOTHER METHOD OF FIXING THE HOROSCOPE AT BIRTH; EQUALLY 
FUTILE; USE OF THE CLEPSYDRA IN ASTROLOGY; THE PREDICTIONS OF THE 
CHALDEANS NOT VERIFIED. 

In this way, the art practised by the Chaldeans will be shown to be unstable. Should any one, however, 
allege that, by questions put to him who inquires from the Chaldeans, (5) the birth can be ascertained, not 
even by this plan is it possible to arrive at the precise period. For if, supposing any such attention on their 
part in reference to their art to be on record, even these do not attain-as we have proved -unto accuracy 
either, how, we ask, can an unsophisticated individual comprehend precisely the time of parturition, in order 
that the Chaldean acquiring the requisite information from this person may set(6) the horoscope correctly? 
But neither from the appearance of the horizon will the rising star seem the same everywhere; but in one 
place its declination will be supposed to be the horoscope, and in another the ascension (will be thought) 
the horoscope, according as the places come into view, being either lower or higher. Wherefore, also, from 
this quarter an accurate prediction will not appear, since many may be born throughout the entire world at 
the same hour, each from a different direction observing the stars. 

But the supposed comprehension (of the period of parturition) by means of clepsydras(7) is likewise futile. 
For the contents of the jar will not flow out in the same time when it is full as when it is half empty; yet, 
according to their own account, the pole itself by a single impulse is whiffed along at an equable velocity. If, 
however, evading the argument,(8) they should affirm that they do not take the time precisely, but as it 
happens in any particular latitude, (9) they will be refuted almost by the sidereal influences themselves. For 
those who have been born at the same time do not spend the same life, but some, for example, have been 
made kings, and others have grown old in fetters. There has been born none equal, at all events to 
Alexander the Macedonian, though many were brought forth along with him throughout the earth; (and) none 
equal to the philosopher Plato. Wherefore the Chaldean, examining the time of the birth in any particular 
latitude, will not be able to say accurately, whether a person born at this time will be prosperous. Many, I 
take it, born at this time, have been unfortunate, so that the similarity according to dispositions is futile. 
Having, then, by different reasons and various methods, refuted the ineffectual mode of examination 
adopted by the Chaldeans, neither shall we omit this, namely, to show that their predictions will eventuate in 
inexplicable difficulties. For if, as the mathematicians assert, it is necessary that one born under the barb of 
Sagittarius' arrow should meet with a violent death, how was it that so many myriads of the Barbarians that 
fought with the Greeks at Marathon or Salamis(1) were simultaneously slaughtered? For unquestionably 
there was not the same horoscope in the case, at all events, of them all. And again, it is said that one born 
under the urn of Aquarius will suffer shipwreck: (yet) how is it that so many (2) of the Greeks that returned from 
Troy were overwhelmed in the deep around the indented shores of Euboea? For it is incredible that all, 
distant from one another by a long interval of duration, should have been born under the urn of Aquarius. For 
it is not reasonable to say, that frequently, for one whose fate it was to be destroyed in the sea, all who were 
with him in the same vessel should perish. For why should the doom of this man subdue the (destinies) of 
all? Nay, but why, on account of one for whom it was allotted to die on land, should not all be preserved? 

CHAP. VI. -ZODIACAL INFLUENCE; ORIGIN OF SIDEREAL NAMES. 

But since also they frame an account concerning the action of the zodiacal signs, to which they say the 
creatures that are procreated are assimilated, (3) neither shall we omit this: as, for instance, that one born in 
Leo will De brave; and that one born in Virgo will have long straight hair,(4) be of a fair complexion, childless, 
modest. These statements, however, and others similar to them, are rather deserving of laughter than 
serious consideration. For, according to them, it is possible for no AEthiopian to be born in Virgo; otherwise 
he would allow that such a one is white, with long straight hair and the rest. But I am rather of opinion, (5) that 
the ancients imposed the names of received animals upon certain specified stars, for the purpose of 
knowing them better, not from any similarity of nature; for what have the seven stars, distant one from 
another, in common with a bear, or the five stars with the head of a dragon?-in regard of which Aratus(6) 
says:- 

"But two his temples, and two his eyes, and one beneath 
Reaches the end of the huge monster's law." 

CHAP. VII. --PRACTICAL ABSURDITY OF THE CHALDAIC ART; DEVELOPMENT OF THE 
ART. 

In this manner also, that these points are not deserving so much labour, is evident to those who prefer to 
think correctly, and do not attend to the bombast of the Chaldeans, who consign monarchs to utter obscurity, 
by perfecting cowardice(7) in them, and rouse private individuals to dare great exploits. But if any one, 
surrendering himself to evil, is guilty of delinquency, he who has been thus deceived does not become a 
teacher to all whom the Chaldeans are disposed to mislead by their mistakes. (Far from it); (these 
astrologers) impel the minds (of their dupes, as they would have them), into endless perturbation, (when) 
they affirm that a configuration of the same stars could not return to a similar position, otherwise than by the 
renewal of the Great Year, through a space of seven thousand seven hundred and seventy and seven 
years. (8) How then, I ask, will human observation for one birth be able to harmonize with so many ages; and 
this not once, (but oftentimes, when a destruction of the world, as some have stated, would intercept the 
progress of this Great Year; or a terrestrial convulsion, though partial, would utterly break the continuity of the 
historical tradition)?(1) The Chaldaic art must necessarily be refuted by a greater number of arguments, 
although we have been reminding (our readers) of it on account of other circumstances, not peculiarly on 
account of the art itself. 

Since, however, we have determined to omit none of the opinions advanced by Gentile philosophers, on 
account of the notorious knavery of the heretics, let us see what they also say who have attempted to 
propound doctrines concerning magnitudes,-who, observing the fruitless labour of the majority (of 
speculators), where each after a different fashion coined his own falsehoods and attained celebrity, have 
ventured to make some greater assertion, in order that they might be highly magnified by those who mightily 
extol their contemptible lies. These suppose the existence of circles, and measures, and triangles, and 
squares, both in twofold and threefold array. Their argumentation, however, in regard of this matter, is 
extensive, yet it is not necessary in reference to the subject which we have taken in hand. 

CHAP. VIM. -PRODIGIES OF THE ASTROLOGERS; SYSTEM OF THE ASTRONOMERS; 
CHALDEAN DOCTRINE OF CIRCLES; DISTANCES OF THE HEAVENLY BODIES. 

I reckon it then sufficient to declare the prodigies(2) detailed by these men. Wherefore, employing 
condensed accounts of what they affirm, I shall turn my attention to the other points(that remain to be 
considered). Now they make the following statements. (3) The Creator communicated pre-eminent power to 
the orbital motion of the identical and similar (circle), for He permitted the revolution of it to be one and 
indivisible; but after dividing this internally into six parts, (and thus having formed) seven unequal circles, 
according to each interval of a twofold and threefold dimension. He commanded, since there were three of 
each, that the circles should travel in orbits contrary to one another, three indeed (out of the aggregate of 
seven) being whirled along with equal velocity, and four of them with a speed dissimilar to each other and to 
the remaining three, yet (all) according to a definite principle. For he affirms that the mastery was 
communicated to the orbital motion of the same (circle), not only since it embraces the motion of the other, 
that, is, the erratic stars, but because also it possesses so great mastery, that is, so great power, that even it 
leads round, along with itself, by a peculiar strength of its own, those heavenly bodies-that is, the erratic 
stars-that are whirled along in contrary directions from west to east, and, in like manner, from east to west. 
And he asserts that this motion was allowed to be one and indivisible, in the first place, inasmuch as the 
revolutions of all the fixed stars were accomplished in equal periods of time, and were not distinguished 
according to greater or less portions of duration. In the next place, they all present the same phase as that 
which belongs to the outermost motion; whereas the erratic stars have been distributed into greater and 
varying periods for the accomplishment of their movements, and into unequal distances from earth. And he 
asserts that the motion in six parts of the other has been distributed probably into seven circles. For as 
many as are sections of each (circle)-l allude to monads of the sections(4)-become segments; for 
example, if the division be by one section, there will be two segments; if by two, three segments; and so, if 
anything be cut into six parts, there will be seven segments. And he says that the distances of these are 
alternately arranged both in double and triple order, there being three of each,-a principle which, he has 
attempted to prove, holds good of the composition of the soul likewise, as depending upon the seven 
numbers. For among them there are from the monad three double (numbers), viz., 2, 4, 8, and three triple 
ones, viz., 3, 9, 27. But the diameter of Earth is 80, 108stadii; and the perimeter of Earth, 250,543 stadii; and 
the distance also from the surface of the Earth to the lunar circle, Aristarchus the Samian computes at 

8,000,1 78 stadii, but Apollonius 5,000,000, whereas Archimedes computes(5) it at 5,544,1 300. And from the 
lunar to solar circle, (according to the last authority,) are 50,262,065 stadii; and from this to the circle of 
Venus, 20,272,065 stadii; and from this to the circle of Mercury, 50,817,165 stadii; and from this to the circle of 
Mars, 40,541 ,108 stadii; and from this to the circle of Jupiter, 20,275,065 stadii; and from this to the circle of 
Saturn, 40,372,065 stadii; and from this to the Zodiac and the furthest periphery, 20,082,005 stadii. (1) 

CHAP. IX. -FURTHER ASTRONOMIC CALCULATIONS. 

The mutual distances of the circles and spheres, and the depths, are rendered by Archimedes. He takes 
the perimeter of the Zodiac at 447,310,000 stadii; so that it follows that a straight line from the centre of the 
Earth to the most outward superficies would be the sixth of the aforesaid number, but that the line from the 
surface of the Earth on which we tread to the Zodiac would be a sixth of the aforesaid number, less by four 
myriads of stadii, which is the distance from the centre of the Earth to its surface. And from the circle of Saturn 
to the Earth he says the distance is 2,226,912,711 stadii; and from the circle of Jupiter to Earth, 502,770,646 
stadii; and from the circle of Mars to Earth, 132,418,581 . From the Sun to Earth, 121 ,604,454; and from 
Mercury to the Earth, 526,882,259; and from Venus to Earth, 50,81 5,1 60. 

CHAP. X. -THEORY OF STELLAR MOTION AND DISTANCE IN ACCORDANCE WITH 
HARMONY. 

Concerning the Moon, however, a statement has been previously made. The distances and profundities of 
the spheres Archimedes thus renders; but a different declaration regarding them has been made by 
Hipparchus; and a different one still by Apollonius the mathematician. It is sufficient, however, for us, 
following the Platonic opinion, to suppose twofold and threefold distances from one another of the erratic 
stars; for the doctrine is thus preserved of the composition of the universe out of harmony, on concordant 
principles(2) in keeping with these distances. The numbers, however, advanced by Archimedes, (3) and the 
accounts rendered by the rest concerning the distances, if they be not on principles of symphony ,-that is, 
the double and triple (distances) spoken of by Plato,-but are discovered independent of harmonies, would 
not preserve the doctrine of the formation of the universe according to harmony. For it is neither credible nor 
possible that the distances of these should be both contrary to some reasonable plan, and independent of 
harmonious and proportional principles, except perhaps only the Moon, on account of wanings and the 
shadow of the Earth, in regard also of the distance of which alone-that is, the lunar (planet) from earth-one 
may trust Archimedes. It will, however, be easy for those who, according to the Platonic dogma itself, adopt 
this distance to comprehend by numerical calculation (intervals) according to what is double and triple, as 
Plato requires, and the rest of the distances. If, then, according to Archimedes, the Moon is distant from the 
surFace of the Earth 5,544,130 stadii, by increasing these numbers double and triple, (it will be) easy to find 
also the distances of the rest, as if subtracting one part of the number of stadii which the Moon is distant from 
the Earth. 

But because the rest of the numbers-those alleged by Archimedes concerning the distance of the erratic 
stars-are not based on principles of concord, it is easy to understand-that is, for those who attend to the 
matter-how the numbers are mutually related, and on what principles they depend. That, however, they 
should not be in harmony and symphony-l mean those that are parts of the world which consists according 
to harmony-this is impossible. Since, therefore, the first number which the Moon is distant from the earth is 
5,544,130, the second number which the Sun is distant from the Moon being 50,272,065, subsists by a 
greater computation than ninefold. But the higher number in reference to this, being 20,272,065, is 
(comprised) in a greater computation than half. The number, however, superior to this, which is 50,817,165, is 
contained in a greater computation than half. But the number superior to this, which is 40,541,108, is 
contained in a less computation than two-fifths. But the number superior to this, which is 20,275,065, is 
contained in a greater computation than half. The final number, however, which is 40,372,065, is comprised 
in a less computation than double. 

CHAP. XI. -THEORY OF THE SIZE OF THE HEAVENLY BODIES IN ACCORDANCE WITH 
NUMERICAL HARMONIES. 

These (numerical) relations, therefore, the greater than ninefold, and less than half, and greater than double, 
and less than two-fifths, and greater than half, and less than double, are beyond all symphonies, from which 
not any proportionate or harmonic system could be produced. But the whole world, and the parts of it, are in 
all respects similarly framed in conformity with proportion and harmony. The proportionate and harmonic 
relations, however, are preserved-as we have previously stated-by double and triple intervals. If, 
therefore, we consider Archimedes reliable in the case of only the first distance, that from the Moon to the 

Earth, it is easy also to find tiie rest (of tiie intervals), by multiplying (them) by double and treble. Let then the 
distance, according to Archimedes, from Earth to Moon be 5,544,130 stadii; there will therefore be the 
double number of this of stadii which the Sun is distant from the Moon, viz. 11,088,260. But the Sun is distant 
from the Earth 16,632,390 stadii; and Venus is likewise distant from the Sun 16,632,390 stadii, but from the 
Earth 33,264,780 stadii; and Mercury is distant from Venus 22,176,520 stadii, but from Earth 55,441 ,300 stadii; 
and Mars is distant from Mercury 49,897, 170 stadii, and from Earth 105,338,470 stadii; and Jupiter is distant 
from Mars 44,353,040 stadii, but from Earth 149,691 ,51 stadii; Saturn is distant from Jupiter 149,691 ,510 
stadii, but from Earth 299,383,020 stadii. 

CHAP. XII. -WASTE OF MENTAL ENERGY IN THE SYSTEMS OF THE ASTROLOGERS. 

Who will not feel astonishment at the exertion of so much deep thought with so much toil? This Ptolemy, 
however-a careful investigator of these matters-does not seem to me to be useless; but only this grieves 
(one), that being recently born, he could not be of service to the sons of the giants, who, being ignorant of 
these measures, and supposing that the heights of heaven were near, endeavoured in vain to construct a 
tower. And so, if at that time he were present to explain to them these measures, they would not have made 
the daring attempt ineffectually. But if any one profess not to have confidence in this (astronomer's 
calculations), let him by measuring be persuaded (of their accuracy); for in reference to those incredulous 
on the point, one cannot have a more manifest proof than this. O, pride of vain-toiling soul, and incredible 
belief, that Ptolemy should be considered pre-eminently wise among those who have cultivated similar 
wisdom! 

CHAP. XIII. --MENTION OF THE HERETIC COLARBASUS; ALLIANCE BETWEEN HERESY 
AND THE PYTHAGOREAN PHILOSOPHY. 

Certain, adhering partly to these, as if having propounded great conclusions, and supposed things worthy of 
reason, have framed enormous and endless heresies; and one of these is Colarbasus,(1) who attempts to 
explain religion by measures and numbers. And others there are (who act) in like manner, whose tenets we 
shall explain when we commence to speak of what concerns those who give heed to Pythagorean 
calculation as possible; and uttering vain prophecies, hastily assume(2) as secure the philosophy by 
numbers and elements. Now certain (speculators), appropriating(3) similar reasonings from these, deceive 
unsophisticated individuals, alleging themselves endued with foresight;(4) sometimes, after uttering many 
predictions, happening on a single fulfilment, and not abashed by many failures, but making their boast in 
this one. Neither shall I pass over the witless philosophy of these men; but, after explaining it, I shall prove 
that those who attempt to form a system of religion out of these (aforesaid elements), are disciples of a 
school(5) weak and full of knavery. 

CHAP. XIV.-SYSTEM OF THE ARITHMETICIANS; PREDICTIONS THROUGH 
CALCULATIONS; NUMERICAL ROOTS; TRANSFERENCE OF THESE DOCTRINES TO 
LETTERS; EXAMPLES IN PARTICULAR NAMES; DIFFERENT METHODS OF 
CALCULATION; PRESCIENCE POSSIBLE BY THESE. 

Those, then, who suppose that they prophesy by means of calculations and numbers, (6) and elements and 
names, constitute the origin of their attempted system to be as follows. They affirm that there is a root of 
each of the numbers; in the case of thousands, so many monads as there are thousands: for example, the 
root of six thousand, six monads; of seven thousand, seven monads; of eight thousand, eight monads; and 
in the case of the rest, in like manner, according to the same (proportion). And in the case of hundreds, as 
many hundreds as there are, so many monads are the root of them: for instance, of seven hundred there are 
seven hundreds; the root of these is seven monads: of six hundred, six hundreds; the root of these, six 
monads. And it is similar respecting decades: for of eighty (the root is) eight monads; and of sixty, six 
monads; of forty, four monads; often, one monad. And in the case of monads, the monads themselves are a 
root: for instance, of nine, nine; of eight, eight; of seven, seven. In this way, also, ought we therefore to act in 
the case of the elements (of words), for each letter has been arranged according to a certain number: for 
instance, the letter n according to fifty monads; but of fifty monads five is the root, and the root of the letter n is 
(therefore) five. Grant that from some name we take certain roots of it. For instance, (from) the name 
Agamemnon, there is of the a, one monad; and of the g, three monads; and of the other a, one monad; of the 
m, four monads; of the e, five monads; of the m, four monads; of the n, five monads; of the (long) o, eight 
monads; of the n, five monads; which, brought together into one series, will be 1, 3, 1, 4, 5, 4, 5, 8, 5; and these 
added together make up 36 monads. Again, they take the roots of these, and they become three in the case 
of the number thirty, but actually six in the case of the number six. The three and the six, then, added 

together, constitute nine; but tiie root of nine is nine: tiierefore tiie name Agamemnon terminates in tiie root 
nine. 

Let us do tiie same witii anotiier name -Hector. Tiie name (H)ector lias five letters-e, and k, and t, and o, 
and r. Tiie roots of tiiese are 5, 2, 3,8,1; and tiiese added togetiier mal<e up 1 9 monads. Again, of tiie ten 
tiie root is one; and of tiie nine, nine; wiiicii added togetiier mal<e up ten: tiie root often is a monad. Tiie 
name Hector, tiierefore, wlien made tiie subject of computation, lias formed a root, namely a monad. It 
would, however, be easier(1) to conduct the calculation thus: Divide the ascertained roots from the 
letters-as now in the case of the name Hector we have found nineteen monads-into nine, and treat what 
remains over as roots. For example, if I divide 1 9 into 9, the remainder is 1 , for 9 times 2 are 1 8, and there is 
a remaining monad: for if I subtract 1 8 from 19, there is a remaining monad; so that the root of the name 
Hector will be a monad. Again, of the name Patroclus these numbers are roots: 8, 1, 3, 1, 7, 2, 3, 7, 2; added 
together, they make up 34 monads. And of these the remainder is 7 monads: of the 30, 3; and of the 4, 4. 
Seven monads, therefore, are the root of the name Patroclus. 

Those, then, that conduct their calculations according to the rule of the number nine, (2) take the ninth part of 
the aggregate number of roots, and define what is left over as the sum of the roots. They, on the other hand, 
(who conduct their calculations) according to the rule of the 

number seven, take the seventh (part of the aggregate number of roots); for example, in the case of the 
name Patroclus, the aggregate in the matter of roots is 34 monads. This divided into seven parts makes 
four, which (multiplied into each other) are 28. There are six remaining monads; (so that a person using this 
method) says, according to the rule of the number seven, that six monads are the root of the name 
Patroclus. If, however, it be 43, (six) taken seven times, (3) he says, are 42, for seven times six are 42, and 
one is the remainder. A monad, therefore, is the root of the number 43, according to the rule of the number 
seven. But one ought to observe if the assumed number, when divided, has no remainder; for example, if 
from any name, after having added together the roots, I find, to give an instance, 36 monads. But the number 
36 divided into nine makes exactly 4 enneads; for nine times 4 are 36, and nothing is over. It is evident, then, 
that the actual root is 9. And again, dividing the number forty-five, we find nine(4) and nothing over-for nine 
times five are forty-five, and nothing remains; (wherefore) in the case of such they assert the root itself to be 
nine. And as regards the number seven, the case is similar: if, for example we divide 28 into 7, we have 
nothing over; for seven times four are 28, and nothing remains; (wherefore) they say that seven is the root. 
But when one computes names, and finds the same letter occurring twice, he calculates it once; for instance, 
the name Patroclus has the pa twice, (5) and the o twice: they therefore calculate the a once and the a once. 
According to this, then, the roots will be 8, 1 , 3, 1 , 7, 2, 3, 2, and added together they make 27 monads; and 
the root of the name will be, according to the rule of the number nine, nine itself, but according to the rule of 
the number seven, six. 

In like manner, (the name) Sarpedon, when made the subject of calculation, produces as a root, according 
to the rule of the number nine, two monads. Patroclus, however, produces nine monads; Patroclus gains the 
victory. For when one number is uneven, but the other even, the uneven number, if it is larger, prevails. But 
again, when there is an even number, eight, and five an uneven number, the eight prevails, for it is larger. If, 
however, there were two numbers, for example, both of them even, or both of them odd, the smaller prevails. 
But how does (the name) Sarpedon, according to the rule of the number nine, make two monads, since the 
letter (long) o is omitted? For when there may be in a name the letter (long) o and (long) e, they leave out the 
(long) a, using one letter, because they say both are equipollent; and the same must not be computed twice 
over, as has been above declared. Again, (the name) Ajax makes four monads; (but the name) Hector, 
according to the rule of the ninth number, makes one monad. And the tetrad is even, whereas the monad 
odd. And in the case of such, we say, the greater prevails-Ajax gains the victory. Again, Alexander and 
Menelaus (may be adduced as examples). Alexander has a proper name (Paris). But Paris, according to 
the rule of the number nine, makes four monads; and IVIenelaus, according to the rule of the number nine, 
makes nine monads. The nine, however, conquer the four (monads): for it has been declared, when the one 
number is odd and the other even, the greater prevails; but when both are even or both odd, the less 
(prevails). Again, Amyous and Polydeuces (may be adduced as examples). Amyous, according to the rule 
of the number nine, makes two monads, and Polydeuces, however, seven: Polydeuces gains the victory. 
Ajax and Ulysses contended at the funeral games. Ajax, according to the rule of the number nine, makes 
font monads; Ulysses, according to the rule of the number nine, (makes) eight.(l) Is there, then, not any 
annexed, and (is there) not a proper name for Ulysses?(2) for he has gained the victory. According to the 
numbers, no doubt, Ajax is victorious, but history hands down the name of Ulysses as the conqueror, 
Achilles and Hector (may be adduced as examples). Achilles, according to the rule of the number nine, 
makes four monads; Hector one: Achilles gains the victory. Again, Achilles and Asteropaeus (are 
instances). Achilles makes four monads, Asteropaeus three: Achilles conquers. Again, IVIenelaus and 
Euphorbus (may be adduced as examples). IVIenelaus has nine monads, Euphorbus eight: IVIenelaus 
gains the victory. 

Some, however, according to the rule of the number seven, employ the vowels only, but others distinguish 
by themselves the vowels, and by themselves the semi-vowels, and by themselves the mutes; and, having 
formed three orders, they take the roots by themselves of the vowels, and by themselves of the 
semi-vowels, and by themselves of the mutes, and they compare each apart. Others, however, do not 
employ even these customary numbers, but different ones: for instance, as an example, they no not wish to 
allow that the letter p has as a root 8 monads, but 5, and that the (letter) x (si) has as a root four monads; and 
turning in every direction, they discover nothing sound. When, however, they contend about the second 
(letter), from each name they take away the first letter; but when they contend about the third (letter), they take 
away two letters of each name, and calculating the rest, compare them. 

CHAP. XV. --QUIBBLES OF THE NUMERICAL THEORISTS; THE ART OF THE 
FRONTISPICISTS (PHYSIOGNOMY); CONNECTION OF THIS ART WITH ASTROLOGY; 
TYPE OF THOSE BORN UNDER ARIES. 

I think that there has been clearly expounded the mind of arithmeticians, who, by means of numbers and of 
names, suppose that they interpret life. Now I perceive that these, enjoying leisure, and being trained in 
calculation, have been desirous that, through the art(3) delivered to them from childhood, they, acquiring 
celebrity, should be styled prophets. And they, measuring the letters up (and) down, have wandered into 
trifling. For if they fail, they say, in putting forward the difficulty. Perhaps this name was not a family one, but 
imposed, as also lighting in the instance they argue in the case of (the names) Ulysses and Ajax. Who, 
taking occasion from this astonishing philosophy, and desirous of being styled "Heresiarch," will not be 
extolled? 

But since, also, there is another more profound art among the all-wise speculators of the Greeks-to whom 
heretical individuals boast that they attach themselves as disciples, on account of their employing the 
opinions of these (ancient philosophers) in reference to the doctrines tempted (to be established) by 
themselves, as shall a little afterwards be proved; but this is an art of divination, by examination of the 
forehead? or rather, I should say, it is madness: yet we shall not be silent as regards this (system) There are 
some who ascribe to the stars figures that mould the ideas s and dispositions of men, assigning the reason 
of this to births (that have taken place) under particular stars; they thus express themselves: Those who(6) 
are born under Aries will be of the following kind: long head, red hair, contracted eyebrows, pointed 
forehead, eyes grey and lively, (7) drawn cheeks, long-nosed, expanded nostrils, thin lips, tapering chin, 
wide month. These, he says, will partake of the following nature: cautious, subtle, perspicuous, (8) prudent, 
indulgent, gentle, over-auxious, persons of secret resolves fitted for every undertaking, prevailing more by 
prudence than strength, deriders for the time being, scholars, trustworthy, contentious, quarrellers in a fray, 
concupiscent, inflamed with unnatural lust, reflective, estranged(l) from their own homes, giving 
dissatisfaction in everything, accusers, like madmen in their cups, scorners, year by year losing 
something(2) serviceable in friendship through goodness; they, in the majority of cases, end their days in a 
foreign land. 

CHAP. XVI. -TYPE OF THOSE BORN UNDER TAURUS. 

Those, however, who are born in Taurus will be of the following description: round head, thick hair, broad 
forehead, square eyes, and large black eyebrows; in a white man, thin veins, sanguine, long eyelids, 
coarse huge ears, round mouths, thick nose, round nostrils, thick lips, strong in the upper parts, formed 
straight from the legs. (3) The same are by nature pleasing, reflective, of a goodly disposition, devout, just, 
uncouth, complaisant, labourers from twelve years, quarrelsome, dull. The stomach of these is small, they 
are quickly filled, forming many designs, prudent, niggardly towards themselves, liberal towards others, 
beneficent, of a slow(4) body: they are partly sorrowful, heedless as regards friendship, useful on account of 
mind, unfortunate. 

CHAP. XVII. -TYPE OF THOSE BORN UNDER GEMINI. 

Those who are born in Gemini will be of the following description: red countenance, size not very large, 
evenly proportioned limbs, (5) black eyes as if anointed with oil, cheeks turned down, (6) and large mouth, 
contracted eyebrows; they conquer all things, they retain whatever possessions they acquire, (7) they are 
extremely rich, penurious, niggardly of what is peculiarly their own, profuse in the pleasures of women, (8) 
equitable, musical liars. And the same by nature are learned, reflective, inquisitive, arriving at their own 
decisions, concupiscent, sparing of what belongs to themselves, liberal, quiet, prudent, crafty, they form 
many designs, calculators, accusers, importunate, not prosperous, they are beloved by the fair sex, 
merchants; as regards friendship, not to any considerable extent useful. 

CHAP. XVIII. -TYPE OF THOSE BORN UNDER CANCER. 

Those born in Cancer are of the following description: size not large, hair like a dog, of a reddish colour, 
small mouth, round head, pointed forehead, grey eyes, sufficiently beautiful, limbs somewhat varying. The 
same by nature are wicked, crafty, proficients in plans, insatiable, stingy, ungracious, illiberal, useless, 
forgetful; they neither restore what is another's, nor do they ask back what is their own;(9) as regards 
friendship, useful. 

CHAP. XIX. -TYPE OF THOSE BORN UNDER LEO. 

Those born in Leo are of the following description: round head, reddish hair, huge wrinkled forehead, 
coarse ears, large development of neck, partly bald, red complexion, grey eyes, large jaws, coarse mouth, 
gross in the upper parts, (10) huge breast, the under limbs tapering. The same are by nature persons who 
allow nothing to interfere with their own decision, pleasing themselves, irascible, passionate, scorners, 
obstinate, forming no design, not loquacious, (1 1) indolent, making an improper use of leisure, familiar,(12) 
wholly abandoned to pleasures of women, adulterers, immodest, in faith untrue, importunate, daring, 
penurious, spoliators, remarkable; as regards fellowship, useful; as regards friendship, (13) useless. 

CHAP. XX.-TYPE OF THOSE BORN UNDER VIRGO. 

Those born in Virgo are of the following description: fair appearance, eyes not large, fascinating, dark, 
compact(14) eyebrows, cheerful, swimmers; they are, however, slight in frame, (15) beautiful in aspect, with 
hair prettily adjusted, large forehead, prominent nose. The same by nature are docile, moderate, intelligent, 
sportive, rational, slow to speak, forming many plans; in regard of a favour, importunate;(16) gladly 
observing everything; and well-disposed pupils, they master whatever they learn; moderate, scorners, 
victims of unnatural lusts, companionable, of a noble soul, despisers, careless in practical matters, 
attending to instruction, more honourable in what concerns others than what relates to themselves; as 
regards friendship, useful. 

CHAP. XXI. -TYPE OR THOSE BORN UNDER LIBRA. 

Those born in Libra will be of the following description: hair thin, drooping, reddish and longish, forehead 
pointed (and) wrinkled, fair compact eyebrows, beautiful eyes, dark pupils, long thin ears, head inclined, 
wide mouth. The same by nature are intelligent. God-fearing, communicative to one another,(1) traders, 
toilers, not retaining gain, liars, not of an amiable disposition, in business or principle true, free-spoken, 
beneficent, illiterate, deceivers, friendly, careless, (to whom it is not profitable to do any act of injustice);(2) 
they are scorners, scoffers, satirical, (3) illustrious, listeners, and nothing succeeds with these; as regards 
friendship, useful. 

CHAP. XXII. -TYPE OF THOSE BORN UNDER SCORPIO. 

Those born in Scorpio are of the following description: a maidenish countenance, comely, pungent, 
blackish hair, well-shaped eyes, forehead not broad, and sharp nostril, small contracted ears, wrinkled 
foreheads, narrow eyebrows, drawn cheeks. The same by nature are crafty, sedulous, liars, communicating 
their particular designs to no one, of a deceitful spirit, wicked, scorners, victims to adultery, well-grown, 
docile; as regards friendship, useless. 

CHAP. XXIII. -TYPE OF THOSE BORN UNDER SAGITTARIUS. 

Those born in Sagittarius will be of the following description: great length, square forehead, profuse 
eyebrows, indicative of strength, well-arranged projection of hair, reddish (in complexion). The same by 
nature are gracious, as educated persons, simple, beneficent; given to unnatural lusts, companionable, 
toil-worn, lovers, beloved, jovial in their cups, clean, passionate, careless, wicked; as regards friendship, 
useless; scorners, with noble souls, insolent, crafty; for fellowship, useful. 

CHAP. XXIV.-TYPE OF THOSE BORN UNDER CAPRICORN. 

Those born in Capricorn will be of the following description: reddish body, projection of greyish hair, round 
mouth, (4) eyes as of an eagle, contracted brows, open forehead, somewhat bald, in the upper parts of the 

body endued with more strength. The same by nature are philosophic, scorners, and scoffers at the existing 
state of things, passionate, persons that can mal<e concessions, honourable, beneficent, lovers of the 
practice of music, passionate in their cups, mirthful, familiar, talkative, given to unnatural lusts, genial, 
amiable, quarrelsome e lovers, for fellowship well disposed. 

CHAP. XXV.--TYPE OF THOSE BORN UNDER AQUARIUS. 

Those born in Aquarius will be of the following description: square in size, of a diminutive body; sharp, small, 
fierce eyes; imperious, ungenial, severe, readily making acquisitions, for friendship and fellowship well 
disposed; moreover, for maritime(5) enterprises they make voyages, and perish. The same by nature are 
taciturn, modest, sociable, adulterers, penurious, practised in business, (6) tumultuous, pure, well-disposed, 
honourable, large eyebrows; frequently they are born in the midst of trifling events, but (in after life) follow a 
different pursuit; though they may have shown kindness to any one, still no one returns them thanks. 

CHAP. XXVI. -TYPE OF THOSE BORN UNDER PISCES. 

Those born in Pisces will be of the following description: of moderate dimensions, pointed forehead like 
fishes, shaggy hair, frequently they become soon grey. The same by nature are of exalted soul, simple, 
passionate, penurious, talkative; in the first period of life they will be drowsy; they are desirous of managing 
business by themselves, of high repute, venturesome, emulous, accusers, changing their locality, lovers, 
dancers; for friendship, useful. 

CHAP. XXVII. --FUTILITY OF THIS THEORY OF STELLAR INFLUENCE. 

Since, therefore, we have explained the astonishing wisdom of these men, and have not concealed their 
overwrought art of divination by means of contemplation, neither shall I be silent as regards (undertakings) 
in the case of which those that are deceived act foolishly. For, comparing the forms and dispositions of men 
with names of stars, how impotent their system is! For we know that those originally conversant with such 
investigations have called the stars by names given in reference to propriety of signification and facility for 
future recognition. For what similarity is there of these (heavenly bodies) with the likeness of animals, or what 
community of nature as regards conduct anti energy (is there ill the two cases), that one should allege that a 
person born in Leo should be irascible, and one born in Virgo moderate, or one born in Cancer wicked, but 
that those born in... 

CHAP. XXVIII. (1)~SYSTEM OF THE MAGICIANS; INCANTATIONS OF DEMONS; SECRET 
MAGICAL RITES. 

... And (the sorcerer), taking (a paper), directs the inquirer (2) to write down with water whatever questions he 
may desire to have asked from the demons. Then, folding up the paper, and delivering it to the attendant, 
he sends him away to commit it to the flames, that the ascending smoke may waft the letters to demons. 
While, however, the attendant is executing this order, (the sorcerer) first removes equal portions of the 
paper, and on some more parts of it he pretends that demons write in Hebrew characters. Then burning an 
incense of the Egyptian magicians, termed Cyphi, he takes these (portions of paper) away, and places 
them near the incense. But (that paper) which the inquirer happens to have written (upon), having placed on 
the coals, he has burned. Then (the sorcerer), appearing to be borne away under divine influence, (and) 
hurrying into a corner (of the house), utters a loud and harsh cry, and unintelligible to all, ... and orders all 
those present to enter, crying out (at the same time), and invoking Phryn, or some other demon. But after 
passing into the house, and when those that were present stood side by side, the sorcerer, flinging the 
attendant upon a bed, (3) utters to him several words, partly in the Greek, and partly, as it were, the Hebrew 
language, (embodying) the customary incantations employed by the magicians. (The attendant), however, 
goes away(4) to make the inquiry. And within (the house), into a vessel full of water (the sorcerer) infusing 
copperas mixture, and melting the drug, having with it sprinkled the paper that forsooth had (the characters 
upon it) obliterated, he forces the latent and concealed letters to come once more into light; and by these he 
ascertains what the inquirer has written down. And if one write with copperas mixture likewise, and having 
ground a gall nut, use its vapour as a fumigator, the concealed letters would become plain. And if one write 
with milk, (and) then scorch the paper, and scraping it, sprinkle and rub (what is thus scraped off) upon the 
letters traced with the milk, these will become plain. And urine likewise, and sauce of brine, and juice of 
euphorbia, and of a fig, produce a similar result. But when (the sorcerer) has ascertained the question in this 
mode, he makes provision for the manner in which be ought to give the reply. And next he orders those that 
are present to enter, holding laurel branches and shaking them, and uttering cries, and invoking the demon 

Phryn. For also it becomes these to invoke liim;(5) and it is wortiiy tiiat tiiey mal<e tiiis request from demons, 
wiiicii tiiey do not wisli of tliemseives to put forward, liaving iost tlieir minds. Tlie confused noise, liowever, 
and tlie tumult, prevent them directing attention to those things which it is supposed (the sorcerer) does in 
secret. But what these are, the present is a fair opportunity for us to declare. 

Considerable darkness, then, prevails. For the (sorcerer) affirms that it is impossible for mortal nature to 
behold divine things, for that to hold converse (with these mysteries) is sufficient. Making, however, the 
attendant lie down (upon the couch), head foremost, and placing by each side two of those little tablets, 
upon which had been inscribed in, forsooth, Hebrew characters, as it were names of demons, he says that 
(a demon) will deposit the rest in their ears. But this (statement) is requisite, in order that some instrument 
may be placed beside the ears of the attendant, by which it is possible that he signify everything which he 
chooses. First, however, he produces a sound that the (attendant) youth may be terrified; and secondly, he 
makes a humming noise; then, thirdly, he speaks(6) through the instrument what he wishes the youth to say, 
and remains in expectation of the issue of the affair; next, he makes those present remain still, and directs 
the (attendant) to signify, what he has heard from the demons. But the instrument that is placed beside his 
ears is a natural instrument, viz., the windpipe of long-necked cranes, or storks, or swans. And if none of 
these is at hand, there are also some different artificial instruments (employed); for certain pipes of brass, 
ten in number, (and) fitting into one another, terminating in a narrow point, are adapted (for the purpose), and 
through these is spoken into the ear whatsoever the (magician) wishes. And the youth hearing these (words) 
with terror as uttered by demons, when ordered, speaks them out. If any one, however, putting around a stick 
a moist hide, and having dried it and drawn it together, close it up, and by removing the rod fashion the hide 
into the form of a pipe, he attains a similar end. Should any of these, however, be not at hand, he takes a 
book, and, opening it inside, stretches it out as far as he think requisite, (and thus) achieves the same result. 
But if he knows beforehand that one is present who is about to ask a question, he is the more ready for all 
(contingencies). If, however, he may also previously ascertain the question, he writes (it) with the drug, and, 
as being prepared, he is considered(l) more skilful, on account of having clearly written out what is (about) 
being asked. If, however, he is ignorant of the question, he forms conjectures, and puts forth something 
capable of a doubtful and varied interpretation, in order that the oracular response, being originally 
unintelligible, may serve for numerous purposes, and in the issue of events the prediction may be 
considered correspondent with what actually occurs. Next, having filled a vessel with water, he puts down 
(into it) the paper, as if uninscribed, at the same time infusing along with it copperas mixture. For in this way 
the paper written upon floats(2) upwards (to the surface), bearing the response. Accordingly there ensue 
frequently to the attendant formidable fancies for also he strikes blows plentifully on the terrified 
(bystanders). For, casting incense into the fire, he again operates after the following method. Covering a 
lump of what are called "fossil salts" with Etruscan wax, and dividing the piece itself of incense into two parts, 
he throws in a grain of salt; and again joining (the piece) together, and placing it on the burning coals, he 
leaves it there. And when this is consumed, the salts, bounding upwards, create the impression of, as it 
were, a strange vision taking place. And the dark-blue dye which has been deposited in the incense 
produces a blood-red flame, as we have already declared. But (the sorcerer) makes a scarlet liquid, by 
mixing wax with alkanet, and, as I said, depositing the wax in the incense. And he makes the coals(3) be 
moved, placing underneath powdered alum; and when this is dissolved and swells up like bubbles, the 
coals are moved. 

CHAP. XXIX.-DISPLAY OF DIFFERENT EGGS. 

But different eggs they display after this manner. Perforating the top at both ends, and extracting the white, 
(and) having again dipped it, throw in some minium and some writing ink. Close, however, the openings with 
refined scrapings of the eggs, smearing them with fig-juice. 

CHAP. XXX. --SELF-SLAUGHTER OF SHEEP. 

By those who cause sheep to cut off their own heads, the following plan is adopted. Secretly smearing the 
throat (of the animal) with a cauterizing drug, he places a sword near, and leaves it there. (4) The sheep, 
desirous of scratching himself, rushes against the blade, and in the act of rubbing is slaughtered, while the 
head is almost severed from the trunk. There is, however, a compound of the drug, bryony and salt and 
squills, made up in equal parts. In order that the person bringing the drug may escape notice, he carries a 
box with two compartments constructed of horn, the visible one of which contains frankincense, but the 
secret one (the aforesaid) drug. He, however, likewise insinuates into the ears of the sheep about to meet 
death quicksilver; but this is a poisonous drug. 

CHAP. XXXI. -METHOD OF POISONING GOATS. 

And if one smear(5) the ears of goats over with cerate, they say that they expire a little afterwards, by having 
their breathing obstructed. For this to them is the way-as these affirm-of their drawing their breath in an act 
of respiration. And a ram, they assert, dies, (6) if one bends back (its neck)(7) opposite the sun. And they 
accomplish the burning of a house, by daubing it over with the juice of a certain fish called dactylus. And this 
effect, which it has by reason of the sea-water, is very useful. Likewise foam of the ocean is boiled in an 
earthen jar along with some sweet ingredients; and if you apply a lighted candle to this while in a seething 
state, it catches the fire and is consumed; and (yet though the mixture) be poured upon the head, it does not 
bum it at all. If, however, you also smear it over with heated resin, (8) it is consumed far more effectually. But 
he accomplishes his object better still, if also he takes some sulphur. 

CHAP. XXXII. -IMITATIONS OF THUNDER, AND OTHER ILLUSIONS. 

Thunder is produced in many ways; for stones very numerous and unusually large, being rolled downwards 
along wooden planks, fall upon plates of brass, and cause a sound similar to thunder. And also around the 
thin plank with which carders thicken cloth, they coil a thin rope; and then drawing away the cord with a whiff, 
they spin the plank round, and in its revolution it emits a sound like thunder. These farces, verily, are played 
off thus. 

There are, however, other practices which I shall explain, which those who execute these ludicrous 
performances estimate as great exploits. Placing a cauldron full of pitch upon burning coals, when it boils 
up, (though) laying their hands down upon it, they are not burned; nay, even while walking on coals of fire 
with naked feet, they are not scorched. But also setting a pyramid of stone on a hearth, (the sorcerer) makes 
it get on fire, and from the mouth it disgorges a volume of smoke, and that of a fiery description. Then also 
putting a linen cloth upon a pot of water, throwing on (at the same time) a quantity of blazing coals, (the 
magician) keeps the linen cloth unconsumed. Creating also darkness in the house, (the sorcerer) alleges 
that he can introduce gods or demons; and if any requires him to show AEsculapius, he uses an invocation 
couched in the following words:- 

"The child once slain, again of Phoebus deathless made 

I call to come, and aid my sacrificial rites; 

Who, also, once the countless tribes of fleeting dead. 

In ever-mournful homes of Tartarus wide. 

The fatal billow breasting, and the inky(1) flood 

Surmounting, where all of mortal mould must float. 

Torn, beside the lake, with endless(2) grief and woe. 

Thyself didst snatch from gloomy Proserpine. 

Or whether the seat of Holy Thrace thou haunt, or lovely 

Pergamos, or besides Ionian Epidaurus, 

The chief of seers, O happy God, invites thee here." 

CHAP. XXXIII.-THE BURNING AESCULAPIUS; TRICKS WITH FIRE. 

But after he discontinues uttering these jests, a fiery AEsculapius(3) appears upon the floor. Then, placing in 
the midst a pot full of water, he invokes all the deifles, and they are present. For any one who is by, glancing 
into the pot, will behold them all, and Diana leading on her baying hounds. We shall not, however, shrink 
from narraflng the account (of the devices) of these men, how they attempt (to accomplish their jugglery). For 
(the magician) lays his hand upon the cauldron of pitch, (4) which is in, as it were, a boiling state; and throwing 
in (at the same flme) vinegar and nitre and moist pitch, he kindles a fire beneath the cauldron. The vinegar, 
however, being mixed along with the nitre, on receiving a small accession of heat, moves the pitch, so as to 
cause bubbles to rise to the surface, and afford the mere semblance of a seething (pot). The (sorcerer), 
however, previously washes his hands frequently in brine; the consequence being, that the contents of the 
cauldron do not in any wise, though in reality boiling, burn him very much. But if, having smeared his hands 
with a flncture of myrtle(5) and nitre and myrrh, along with vinegar, he wash them in brine frequently, he is not 
scorched: and he does not burn his feet, provided he smear them with isinglass and a salamander. 
As regards, however, the burning like a taper of the pyramid, though composed of stone, the cause of this is 
the following. Chalky earth is fashioned into the shape of a pyramid, but its colour is that of a milk-white 
stone, and it is prepared after this fashion. Having anointed the piece of clay with plenty of oil, and put it 
upon coals, and baked it, by smearing it afresh, and scorching it a second and third time, and frequently, 
(the sorcerer) contrives that it can be burned, even though he should plunge it in water; for it contains in itself 
abundance of oil. The hearth, however, is spontaneously kindled, while the magician pours out(6) a libation. 

by having time instead of asiies burning underneatii, and refined franl<incense and a large quantity of tow, (7) 
and a bundle(8) of anointed tapers and of gall nuts, hollow within, and supplied with (concealed) fire. And 
after some delay, (the sorcerer) makes (the pyramid) emit smoke from the mouth, by both putting fire in the 
gall nut, and encircling it with tow, and blowing into the mouth. The linen cloth, however, that has been placed 
round the cauldron, (and) on which he deposits the coals, on account of the underlying brine, would not be 
burned; besides, that it has itself been washed in brine, and then smeared with the white of an egg, along 
with moist alum. And if, likewise, one mix in these the juice of house-leek along with vinegar, and for a long 
time previously smear it (with this preparation), after being washed in this drug, it continues altogether 
fire-proof. 

CHAP.XXXIV.-THE ILLUSION OF THE SEALED LETTERS;OBJECT IN DETAILING THESE 
JUGGLERIES. 

After, then, (9) we have succinctly explained the powers of the secret arts practised among these 
(magicians), and have shown their easy plan for the acquisition of knowledge, (10) neither are we disposed 
to be silent on the following point, which is a necessary one, -how that, loosing the seals, they restore the 
sealed letters, with the actual seals themselves. Melting pitch, resin, and sulphur, and moreover asphalt, in 
equal parts, (and) forming the ointment into a figure, they keep it by them. When, however, it is time to loose 
a small tablet, smearing with oil their tongue, next with the latter anointing the seal, (and) heating the drug with 
a moderate fire, (the sorcerers) place it upon the seal; and they leave it there until it has acquired complete 
consistence, and they use it in this condition as a seal. But they say, likewise, that wax itself with fir-wood 
gum possesses a similar potency, as well as two parts of mastich with one part of dry asphalt. But sulphur 
also by itself effects the purpose tolerably well, and flower of gypsum strained with water, and of gum. Now 
this (last mixture) certainly answers most admirably also for sealing molten lead. And that which is 
accomplished by the Tuscan wax, and refuse(1) of resin, and pitch, and asphalt, and mastich, and 
powdered spar, all being boiled together in equal parts, is superior to the rest of the drugs which I have 
mentioned, while that which is effected by the gum is not inferior. In this manner, then, also, they attempt to 
loose the seals, endeavouring to learn the letters written within. 

These contrivances, however, I hesitated to narrate(2) in this book, perceiving the danger lest, perchance, 
any knavish person, taking Occasion (from my account), should attempt (to practise these juggleries). 
Solicitude, however, for many young persons, who could be preserved from such practices, has persuaded 
me to teach and publish, for security's sake, (the foregoing statements). For although one person may make 
use of these for gaining instruction in evil, in this way somebody else will, by being instructed (in these 
practices), be preserved from them. And the magicians themselves, corrupters of life, will be ashamed in 
plying their art. And learning these points that have been previously elucidated(3) by us, they will possibly 
be restrained from their folly. But that this seal may not be broken, let me seal it with hog's lard and hair 
mixed with wax. (4) 

CHAP. XXXV. -THE DIVINATION BY A CAULDRON; ILLUSION OF FIERY DEMONS; 
SPECIMEN OF A MAGICAL INVOCATION. 

But neither shall I be silent respecting that piece of knavery of these (sorcerers), which consists in the 
divination by means of the cauldron. For, making a closed chamber, and anointing the ceiling with cyanus 
for present use, (5) they introduce certain vessels of cyanus, (6) and stretch them upwards. The cauldron, 
however, full of water, is placed in the middle on the ground; and the reflection of the cyanus falling upon it, 
presents the appearance of heaven. But the floor also has a certain concealed aperture, on which the 
cauldron is laid, having been (previously, supplied with a bottom of crystal, while itself is composed of 
stone. (7) Underneath, however, unnoticed (by the spectators), is a compartment, into which the 
accomplices, assembling, appear invested with the figures of such gods and demons as the magician 
wishes to exhibit. Now the dupe, beholding these, becomes astonished at the knavery of the magician, and 
subsequently believes all things that are likely to be stated by him. But (the sorcerer) produces a burning 
demon, by tracing on the wall whatever figure he wishes, and then covertly smearing it with a drug mixed 
according to this manner, viz., of Laconian(8) and Zacynthian asphalt,-while next, as if under the influence of 
prophetic frenzy, he moves the lamp towards the wall. The drug, however, is burned with considerable 
splendour. And that a fiery Hecate seems to career through air, he contrives in the mode following. 
Concealing a certain accomplice in a place which he wishes, (and) taking aside his dupes, he persuades 
them (to believe himself), alleging that he will exhibit a flaming demon riding through the air. Now he exhorts 
them immediately to keep their eyes fixed until they see the flame in the air, and that (then), veiling 
themselves, they should fall on their face until he himself should call them; and after having given them these 
instructions, he, on a moonless night, in verses speaks thus:- 

"Infernal, and earthy, and supernal Bombo, come! 
Saint of streets, and brilliant one, that strays by night; 
Foe of radiance, but friend and mate of gloom; 
In howl of dogs rejoicing, and in crimson gore. 
Wading 'mid corpses through tombs of lifeless dust. 
Panting for blood; with fear convulsing men. 
Gorge, and Mormo, and Luna, (9) and of many shapes. 
Come, propitious, to our sacrificial rites!" 

CHAP. XXXVI. -MODE OF MANAGING AN APPARITION. 

And while speaking these words, fire is seen borne through the air; but the (spectators) being horrified at the 
strange apparition, (and) covering their eyes, fling themselves speechless to earth. But the success of the 
artifice is enhanced by the following contrivance. The accomplice whom I have spoken of as being 
concealed, when he hears the incantation ceasing, holding a kite or hawk enveloped with tow, sets fire to it 
and releases it. The bird, however, frightened by the flame, is borne aloft, and makes a (proportionably) 
quicker flight, which these deluded persons beholding, conceal themselves, as if they had seen something 
divine. The winged creature, however, being whirted round by the fire, is borne whithersoever chance may 
have it, and burns now the houses, and now the courtyards. Such is the divination of the sorcerers. 

CHAP. XXXVII. -ILLUSIVE APPEARANCE OF THE MOON. 

And they make moon and stars appear on the ceiling after this manner. In the central part of the ceiling, 
having fastened a mirror, placing a dish full of water equally (with the mirror) in the central portion of the floor, 
and setting in a central place likewise a candle, emitting a faint light from a higher position than the dish,-in 
this way, by reflection, (the magician) causes the moon to appear by the mirror. But frequently, also, they 
suspend on high from the ceiling, at a distance, a drum,(1) but which, being covered with some garment, is 
concealed by the accomplice, in order that (the heavenly body) may not appear before the (proper) time. 
And afterwards placing a candle (within the drum), when the magician gives the signal to the accomplice, he 
removes so much of the covering as may be sufficient for effecting an imitation representing the figure of the 
moon as it is at that particular time. He smears, however, the luminous parts of the drum with cinnabar and 
gum;(2) and having pared around the neck and bottom of a flagon(3) of glass ready behind, he puts a 
candle in it, and places around it some of the requisite contrivances for making the figures shine, which 
some one of the accomplices has concealed on high; and on receiving the signal, he throws down from 
above the contrivances, so to make the moon appear descending from the sky. 

And the same result is achieved by means of a jar in sylvan localities. (4) For it is by means of a jar that the 
tricks in a house are performed. For having set up an altar, subsequently is (placed upon it) the jar, having a 
lighted lamp; when, however, there are a greater number of lamps, no such sight is displayed. After then the 
enchanter invokes the moon, he orders all the lights to be extinguished, yet that one be left faintly burning; 
and then the light, that which streams from the jar, is reflected on the ceiling, and furnishes to those present a 
representation of the moon; the mouth of the jar being kept covered for the time which it would seem to 
require, in order that the representation of full moon should be exhibited on the ceiling. 

CHAP. XXXVIII. -ILLUSIVE APPEARANCE OF THE STARS. 

But the scales of fishes-for instance, the seahorse-cause the stars to appear to be; the scales being 
steeped in a mixture of water and gum, and fastened on the ceiling at intervals. 

CHAP. XXXIX.-IMITATION OF AN EARTHQUAKE. 

The sensation of an earthquake they cause in such a way, as that all things seem set in motion; ordure of a 
weasel burned with a magnet upon coals (has this effect). (5) 

CHAP. XL.-TRICK WITH THE LIVER. 

And they exhibit a liver seemingly bearing an inscription in this manner. With the left hand he writes what he 
wishes, appending it to the question, and the letters are traced with gall juice and strong vinegar. Then 
taking up the liver, retaining it in the left hand, he makes some delay, and then it draws away the impression, 
and it is supposed to have, as it were, writing upon it. 

CHAP. XL!. -MAKING A SKULL SPEAK. 

But putting a skull on the ground, they make it speak in this manner. The skull itself is made out of the caul of 
an ox;(6) and when fashioned into the requisite figure, by means of Etruscan wax and prepared gum, (7) 
(and) when this membrane is placed around, it presents the appearance of a skull, which seems to all(8) to 
speak when the contrivance operates; in the same manner as we have explained in the case of the 
(attendant) youths, when, having procured the windpipe of a crane, (9) or some such long-necked animal, 
and attaching it covertly to the skull, the accomplice utters what he wishes. And when he desires (the skull) to 
become invisible, he appears as if burning incense, placing around, (for this purpose,) a quantity of coals; 
and when the wax catches the heat of these, it melts, and in this way the skull is supposed to become 
invisible. 

CHAP. XLII.-THE FRAUD OF THE FOREGOING PRACTICES; THEIR CONNECTION WITH 
HERESY. 

These are the deeds of the magicians, (1) and innumerable other such (tricks) there are which work on the 
credulity of the dupes, by fair balanced words, and the appearance of plausible acts. And the heresiarchs, 
astonished at the art of these (sorcerers), have imitated them, partly by delivering their doctrines in secrecy 
and darkness, and partly by advancing (these tenets) as their own. For this reason, being desirous of 
warning the multitude, we have been the more painstaking, in order not to omit any expedient(2) practised 
by the magicians, for those who may be disposed to be deceived. We have been however drawn, not 
unreasonably, into a detail of some of the secret (mysteries) of the sorcerers, which are not very requisite, to 
be sure, in reference to the subject taken in hand; yet, for the purpose of guarding against the villanous and 
incoherent art of magicians, may be supposed useful. Since, therefore, as far as delineation is feasible, we 
have explained the opinions of all (speculators), exerting especial attention towards the elucidation of the 
opinions introduced as novelties by the heresiarchs; (opinions) which, as far as piety is concerned, are futile 
and spurious, and which are not, even among themselves, perhaps(3) deemed worthy of serious 
consideration. (Having pursued this course of inquiry), it seems expedient that, by means of a compendious 
discourse, we should recall to the (reader's) memory statements that have been previously made. 

CHAP. XLIII. -RECAPITULATION OF THEOLOGIES AND COSMOGONIES; SYSTEM OF THE 
PERSIANS; OF THE BABYLONIANS; THE EGYPTIAN NOTION OF DEITY; THEIR 
THEOLOGY BASED ON A THEORY OF NUMBERS; THEIR SYSTEM OF COSMOGONY. 

Among all those who throughout the earth, as philosophers and theologians, have carried on investigations, 
has prevailed diversity of opinion(4) concerning the Deity, as to His essence or nature. For some affirm Him 
to be fire, and some spirit, and some water, while others say that He is earth. And each of the elements 
labours under some deficiency, and one is worsted by the other. To the wise men of the world, this, 
however, has occurred, which is obvious to persons possessing intelligence; (I mean) that, beholding the 
stupendous works of creation, they were confused respecting the substance of existing things, supposing 
that these were too vast to admit of deriving generation from another, and at the same time (asserting) that 
neither the universe itself is God. As far as theology was concerned, they declared, however, a single 
cause for things that fall under the cognizance of vision, each supposing the cause which he adjudged the 
most reasonable; and so, when gazing on the objects made by God, and on those which are the most 
insignificant in comparison with His overpowering majesty, not, however, being able to extend the mind to 
the magnitude of God as He really is, they deified these (works of the external world). 
But the Persians, (5) supposing that they had penetrated more within the confines of the truth, asserted that 
the Deity is luminous, a light contained in air. The Babylonians, however, affirmed that the Deity is dark, 
which very opinion also appears the consequence of the other; for day follows night, and night day. Do not 
the Egyptians, however,(6) who suppose themselves more ancient than all, speak of the power of the Deity? 
(This power they estimate by) calculating these intervals of the parts (of the zodiac; and, as if) by a most 
divine inspiration, (7) they asserted that the Deity is an indivisible monad, both itself generating itself, and 
that out of this were formed all things. For this, say they, (8) being unbegotten, produces the succeeding 
numbers; for instance, the monad, superadded into itself, generates the duad; and in like manner, when 
superadded (into duad, triad, and so forth), produces the triad and tetrad, up to the decade, which is the 
beginning and end of numbers. Wherefore it is that the first and tenth monad is generated, on account of the 
decade being equipollent, and being reckoned for a monad, and (because) this multiplied ten times will 
become a hundred, and again becomes a monad, and the hundred multiplied ten times will produce a 
thousand, and this will be a monad. In this manner also the thousand multiplied ten times make up the full 

sum of a myriad; in lil<e manner will it be a monad. But by a comparison of indivisible quantities, the kindred 
numbers of the monad comprehend 3, 5, 7, 9.(1) 

There is also, however, a more natural relation of a different number to the monad, according to the 
arrangement of the orbit of six days' duration, (2) (that is), of the duad, according to the position and division 
of even numbers. But the kindred number is 4 and 8. These, however, taking from the monad of the 
numbers(3) an idea of virtue, progressed up to the four elements; (I allude), of course, to spirit, and fire, and 
water, and earth. And out of these having made the world, (God) framed it an ermaphrodite, and allocated 
two elements for the upper hemisphere, namely spirit and fire; and this is styled the hemisphere of the 
monad, (a hemisphere) beneficent, and ascending, and masculine. For, being composed of small particles, 
the monad soars into the most rarified and purest part of the atmosphere; and the other two elements, earth 
and water, being more gross, he assigned to the duad; and this is termed the descending hemisphere, both 
feminine and mischievous. And likewise, again, the upper elements themselves, when compared one with 
another, comprise in one another both male and female for fruitfulness and increase of the whole creation. 
And the fire is masculine, and the spirit feminine. And again the water is masculine, and the earth feminine. 
And so from the beginning fire consorted with spirit, and water with earth. For as the power of spirit is fire, so 
also that of earth is water;(4) ... and the elements themselves, when computed and resolved by subtraction 
of enneads, terminate properly, some of them in the masculine number, and others of them in the feminine. 
And, again, the ennead is subtracted for this cause, because the three hundred and sixty parts of the entire 
(circle) consist of enneads, and for this reason the four regions of the world are circumscribed by ninety 
perfect parts. And light has been appropriated to the monad, and darkness to the duad, and life to light, 
according to nature, and death to the duad. And to life (has been appropriated) justice; and to death, 
injustice. Wherefore everything generated among masculine numbers is beneficent, while that (produced) 
among feminine (numbers) is mischievous. For instance, they pursue their calculations thus: monad-that we 
may commence from this-becomes 361 , which (numbers) terminate in a monad by the subtraction of the 
ennead. In like manner, reckon thus: Duad becomes 605; take away the enneads, it ends in a duad, and 
each reverts into its own peculiar (function). 

CHAP. XLIV. --EGYPTIAN THEORY OF NATURE; THEIR AMULETS. 

For the monad, therefore, as being beneficent, they assert that there are consequently(5) names ascending, 
and beneficent, and masculine, and carefully observed, terminating in an uneven number;(6) whereas that 
those terminating in the even number have been supposed to be both descending, and feminine and 
malicious. For they affirm that nature is made up of contraries, namely bad and good, as right and left, light 
and darkness, night and day, life and death. And moreover they make this assertion, that they have 
calculated the word "Deity," (and found that it reverts into a pentad with an ennead subtracted). Now this 
name is an even number, and when it is written down (on some material) they attach it to the body, and 
accomplish cures(7) by it. In this manner, likewise, a certain herb, terminating in this number, being similarly 
fastened around (the frame), operates by reason of a similar calculation of the number. Nay, even a doctor 
cures sickly people by a similar calculation. If, however, the calculation is contrary, it does not heal with 
facility. (8) Persons attending to these numbers reckon as many as are homogeneous according to this 
principle; some, however, according to vowels alone; whereas others according to the entire number. Such 
also is the wisdom of the Egyptians, by which, as they boast, they suppose that they cognise the divine 
nature. 

CHAP. XLV.~USE OF THE FOREGOING DISCUSSIONS, 

It appears, then, that these speculations also have been sufficiently explained by us. But since I think that I 
have omitted no opinion found in this earthly and grovelling Wisdom, I perceive that the solicitude 
expended by us on these subjects has not been useless. For we observe that our discourse has been 
serviceable not only for a refutation of heresies, but also in reference to those who entertain these opinions. 
Now these, when they encounter the extreme care evinced by us, will even be struck with admiration of our 
earnestness, and will not despise our industry and condemn Christians as fools when they discern the 
opinions to which they themselves have stupidly accorded their belief. And furthermore, those who, 
desirous of learning, addict themselves to the truth, will be assisted by our discourse to become, when they 
have learned the fundamental principles of the heresies, more intelligent not only for the easy refutation of 
those who have attempted to deceive them, but that also, when they have ascertained the avowed opinions 
of the wise men, and have been made acquainted with them, that they shall neither be confused by them as 
ignorant persons would, nor become the dupes of certain individuals acting as if from some authority; nay, 
more than this, they shall be on their guard against those that are allowing themselves to become victims to 
these delusions. 

CHAP. XLVI.-THE ASTROTHEOSOPHISTS; ARATUS IMITATED BY THE HERESIARCHS; 
HIS SYSTEM OF THE DISPOSITION OF THE STARS. 

Having sufficiently explained these opinions, let us next pass on to a consideration of the subject taken in 
hand, in order that, by proving what we have determined concerning heresies, and by compelling their 
(champions) to return to these several (speculators) their peculiar tenets, we may show the heresiarchs 
destitute (of a system); and by proclaiming the folly of those who are persuaded (by these heterodox 
tenets), we shall prevail on them to retrace their course to the serene haven of the truth. In order, however, 
that the statements about to follow may seem more clear to the readers, it is expedient also to declare the 
opinions advanced by Aratus concerning the disposition of the stars of the heavens. (And this is 
necessary), inasmuch as some persons, assimilating these (doctrines) to those declared by the Scriptures, 
convert (the holy writings) into allegories, and endeavour to seduce the mind of those who give heed to their 
(tenets), drawing them on by plausible words into the admission of whatever opinions they wish, (and) 
exhibiting a strange marvel, as if the assertions made by them were fixed among the stars. They, however, 
gazing intently on the very extraordinary wonder, admirers as they are of trifles, are fascinated like a bird 
called the owl, which example it is proper to mention, on account of the statements that are about to follow. 
The animal (I speak of) is, however, not very different from an eagle, either in size or figure, and it is captured 
in the following way:-The hunter of these birds, when he sees a flock of them lighting anywhere, shaking his 
hands, at a distance pretends to dance, and so by little and little draws near the birds. But they, struck with 
amazement at the strange sight, are rendered unobservant of everything passing around them. But others of 
the party, who have come into the country equipped for such a purpose, coming from behind upon the birds, 
easily lay hold on them as they are gazing on the dancer. 

Wherefore I desire that no one, astonished by similar wonders of those who interpret the (aspect of) heaven, 
should, like the owl, be taken captive. For the knavery practised by such speculators may be considered 
dancing and silliness, but not truth. Aratus, (1) therefore, expresses himself thus:- 

"Just as many are they; hither and thither they roll 

Day by day o'er heav'n, endless, ever, (that is, every star). 

Yet this declines not even little; but thus exactly 

E'er remains with axis fixed and poised in every part 

Holds earth midway, and heaven itself around conducts." 

CHAP. XLVII. -OPINIONS OF THE HERETICS BORROWED FROM ARATUS. 

Aratus says that there are in the sky revolving, that is, gyrating stars, because from east to west, and west to 
east, they journey perpetually, (and) in an orbicular figure. And he says that there revolves towards(2) "The 
Bears" themselves, like some stream of a river, an enormous and prodigious monster, (the) Serpent; and 
that this is what the devil says in the book of Job to the Deity, when (Satan) uses these words: "I have 
traversed earth under heaven, and have gone around (it), "(3) that is, that I have been turned around, and 
thereby have been able to survey the worlds. For they suppose that towards the North Pole is situated the 
Dragon, the Serpent, from the highest pole looking upon all (the objects), and gazing on all the works of 
creation, in order that nothing of the things that are being made may escape his notice. For though all the 
stars in the firmament set, the pole of this (luminary) alone never sets, but, careering high above the horizon, 
surveys and beholds all things, and none of the works of creation, he says, can escape his notice. 
"Where chiefly 
Settings mingle and risings one with other."(4) 

(Here Aratus) says that the head of this (constellation) is placed. For towards the west and east of the two 
hemispheres is situated the head of the Dragon, in order, he says, that nothing may escape his notice 
throughout the same quartet, either of objects in the west or those in the east, but that the Beast may know all 
things at the same time. And near the head itself of the Dragon is the appearance of a man, conspicuous by 
means of the stars, which Aratus styles a wearied image, and like one oppressed with labour, and he is 
denominated "Engonasis." Aratus(1) then affirms that he does not know what this toil is, and what this 
prodigy is that revolves in heaven. The heretics, however, wishing by means of this account of the stars to 
establish their own doctrines, (and) with more than ordinary earnestness devoting their attention to these 
(astronomic systems), assert that Engonasis is Adam, according to the commandment of God as Moses 
declared, guarding the head of the Dragon, and the Dragon (guarding) his heel. For so Aratus expresses 
himself:- 

"The right-foot's track of the Dragon fierce possessing." (2) 

CHAP. XLVIII. -INVENTION OF THE LYRE; ALLEGORIZING THE APPEARANCE AND 
POSITION OF THE STARS; ORIGIN OF THE PHOENICIANS; THE LOGOS IDENTIFIED BY 
ARATUS WITH THE CONSTELLATION CANIS; INFLUENCE OF CANIS ON FERTILITY AND 
LIFE GENERALLY. 

And (Aratus) says that (the constellations) Lyra and Corona have been placed on both sides near him, -now 
I mean Engonasis,-but that he bends the knee, and stretches forth both hands, as if making a confession of 
sin. And that the lyre is a musical instrument fashioned by Logos while still altogether an infant, and that 
Logos is the same as he who is denominated Mercury among the Greeks. And Aratus, with regard to the 
construction of the lyre, observes:- 

"Then, further, also near the cradle, (3) 

Hermes pierced it through, and said. Call it Lyre. "(4) 

It consists of seven strings, signifying by these seven strings the entire harmony and construction of the 
world as it is melodiously constituted. For in six days the world was made, and (the Creator) rested on the 
seventh. If, then, says (Aratus), Adam, acknowledging (his guilt) and guarding the head of the Beast, 
according to the commandment of the Deity, will imitate Lyra, that is, obey the Logos of God, that is, submit 
to the law, he will receive Corona that is situated near him. If, however, he neglect his duty, he shall be hurled 
downwards in company with the Beast that lies underneath, and shall have, he says, his portion with the 
Beast. And Engonasis seems on both sides to extend his hands, and on one to touch Lyra, and on the other 
Corona-and this is his confession ;-so that it is possible to distinguish him by means of this (sidereal) 
configuration itself. But Corona nevertheless is plotted against, and forcibly drawn away by another beast, a 
smaller Dragon, which is the offspring of him who is guarded by the foot(5) of Engonasis. A man also stands 
firmly grasping with both hands, and dragging towards the space behind the Serpent from Corona; and he 
does not permit the Beast to touch Corona, though making a violent effort to do so. And Aratus styles him 
Anguitenens, because he restrains the impetuosity of the Serpent in his attempt to reach Corona. But Logos, 
he says, is he who, in the figure of a man, hinders the Beast from reaching Corona, commiserating him who 
is being plotted against by the Dragon and his offspring simultaneously. 

These (constellations), "The Bears," however, he says, are two hebdomads, composed of seven stars, 
images of two creations. For the first creation, he affirms, is that according to Adam in labours, this is he who 
is seen "on his knees" (Engonasis). The second creation, however, is that according to Christ, by which we 
are regenerated; and this is Anguitenens, who struggles against the Beast, and hinders him from reaching 
Corona, which is reserved for the man. But "The Great Bear" is, he says, Helice,(6) symbol of a mighty world 
towards which the Greeks steer their course, that is, for which they are being disciplined. And, wafted by the 
waves of life, they follow onwards, (having in prospect) some such revolving world or discipline or wisdom 
which conducts those back that follow in pursuit of such a world. For the term Helice seems to signify a 
certain circling and revolution towards the same points. There is likewise a certain other "Small Bear" 
(Cynosuris), as it were some image of the second creation-that formed according to God. For few, he says, 
there are that journey by the narrow path. (7) But they assert that Cynosuris is narrow, towards which Aratus(8) 
says that the Sidonians navigate. But Aratus has spoken partly of the Sidonians, (but means) the 
Phoenicians, on account of the existence of the admirable wisdom of the Phoenicians. The Greeks, 
however, assert that they are Phoenicians, who have migrated from (the shores of) the Red Sea into this 
country where they even at present dwell, for this is the opinion of Herodotus. (1) Now Cynosura, he says, is 
this (lesser) Bear, the second creation; the one of limited dimensions, the narrow way, and not Helice. For he 
does not lead them back, but guides forward by a straight path, those that follow him being (the tail) of Canis. 
For Canis is the Logos, (2) partly guarding and preserving the flock, that is plotted against by the wolves; and 
partly like a dog, hunflng the beasts from the creaflon, and destroying them; and partly producing all things, 
and being what they express by the name "Cyon" (Canis), that is, generator. Hence it is said, Aratus has 
spoken of the rising of Canis, expressing himself thus: "When, however, Canis has risen, no longer do the 
crops miss." This is what he says: Plants that have been put into the earth up to the period of Canis' rising, 
frequently, though not having struck root, are yet covered with a profusion of leaves, and afford indicaflons to 
spectators that they will be productive, and that they appear full of life, (though in reality) not having vitality in 
themselves from the root. But when the rising of Canis takes place, the living are separated from the dead 
by Canis; for whatsoever plants have not taken root, really undergo putrefaction. This Canis, therefore, he 
says, as being a certain divine Logos, has been appointed judge of quick and dead. And as (the influence 
of) Canis is observable in the vegetable productions of this world, so in plants of celesflal growth-in men-is 
beheld the (power of the) Logos. From some such cause, then, Cynosura, the second creation, is set in the 

firmament as an image of a creation by tiie Logos. Tiie Dragon, iiowever, in tiie centre reclines between tlie 
two creations, preventing a transition of wiiatever tilings are from the great creation to tiie small creation; and 
in guarding those that are fixed in the (great) creation, as for instance Engonasis, observing (at the same 
time) how and in what manner each is constituted in the small creation. And (the Dragon) himself is watched 
at the head, he says, by Anguitenens. This image, he affirms, is fixed in heaven, being a certain wisdom to 
those capable of discerning it. If. however, this is obscure, by means of some other image, he says the 
creation teaches (men) to philosophize, in regard to which Aratus has expressed himself thus:- 

"Neither of Cepheus lasidas are we the wretched brood. "(3) 

CHAP. XLIX. -SYMBOL OF THE CREATURE; AND OF SPIRIT; AND OF THE DIFFERENT 
ORDERS OF ANIMALS. 

But Aratus says, near this (constellation) is Cepheus, and Cassiepea, and Andromeda, and Perseus, great 
lineaments of the creation to those who are able to discern them. For he asserts that Cepheus is Adam, 
Cassiepea Eve, Andromeda the soul of both of these, Perseus the Logos, winged offspring of Jove, and 
Cetos(4) the plotting monster. Not to any of these, but to Andromeda only does he repair, who slays the 
Beast; from whom, likewise taking unto himself Andromeda, who had been delivered (and) chained to the 
Beast, the Logos-that is, Perseus-achieves, be says, her liberation. Perseus, however, is the winged axle 
that, pierces both poles through the centre of the earth, and turns the world round. The spirit also, that which 
is in the world, is (symbolized by) Cycnus, a bird-a musical animal near "The Bears"-type of the Divine 
Spirit, because that when it approaches the end itself of life, (5) it alone is fitted by nature to sing, on 
departing with good hope from the wicked creation, (and) offering up hymns unto God. But crabs, and bulls, 
and lions, and rams, and goats, and kids, and as many other beasts as have their names used for 
denominating the stars in the firmament, are, he says, images, and exemplars from which the creation, 
subject to change, obtaining (the different) species, becomes replete with animals of this description. 

CHAP. L. --FOLLY OF ASTROLOGY. 

Employing these accounts, (the heretics) think to deceive as many of these as devote themselves 
over-sedulously to the astrologers, from thence striving to construct a system of religion that is widely 
divergent from the thoughts of these (speculators). Wherefore, beloved, let us avoid the habit of admiring 
trifles, secured by which the bird (styled) the owl (is captured). For these and other such speculations are, 
(as it were), dancing, and not Truth. For neither do the stars yield these points of information; but men of their 
own accord, for the designation of certain stars, thus called them by names, in order that they might become 
to them easily distinguishable. For what similarity with a bear or lion, or kid, or waterman, or Cepheus, or 
Andromeda, or the spectres that have names given them in Hades, have the stars that are scattered over 
the firmament-for we must remember that these men, and the titles themselves, came into existence long 
after the origin of man,-(what, I say, is in common between the two), that the heretics, astonished at the 
marvel, should thus strive by means of such discourses to strengthen their own opinions? 

CHAP. LI. -THE HEBDOMADARII; SYSTEM OF THE ARITHMETICIANS; PRESSED INTO 
THE SERVICE OF HERESY; INSTANCES OF, IN SIMON AND VALENTINUS; THE NATURE 
OF THE UNIVERSE DEDUCIBLE FROM THE PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BRAIN. 

But since almost every heresy (that has sprung up) through the arithmetical art has discovered measures of 
hebdomads and certain projections of Aeons, each rending the art differently, while whatever variation 
prevailed was in the names merely; and (since) Pythagoras became the instructor of these, tint introducing 
numbers of this sort among the Greeks from Egypt, it seems expedient not to omit even this, but, after we 
have given a compendious elucidation, to approach the demonstration of those things that we propose to 
investigate. 

Arithmeticians and geometers arose, to whom especially Pythagoras first seems to have furnished 
principles. And from numbers that can continually progress ad infinitum by multiplication, and from figures, 
these derived their first principles, (1) as capable of being discerned by reason alone; for a principle of 
geometry, as one may perceive, is an indivisible point. From that point, however, by means of the art, the 
generation of endless figures from the point is discovered. For the point being drawn into length becomes a 
line, after being thus continued, having a point for its extremity. And a line flowing out into breadth begets a 
surface, and the limits of the surface are lines; but a surface flowing out into breadth becomes body. And 
when what is solid has in this manner derived existence from, altogether, the smallest point, the nature of a 
huge body is constituted; and this is what Simon expresses thus: "The little will be great, being as a point. 

and the great illimitable." Now this coincides with the geometrical doctrine of a point. 
But of the arithmetical(2) art, which by composition contains philosophy, number became a first principle, 
which is an indefinable and incomprehensible(entity), comprising in itself all the numbers that can go on ad 
infinitum by aggregation. But the first monad became a principle, according to substance, of the numbers, 
which (principle) is a male(3) monad, pro-creating paternally all the rest of the numbers. Secondly, the duad 
is a female number, which by the arithmeticians is also itself denominated even. Thirdly, the triad is a male 
number; this also it has been the usual custom of arithmeticians to style odd. In addition to all these, the 
tetrad is a female number; and this same, because it is feminine, is likewise denominated even. All the 
numbers therefore, taken generically, are four-number, however, as regards genus, is indefinite-from 
which, according to their system, is formed the perfect number-l mean the decade. For one, two, three, four, 
become ten-as has been previously proved-if the proper denomination be preserved, according to 
substance, for each of the numbers. This is the sacred quaternion, according to Pythagoras, having in itself 
roots of an endless nature, that is, all other numbers; for eleven, and twelve, and the rest, derive the principle 
of generation from the ten. Of this decade-the perfect number-there are called four parts-number, monad, 
power, cube-whose connections and mixtures take place for the generation of increase, according to 
nature completing the productive number. For when the square is multiplied into itself, it becomes a 
biquadratic; but when the square is multiplied into a cube, it becomes the product of a quadratic and cube; 
but when a cube is multiplied into a cube, it becomes the product of cube multiplied by cube. Wherefore all 
the numbers are seven; so that the generation of things produced may be from the hebdomad-which is 
number, monad, power, cube, biquadratic, product of quadratic multiplied by cube, product of cube 
multiplied by cube. 

Of this hebdomad Simon and Valentinus, having altered the names, detailed marvellous stories, from 
thence hastily adopting a system for themselves. For Simon employs his denominations thus: Mind, 
Intelligence, Name, Voice, Ratiocination, Reflection; and He who stood, stands, will stand. And Valentinus 
(enumerates them thus): Mind, Truth, Word, Life, Man, Church, and the Father, reckoned along with these, 
according to the same principles as those advanced by the cultivators of arithmetical philosophy. And 
(heresiarchs) admiring, as if unknown to the multitude, (this philosophy, and) following it, have framed 
heterodox doctrines devised by themselves. 

Some indeed, then, attempt likewise to form the hebdomads from the medical(1) (art), being astonished at 
the dissection of the brain, asserting that the substance of the universe and the power of procreation and the 
Godhead could be ascertained from the arrangement of the brain. For the brain, being the dominant portion 
of the entire body, reposes calm and unmoved, containing within itself the spirit. Such an account, then, is not 
incredible, but widely differs from the conclusions which these (heretics) attempt to deduce from it. For the 
brain, on being dissected, has within it what may be called a vaulted chamber. And on either side of this are 
thin membranes, which they term little wings. Now these are gently moved by the spirit, and in turn propel 
towards the cerebellum the spirit, which, careering through a certain blood-vessel like a reed, advances 
towards the pineal gland. And near this is situated the entrance of the cerebellum, which admits the current 
of spirit, and distributes it into what is styled the spinal marrow. But from them the whole frame participates in 
the spiritual energy, inasmuch as all the arteries, like a branch, are fastened on from this blood-vessel, the 
extremity of which terminates in the genital blood-vessels, whence all the (animal) seeds proceeding from 
the brain through the loin are secreted (in the seminal glands). The form, however, of the brain is like the 
head of a serpent, respecting which a lengthened discussion is maintained by the professors of knowledge, 
falsely so named, as we shall prove. Six other coupling ligaments grow out of the brain, which, traversing 
round the head, and having their termination in (the head) itself, hold bodies together; but the seventh 
(ligament) proceeds from the cerebellum to the lower parts of the rest of the frame, as we have declared. 
And respecting this there is an enlarged discussion, whence both Simon and Valentinus will be found both 
to have derived from this source starting-points for their opinions, and, though they may not acknowledge it, 
to be in the first instance liars, then heretics. Since, then, it appears that we have sufficiently explained these 
tenets likewise, and that all the reputed opinions of this earthly philosophy have been comprised in four 
books; it seems expedient to proceed to a consideration of the disciples of these men, nay rather, those 
who have furtively appropriated their doctrines. (2) 

NOTE. 

[On p. 43 supra I omitted to direct attention to the desirable enlargement of note 3 by a reference to Homer's 
Hymn of Mercury and its minute description of the invention of the Lyre. The passage is given in Henry 
Nelson Coleridge's Introduction, etc., p. 202. The versified translation of Shelley is inimitable; in ottava rima, 
but instinct with the ethos of the original.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

BOOKV. 

CONTENTS. 

The following are the contents of the fifth book of the Refutation of all Heresies:(1)- 

What the assertions are of the Naasseni, who style themselves Gnostics, and that they advance those 

opinions which the Philosophers of the Greeks previously propounded, as well as those who have handed 

down mystical (rites), from (both of) whom the Naasseni taking occasion, have constructed their heresies. 

And what are the tenets of the Perstae, and that their system is not framed by them out of the holy Scriptures, 

but from astrological art. 

What is the doctrine of the Sethians,(2) and that, purloining(3) their theories from the wise men among the 

Greeks, they have patched together their own system out of shreds of opinion taken from Musaeus, and 

Linus, and Orpheus. 

What are the tenets of Justinus, and that his system is framed By him, not out of the holy Scriptures, but from 

the detail of marvels furnished by Herodotus the historian. 

CHAP. I.- RECAPITULATION; CHARACTERISTICS OF HERESY; ORIGIN OF THE NAME 
NAASSENI; THE SYSTEM OF THE NAASSENI. 

I think that in the four preceding books I have very elaborately explained the opinions propounded by all the 
speculators among both Greeks and Barbarians, respecting the Divine Nature and the creation of the world; 
and not even have I omitted(4) the consideration of their systems of magic. So that I have for my readers 
undergone no ordinary amount of toil, in my anxiety to urge many forward into a desire of learning, and into 
stedfastness of knowledge in regard of the truth. It remains, therefore, to hasten on to the refutation of the 
heresies; but it is for the purpose of furnishing this (refutation) that we have put forward the statements 
already made by us. For from philosophers the heresiarchs deriving(5) starting-points, (and) like cobblers 
patching together, according to their own particular interpretation, the blunders of the ancients, have 
advanced them as novelties to those that are capable of being deceived, as we shall prove in the following 
books. In the remainder (of our work), the opportunity invites us to approach the treatment of our proposed 
subjects, and to begin from those who have presumed to celebrate a serpent,(6) the originator of the error 
(in question), through certain expressions devised by the energy of his own (ingenuity). The priests, then, 
and champions of the system, have been first those who have been called Naasseni, (7) being so 
denominated from the Hebrew language, for the serpent is called naas(8) (in Hebrew). Subsequently, 
however, they have styled themselves Gnostics, alleging that they alone have sounded the depths of 
knowledge. Now, from the system of these (speculators), many, detaching parts, have constructed a heresy 
which, though with several subdivisions, is essentially one, and they explain precisely the same (tenets); 
though conveyed under the guise of different opinions, as the following discussion, according as it 
progresses, will prove. 

These (Naasseni), then, according to the system(1) advanced by them, magnify, (as the originating cause) 
of all things else, a man and a son of man. And this man is a hermaphrodite, and is denominated among 
them Adam; and hymns many and various are made to him. The hymns? however-to be brief-are couched 
among them in some such form as this: "From thee (comes) father, and through thee (comes) mother, two 
names immortal, progenitors of Aeons, O denizen of heaven, thou illustrious man." But they divide him as 
Geryon(3) into three parts. For, say they, of this man one part is rational, another psychical, another earthly. 
And they suppose that the knowledge of him is the originating principle of the capacity for a knowledge of 
God, expressing themselves thus: "The originating principle of perfection is the knowledge(4) of man, while 
the knowledge of God is absolute perfection." All these qualities, however-rational, and psychical, and 
earthly-have, (the Naassene) says, retired and descended into one man simultaneously-Jesus,(5) who 
was born of Mary. And these three men (the Naassene) says, are in the habit of speaking (through Jesus) at 
the same time together, each from their own proper substances to those peculiarly their own. For, according 
to these, there are three kinds of all existent things-angelic, psychical, earthly; and there are three 
churches-angelic, psychical, earthly; and the names of these are elect, called, captive. 

CHAP. II.-NAASSENI ASCRIBE THEIR SYSTEM, THROUGH MARIAMNE, TO JAMES THE 
LORD'S BROTHER; REALLY TRACEABLE TO THE ANCIENT MYSTERIES; THEIR 
PSYCHOLOGY AS GIVEN IN THE "GOSPEL ACCORDING TO THOMAS;" ASSYRIAN 
THEORY OF THE SOUL;THE SYSTEMS OF THE NAASSENI AND THE ASSYRIANS 
COMPARED; SUPPORT DRAWN BY THE NAASSENI FROM THE PHRYGIAN AND 
EGYPTIAN MYSTERIES; THE MYSTERIES OF ISIS; THESE MYSTERIES ALLEGORIZED 
BY THE NAASSENI. 

These are the heads of very numerous discourses which (the Naassene) asserts James the brother of the 
Lord handed down to l\/lariamne.(6) In order, then, that these impious (heretics) may no longer belie 
Mariamne or James, or the Saviour Himself, let us come to the mystic rites (whence these have derived 
their figment), -to a consideration, if it seems right, of both the Barbarian and Grecian (mysteries), -and let us 
see how these (heretics), collecting together the secret and ineffable mysteries of all the Gentiles, are 
uttering falsehoods against Christ, and are making dupes of those who are not acquainted with these orgies 
of the Gentiles. For since the foundation of the doctrine with them is the man Adam, and they say that 
concerning him it has been written, "Who shall declare his generation?"(7) learn how, partly deriving from the 
Gentiles the undiscoverable and diversified(8) generation of the man, they fictitiously apply it to Christ. 
"Now earth, "(9) say the Greeks, "gave forth a man, (earth) first bearing a goodly gift, wishing to become 
mother not of plants devoid of sense, nor beasts without reason, but of a gentle and highly favoured 
creature." "It, however, is difficult," (the Naassene) says, "to ascertain whether Alalcomeneus, (10) first of 
men, rose upon the Boeotians over Lake Cephisus; or whether it were the Idaean Curetes, a divine race; or 
the Phrygian Corybantes, whom first the sun beheld springing up after the manner of the growth of trees; or 
whether Arcadia brought forth Pelasgus, of greater antiquity than the moon; or Eleusis (produced) Diaulus, 
an inhabitant of Raria; or Lemnus begot Cabirus, fair child of secret orgies; or Pallerie (brought forth) the 
Phlegraean Alcyoneus, oldest of the giants. But the Libyans affirm that larbas, first born, on emerging from 
arid plains, commenced eating the sweet acorn of Jupiter. But the Nile of the Egyptians," he says, "up to this 
day fertilizing mud, (and therefore) generating animals, renders up living bodies, which acquire flesh from 
moist vapour." The Assyrians, however, say that fish-eating Oannes(1 1) was (the first man, and) produced 
among themselves. The Chaldeans, however, say that this Adam is the man whom alone earth brought 
forth. And that he lay inanimate, unmoved, (and) still as a statue; being an image of him who is above, who is 
celebrated as the man Adam,(1) having been begotten by many powers, concerning whom individually is 
an enlarged discussion. 

In order, therefore, that finally the Great Man from above may be overpowered, "from whom," as they say, 
"the whole family named on earth and in the heavens has been formed, to him was given also a soul, that 
through the soul he might suffer; and that the enslaved image may be punished of the Great and most 
Glorious and Perfect Man, for even so they call him. Again, then, they ask what is the soul, and whence, and 
what kind in its nature, that, coming to the man and moving him, (2) it should enslave and punish the image of 
the Perfect Man. They do not, however, (on this point) institute an inquiry from the Scriptures, but ask this 
(question) also from the mystic (rites). And they affirm that the soul is very difficult to discover, and hard to 
understand; for it does not remain in the same figure or the same form invariably, or in one passive 
condition, that either one could express it by a sign, or comprehend it substantially. 
But they have these varied changes (of the soul) set down in the gospel inscribed "according to the 
Egyptians. "(3) They are, then, in doubt, as all the rest of men among the Gentiles, whether (the soul) is at all 
from something pre-existent, or whether from the self-produced (one), (4) or from a widespread Chaos. And 
first they fly for refuge to the mysteries of the Assyrians, perceiving the threefold division of the man; for the 
Assyrians first advanced the opinion that the soul has three parts, and yet (is essentially) one. For of soul, 
say they, is every nature desirous, and each in a different manner. For soul is cause of all things made; all 
things that are nourished, (the Naassene) says, and that grow, require soul. For it is not possible, he says, to 
obtain any nourishment or growth where soul is not present. For even stones, he affirms, are animated, for 
they possess what is capable of increase; but increase would not at any time take place without 
nourishment, for it is by accession that things which are being increased grow, but accession is the 
nourishment of things that are nurtured. Every nature, then, as of thins celestial and (the Naasene) says, of 
things celestial, and earthly, and infernal, desires a soul. And an entity of this description the Assyrians call 
Adonis or Endymion;(5) and when it is styled Adonis, Venus, he says, loves and desires the soul when 
styled by such a name. But Venus is production, according to them. But whenever Proserpine or Cora 
becomes enamoured with Adonis, there results, he says, a certain mortal soul separated from Venus (that 
is, from generation). But should the Moon pass into concupiscence for Endymion, and into love of her form, 
the nature, (6) he says, of the higher beings requires a soul likewise. But if, he says, the mother of the gods 
emasculate Attis,(7) and herself has this (person) as an object of affection, the blessed nature, he says, of 

the supernal and everlasting (beings) alone recalls the male power of the soul to itself. 
For (the Naassene) says, there is the hermaphrodite man. According to this account of theirs, the 
intercourse of woman with man is demonstrated, in conformity with such teaching, to be an exceedingly 
wicked and filthy (practice). (8) For, says (the Naassene), Attis has been emasculated, that is, he has 
passed over from the earthly parts of the nether world to the everlasting substance above, where, he says, 
there is neither female or male, (9) but a new creature, (10) a new man, which is hermaphrodite. As to where, 
however, they use the expression "above," I shall show when I come to the proper place (for treating this 
subject). But they assert that, by their account, they testify that Rhea is not absolutely isolated, but-for so I 
may say-the universal creature; and this they declare to be what is affirmed by the Word. "For the invisible 
things of Him are seen from the creation of the world, being understood by the things that are made by Him, 
even His eternal power and Godhead, for the purpose of leaving them without excuse. Wherefore, knowing 
God, they glorified Him not as God, nor gave Him thanks; but their foolish heart was rendered vain. For, 
professing themselves to be wise, they became fools, and changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into 
images of the likeness of corruptible man, and of birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping things. 
Wherefore also God gave them up unto vile affections; for even their women did change the natural use into 
that which is against nature." What, however, the natural use is, according to them, we shall afterwards 
declare. "And likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of the woman, burned in their lust one toward 
another; men with men working that which is unseemly"-now the expression that which is unseemly signifies, 
according to these (Naasseni), the first and blessed substance, figureless, the cause of all figures to those 
things that are moulded into shapes,-"and receiving in themselves that recompense of their error which was 
meet."(1) For in these words which Paul has spoken they say the entire secret of theirs, and a hidden 
mystery of blessed pleasure, are comprised. For the promise of washing is not any other, according to 
them, than the introduction of him that is washed in, according to them, life-giving water, and anointed with 
ineffable(2) ointment (than his introduction) into unfading bliss 

But they assert that not only is there in favour of their doctrine, testimony to be drawn from the mysteries of 
the Assyrians, but also from those of the Phrygians concerning the happy nature-concealed, and yet at the 
same time disclosed-of things that have been, and are coming into existence, and moreover will be, -(a 
happy nature) which, (the Naassene) says, is the kingdom of heaven to be sought for within a man. (3) And 
concerning this (nature) they hand down an explicit passage, occurring(4) in the Gospel inscribed according 
to Thomas, (5) expressing themselves thus: "He who seeks me, will find, me in children from seven years 
old; for there concealed, I shall in the fourteenth age be made manifest." This, however, is not (the teaching) 
of Christ, but of Hippocrates, who uses these words: "A child of seven years is half of a father." And so it is 
that these (heretics), placing the originative nature of the universe in causative seed, (and) having 
ascertained the (aphorism) of Hippocrates, (6) that a child of seven years old is half of a father, say that in 
fourteen years, according to Thomas, he is manifested. This, with them, is the ineffable and mystical Logos. 
They assert, then, that the Egyptians, who after the Phrygians, (7) it is established, are of greater antiquity 
than all mankind, and who confessedly were the first to proclaim to all the rest of men the rites and orgies of, 
at the same time, all the gods, as well as the species and energies (of things), have the sacred and august, 
and for those who are not initiated, unspeakable mysteries of Isis. These, however, are not anything else 
than what by her of the seven dresses and sable robe was sought and snatched away, namely, the 
pudendum of Osiris. And they say that Osiris is water.(8) But the seven-robed nature, encircled and arrayed 
with seven mantles of ethereal texture-for so they call the planetary stars, allegorizing and denominating 
them ethereal(9) robes,-is as it were the changeable generation, and is exhibited as the creature 
transformed by the ineffable and unportrayable,(10) and inconceivable and figureless one. And this, (the 
Naassene) says, is what is declared in Scripture, "The just will fall seven times, and rise again. "(1 1) For 
these falls, he says, are the changes of the stars, moved by Him who puts all things in motion. 
They affirm, then, concerning the substance(12) of the seed which is a cause of all existent things, that it is 
none of these, but that it produces and forms all things that are made, expressing themselves thus: "I 
become what I wish, and I am what I am: on account of this I say, that what puts all things in motion is itself 
unmoved. For what exists remains forming all things, and nought of existing things is made."(1 3) He says 
that this (one) alone is good, and that what is spoken by the Saviour(1 4) is declared concerning this (one): 
"Why do you say that am good? One is good, my Father which is in the heavens, who causeth His sun to 
rise upon the just and unjust, and sendeth rain upon saints and sinners. "(15) But who the saintly ones are on 
whom He sends the rain, and the sinners on whom the same sends the rain, this likewise we shall afterwards 
declare with the rest. And this is the great and secret and unknown mystery of the universe, concealed and 
revealed among the Egyptians. For Osiris, (16) (the Naassene) says, is in temples in front of lsis;(17) and his 
pudendum stands exposed, looking downwards, and crowned with all its own fruits of things that are made. 
And (he affirms) that such stands not only in the most hallowed temples chief of idols, but that also, for the 
information of all, it is as it were a light not set under a bushel, but upon a candlestick, proclaiming its 
message upon the housetops, (18) in all by-ways, and all streets, and near the actual dwellings, placed in 

front as a certain appointed limit and termination of tiie dwelling, and that this is denominated the good 
(entity) by all. For they style this good-producing, not knowing what they say. And the Greeks, deriving this 
mystical (expression) from the Egyptians, preserve it until this day. For we behold, says (the Naassene), 
statues of Mercury, of such a figure honoured among them. 

Worshipping, however, Cyllenius with especial distinction, they style him Logics. For Mercury is Logos, who 
being interpreter and fabricator of the things that have been made simultaneously, and that are being 
produced, and that will exist, stands honoured among them, fashioned into some such figure as is the 
pullendum of a man, having an impulsive power from the parts below towards those above. And that this 
(deity)-that is, a Mercury of this description-is, (the Naassene) says, a conjurer of the dead, and a guide of 
departed spirits, and an originator of souls; nor does this escape the notice of the poets, who express 
themselves thus:- 
"Cyllenian Hermes also called 
The souls of mortal suitors. "(1) 

Not Penelope's suitors, says he, O wretches! but (souls) awakened and brought to recollection of 
themselves, 

"From honour so great, and from bliss so long. "(2) 

That is, from the blessed man from above, or the primal man or Adam, as it seems to them, souls have 
been conveyed down here into a creation of clay, that they may serve the Demiurge of this creation, 
laldabaoth,(3) a fiery God, a fourth number; for so they call the Demiurge and father of the formal world:- 

"And in hand he held a lovely 

Wand of gold that human eyes enchants. 

Of whom he will, and those again who slumber rouses. "(4) 

This, he says, is he who alone has power of life and death. Concerning this, he says, it has been written, 
"Thou Shalt rule them with a rod of iron. "(5) The poet, however, he says, being desirous of adorning the 
incomprehensible (potency) of the blessed nature of the Logos, invested him with not an iron, but golden 
wand. And he enchants the eyes of the dead, as he says, and raises up again those that are slumbering, 
after having been roused from sleep, and after having been suitors. And concerning these, he says, the 
Scripture speaks: "Awake thou that sleepest, and arise, and Christ will give thee light."(6) 

This is the Christ who, he says, in all that have been generated, is the portrayed Son of Man from the 
unportrayable Logos. This, he says, is the great and unspeakable mystery of the Eleusinian rites, Hye, 
Cye.(7) And he affirms that all things have been subjected unto him, and this is that which has been spoken, 
"Their sound is gone forth unto all the earth, "(8) just as it agrees with the expressions, "Mercury(9) waving his 
wand, guides the souls, but they twittering follow." I mean the disembodied spirits follow continuously in such 
a way as the poet by his imagery delineates, using these words:- 

"And as when in the magic cave's recess 

Bats humming fly, and when one drops 

From ridge of rock, and each to other closely clings. "(10) 

The expression "rock," he says, he uses of Adam. This, he affirms, is Adam: "The chief corner-stone 
become the head of the corner.(11) For that in the head the substance is the formative brain from which the 
entire family is fashioned. (12) "Whom," he says, "I place as a rock at the foundations of Zion." Allegorizing, 
he says, he speaks of the creation of the man. The rock is interposed (within) the teeth, as Homer(13) says, 
"enclosure of teeth," that is, a wall anti fortress, in which exists the inner man, who thither has fallen from 
Adam, the primal man above. And he has been "severed without hands to effect the division, "(14) and has 
been borne down into the image of oblivion, being earthly and clayish. And he asserts that the twittering 
spirits follow him, that is, the Logos:- 

"Thus these, twittering, came together: and then the souls. 

That is, he guides them; 

Gentle Hermes led through wide-extended paths. "(15) 

That is, he says, into the eternal places separated from all wickedness. For whither, he says, did they 
come:- 

"O'er ocean's streams they came, and Leuca's cliff. 
And by the portals of the sun and land of dreams." 

This, he says, is ocean, "generation of gods and generation of men"(16) ever whirled round by the eddies 
of water, at one time upwards, at another time downwards. But he says there ensues a generation of men 
when the ocean flows downwards; but when upwards to the wall and fortress and the cliff of Luecas, a 
generation of gods takes place. This, he asserts, is that which has been written: "I said. Ye are gods, and all 
children of the highest;"(1) "If ye hasten to fly out of Egypt, and repair beyond the Red Sea into the 
wilderness," that is, from earthly intercourse to the Jerusalem above, which is the mother of the living;(2) "If, 
moreover, again you return into Egypt," that is, into earthly intercourse, (3) "ye shall die as men." For mortal, 
he says, is every generation below, but immortal that which is begotten above, for it is born of water only, 
and of spirit, being spiritual, not carnal. But what (is born) below is carnal, that is, he says, what is written. 
"That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the spirit is spirit."(4) This, according to them, 
is the spiritual generation. This, he says, is the great Jordan(5) which, flowing on (here) below, and 
preventing the children of Israel from departing out of Egypt-I mean from terrestrial intercourse, for Egypt is 
with them the body,-Jesus drove back, and made it flow upwards. 

CHAP. III. --FURTHER EXPOSITION OF THE HERESY OF THE NAASSENI; PROFESS TO 
FOLLOW HOMER; ACKNOWLEDGE A TRIAD OF PRINCIPLES; THEIR TECHNICAL NAMES 
OF THE TRIAD; SUPPORT THESE ON THE AUTHORITY OF GREEK POETS; ALLEGORIZE 
OUR SAVIOUR'S MIRACLES; THE MYSTERY OF THE SAMOTHRACIANS; WHY THE LORD 
CHOSE TWELVE DISCIPLES; THE NAME CORYBAS, USED BY THRACIANS AND 
PHRYGIANS, EXPLAINED; NAASSENI PROFESS TO FIND THEIR SYSTEM IN 
SCRIPTURE; THEIR INTERPRETATION OF JACOB'S VISION; THEIR IDEA OF THE 
"PERFECT MAN;" THE "PERFECT MAN" CALLED "PAPA" BY THE PHRYGIANS; THE 
NAASSENI AND PHRYGIANS ON THE RESURRECTION; THE ECSTASIS OF ST. PAUL; 
THE MYSTERIES OF RELIGION AS ALLUDED TO BY CHRIST; INTERPRETATION OF THE 
PARABLE OF THE SOWER; ALLEGORY OF THE PROMISED LAND; COMPARISON OF THE 
SYSTEM OF THE PHRYGIANS WITH THE STATEMENTS OF SCRIPTURE; EXPOSITION 
OF THE MEANING OF THE HIGHER AND LOWER ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES; THE 
INCARNATION DISCOVERABLE HERE ACCORDING TO THE NAASSENI. 

Adopting these and such like (opinions), these most marvellous Gnostics, inventors of a novel(6) 
grammatical art, magnify Homer as their prophet-as one, (according to them,) who, after the mode adopted 
in the mysteries, announces these truths; and they mock those who are not indoctrinated into the holy 
Scriptures, by betraying them into such notions. They make, however, the following assertion: he who says 
that all things derive consistence from one, is in error; but he who says that they are of three, is in 
possession of the truth, and will furnish a solution of the (phenomena of the) universe. For there is, says (the 
Naassene), one blessed nature of the Blessed Man, of him who is above, (namely) Adam; and there is one 
mortal nature, that which is below; and there is one kingless generation, which is begotten above, where, he 
says, is Mariam(7) the sought-for one, and lothorthe mighty sage, and Sephors the gazing one, and Moses 
whose generation is not in Egypt, for children were born unto him in Madian; and not even this, he says, has 
escaped the notice of the poets. 

"Threefold was our partition; each obtained 
His meed of honour due. "(8) 

For, says he, it is necessary that the magnitudes be declared, and that they thus be declared by all 
everywhere, "in order that hearing they may not hear, and seeing they may not see. "(9) For if, he says, the 
magnitudes were not declared, the world could not have obtained consistence. These are the three tumid 
expressions (of these heretics), CAULACAU,(10) SAULASU, ZEESAR. CAULACAU, i.e., Adam, who is 
farthest above; SAULASAU, that is, the mortal one below; ZEESAR, that is, Jordan that flows upwards. This, 
he says, is the hermaphrodite man (present) in all. But those who are ignorant of him, call him Geryon with 
the threefold body-Geryon, i.e., as if (in the sense of) flowing from earth-but (whom) the Greeks by common 
consent (style) "celestial horn of the moon," because he mixed and blended all things in all. "For all things," 
he says, "were made by him, and not even one thing was made without him, and what was made in him is 
life. "(1 1) This, says he, is the life, the ineffable generation of perfect men, which was not known by preceding 

generations. But the passage, "nothing was made without him," refers to the formal world, for it was created 
without his instrumentality by the third and fourth (of the quaternion named above). For says he, this is the 
cup "CONDY, out of which the king, while he quaffs, draws his omens. "(12) This, he says, has been 
discovered hid in the beauteous seeds of Benjamin. And the Greeks likewise, he says, speak of this in the 
following terms:- 

"Waterto the raging mouth bring; thou slave, bring wine; 

Intoxicate and plunge me into stupor. 

My tankard tells me 

The sort I must become. "(1) 

This, says he, was alone sufficient for its being understood by men; (I mean) the cup of Anacreon declaring, 
(albeit) mutely, an ineffable mystery. For dumb, says he, is Anacreon's cup; and (yet) Anacreon affirms that it 
speaks to himself, in language mute, as to what sort he must become-that is spiritual, not carnal-if he shall 
listen in silence to the concealed mystery. And this is the water in those fair nuptials which Jesus changing 
made into wine. This, he says, is the mighty and true beginning of miracles(2) which Jesus performed in 
Cana of Galilee, and (thus) manifested the kingdom of heaven. This, says he, is the kingdom of heaven that 
reposes within us as a treasure, as leaven hid in the three measures of meal. (3) 

This is, he says, the great and ineffable mystery of the Samothracians, which it is allowable, he says, for us 
only who are initiated to know. For the Samothracians expressly hand down, in the mysteries that are 
celebrated among them, that (same) Adam as the primal man. And habitually there stand in the temple of 
the Samothracians two images of naked men, having both hands stretched aloft towards heaven, and their 
pudenda erecta, as with the statue of Mercury on Mount Cyllene. And the aforesaid images are figures of the 
primal man, and of that spiritual one that is born again, in every respect of the same substance with that man. 
This, he says, is what is spoken by the Saviour: "If ye do not drink my blood, and eat my flesh, ye will not 
enter into the kingdom of heaven; but even though," He says, "ye drink of the cup which I drink of, whither I 
go, ye cannot enter there. "(4) For He says He was aware of what sort of nature each of His disciples was, 
and that there was a necessity that each of them should attain unto His own peculiar nature. For He says He 
chose twelve disciples from the twelve tribes, and spoke by them to each tribe. On this account. He says, 
the preachings of the twelve disciples neither did all hear, nor, if they heard, could they receive. For the 
things that are not according to nature, are with them contrary to nature. 

This, he says, the Thracians who dwell around Haemus, and the Phrygians similarly with the Thracians, 
denominate Corybas, because, (though) deriving the beginning of his descent from the head above and 
from the unportrayed brain, and (though) permeating all the principles of the existing state of things, (yet) we 
do not perceive how and in what manner he comes down. This, says he, is what is spoken: "We have heard 
his voice, no doubt, but we have not seen his shape. "(5) For the voice of him that is set apart(6) and 
portrayed is heard; but (his) shape, which descends from above from the unportrayed one,-what sort it is, 
nobody knows. It resides, however, in an earthly mould, yet no one recognises it. This, he says, is "the god 
that inhabiteth the flood," according to the Psalter, "and who speaketh and crieth from many waters. "(7) The 
"many waters," he says, are the diversified generation of mortal men, from which (generation) he cries and 
vociferates to the unportrayed man, saying, "Preserve my only-begotten from the lions. "(8) In reply to him, it 
has, says he, been declared, "Israel, thou art my child: fear not; even though thou passest through rivers, 
they shall not drown thee; even though thou passest through fire, it shall not scorch thee. "(9) By rivers he 
means, says he, the moist substance of generation, and by fire the impulsive principle and desire for 
generation. "Thou art mine; fear not." And again, he says, "If a mother forget her children, so as not to have 
pity on them and give them food, I also will forget you. "(10) Adam, he says, speaks to his own men: "But 
even though a woman forget these things, yet I will not forget you. I have painted you on my hands." In 
regard, however, of his ascension, that is his regeneration, that he may become spiritual, not carnal, the 
Scripture, he says, speaks (thus): "Open the gates, ye who are your rulers; and be ye lift up, ye everlasting 
doors, and the King of glory shall come in," that is a wonder of wonders. (11) "For who," he says, "is this King 
of glory? A worm, and not a man; a reproach of man, and an outcast of the people; himself is the King of 
glory, and powerful in war."(12) 

And by war he means the war that is in the body, because its frame has been made out of hostile elements; 
as it has been written, he says, "Remember the conflict that exists in the body."(1 3) Jacob, he says, saw this 
entrance and this gate in his journey into Mesopotamia, that is, when from a child he was now becoming a 
youth and a man; that is, (the entrance and gate) were made known unto him as he journeyed into 
Mesopotamia. But Mesopotamia, he says, is the current of the great ocean flowing from the midst of the 
Perfect Man; and he was astonished at the celestial gate, exclaiming, "How terrible is this place! it is nought 
else than the house of God, and this (is) the gate of heaven. "(1) On account of this, he says, Jesus uses the 
words, "I am the true gate. "(2) Now he who makes these statements is, he says, the Perfect Man that is 

imaged from the unportrayable one from above. The Perfect Man therefore cannot, he says, be saved, 
unless, entering in through this gate, he be born again. But this very one the Phrygians, he says, call also 
PAPA, because he tranquillized all things which, prior to his manifestation, were confusedly and dissonantly 
moved. For the name, he says, of PAPA belongs simultaneously to all creatures(3)-celestial, and terrestrial, 
and infernal-who exclaim. Cause to cease, cause to cease the discard of the world, and make "peace for 
those that are afar off," that is, for material and earthly beings; and "peace for those that are near,"(4) that is, 
for perfect men that are spiritual and endued with reason. But the Phrygians denominate this same also 
"corpse"-buried in the body, as it were, in a mausoleum and tomb. This, he says, is what has been 
declared, "Ye are whited sepulchres, full," he says, "of dead men's bones within, "(5) because there is not in 
you the living man. And again he exclaims, "The dead shall start forth from the graves, "(6) that is, from the 
earthly bodies, being born again spiritual, not carnal. For this, he says, is the Resurrection that takes place 
through the gate of heaven, through which, he says, all those that do not enter remain dead. These same 
Phrygians, however, he says, affirm again that this very (man), as a consequence of the change, (becomes) 
a god. For, he says, he becomes a god when, having risen from the dead, he will enter into heaven through 
a gate of this kind. Paul the apostle, he says, knew of this gate, partially opening it in a mystery, and stating 
"that he was caught up by an angel, and ascended as far as the second and third heaven into paradise 
itself; and that he beheld sights and heard unspeakable words which it would not be possible for man to 
declare. "(7) 

These are, he says, what are by all called the secret mysteries, "which (also we speak), not in words taught 
of human wisdom, but in those taught of the Spirit, comparing spiritual things with spiritual. But the natural 
man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him. "(8) And these are, he 
says, the ineffable mysteries of the Spirit, which we alone are acquainted with. Concerning these, he says, 
the Saviour has declared, "No one can come unto me, except my heavenly Father draw some one unto 
me. "(9) For it is very difficult, he says, to accept and receive this great and ineffable mystery. And again, it is 
said, the Saviour has declared, "Not every one that saith unto me. Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of 
heaven, but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven. "(1 0) And it is necessary that they who 
perform this (will), not hear it merely, should enter into the kingdom of heaven. And again, he says, the 
Saviour has declared, "The publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of heaven before you."(1 1) For 
"the publicans," he says, are those who receive the revenues(1 2) of all things;(1 3) but we, he says, are the 
publicans, "unto whom the ends of the ages have come. "(14) For "the ends," he says, are the seeds 
scattered from the unportrayable one upon the world, through which the whole cosmical system is 
completed; for through these also it began to exist. And this, he says, is what has been declared: "The 
sower went forth to sow. And some fell by the wayside, and was trodden down; and some on the rocky 
places, and sprang up," he says, "and on account of its having no depth (of soil), it withered and died; and 
some," he says, "fell on fair and good ground, and brought forth fruit, some a hundred, some sixty, and some 
thirty fold. Who hath ears," he says, "to hear, let him hear."(15) The meaning of this, he says, is as follows, 
that none becomes a hearer of these mysteries, unless only the perfect Gnostics. This, he says, is the fair 
and good land which Moses speaks of: "I will bring you into a fair and good land, into a land flowing with milk 
and honey. "(16) This, he says, is the honey and the milk, by tasting which those that are perfect become 
kingless, and share in the Pleroma. This, he says, is the Pleroma, through which all existent things that are 
produced(17) have from the ingenerable one been both produced and completed. 

And this same (one) is styled also by(18) the Phrygians "unfruitful." For he is unfruitful when he is carnal, and 
causes the desire of the flesh. This, he says, is what is spoken: "Every tree not producing good fruit, is cut 
down and cast into the fire."(1) For these fruits, he says, are only rational living men, who enter m through the 
third gate. They say, forsooth, "Ye devour the dead, and make the living; (but) if ye eat the living, what will ye 
do?" They assert, however, that the living "are rational faculties and minds, and men-pearls of that 
unportrayable one cast before the creature below. "(2) This, he says, is what (Jesus) asserts: "Throw not that 
which is holy unto the dogs, nor pearls unto the swine. "(3) Now they allege that the work of swine and dogs is 
the intercourse of the woman with a man. And the Phrygians, he says, call this very one "goat-herd" (Aipolis), 
not because, he says, he is accustomed to feed the goats female and male, as the natural (men) use the 
name, but because, he says, he is "Aipolis"-that is, always ranging over,-who both revolves and carries 
around the entire cosmical system by his revolutionary motion. For the word "Polein" signifies to turn and 
change things; whence, he says, they all call the twos centre of the heaven poles (Poloi). And the poet 
says:- 

"What sea-born sinless sage comes hither. 
Undying Egyptian Proteus? "(4) 

He is not undone, (5) he says, (6) but revolves as it were, and goes round himself. Moreover, also, cities in 
which we dwell, because we turn and go round in them, are denominated "Poleis." In this manner, he says. 

the Phygians call this one "Aipolis," inasmuch as he everywhere ceaselessly turns all things, and changes 
them into their own peculiar (functions). And the Phrygians style him, he says, "very fruitful" likewise, 
"because," says he, "more numerous are the children of the desolate one, than those of her which hath an 
husband;"(7) that is, things by being born again become immortal and abide for ever in great numbers, 
even though the things that are produced may be few; whereas things carnal, he says, are all corruptible, 
even though very many things (of this type) are produced. For this reason, he says, "Rachel wept(8) for her 
children, and would not," says (the prophet), "be comforted; sorrowing for them, for she knew," says he, "that 
they are not."(9) But Jeremiah likewise utters lamentation for Jerusalem below, not the city in Phoenicia, but 
the corruptible generation below. For Jeremiah likewise, he says, was aware of the Perfect Man, of him that 
is born again-of water and the Spirit not carnal. At least Jeremiah himself remarked: "He is a man, and who 
shall know him?"(10) In this manner, (the Naassene) says, the knowledge of the Perfect Man is exceedingly 
profound, and difficult of comprehension. For, he says, the beginning of perfection is a knowledge of man, 
whereas knowledge of God is absolute perfection. 

The Phrygians, however, assert, he says, that he is likewise "a green ear of corn reaped." And after the 
Phrygians, the Athenians, while initiating people into the Eleusinian rites, likewise display to those who are 
being admitted to the highest grade at these mysteries, the mighty, and marvellous, and most perfect secret 
suitable for one initiated into the highest mystic truths: (I allude to) an ear of corn in silence reaped. But this 
ear of corn is also (considered) among the Athenians to constitute the perfect enormous illumination (that 
has descended) from the unportrayable one, just as the Hierophant himself (declares); not, indeed, 
emasculated like Attis,(1 1) but made a eunuch by means of hemlock, and despising(12) all carnal 
generation. (Now) by night in Eleusis, beneath a huge fire, (the Celebrant,) enacting the great and secret 
mysteries, vociferates and cries aloud, saying, "August Brimo has brought forth a consecrated son, Brimus;" 
that is, a potent (mother has been delivered of) a potent child. But revered, he says, is the generation that is 
spiritual, heavenly, from above, and potent is he that is so born. For the mystery is called "Eleusin" and 
"Anactorium." "Eleusin," because, he says, we who are spiritual come flowing down from Adam above; for 
the word "eleusesthai" is, he says, of the same import with the expression "to come." But "Anactorium" is of 
the same import with the expression "to ascend upwards." This, he says, is what they affirm who have been 
iniflated in the mysteries of the Eleusinians. It is, however, a regulaflon of law, that those who have been 
admitted into the lesser should again be iniflated into the Great Mysteries. For greater destinies obtain 
greater portions. But the inferior mysteries, he says, are those of Proserpine below; in regard of which 
mysteries, and the path which leads thither, which is wide and spacious, and conducts those that are 
perishing to Proserpine, the poet likewise says:- 

"But under her a fearful path extends. 
Hollow miry, yet best guide to 
Highly-honoured Aphrodite's lovely grove. "(13) 

These, he says, are the inferior mysteries, those appertaining to carnal generaflon. Now, those men who 
are iniflated into these inferior (mysteries) ought to pause, and (then) be admitted into the great (and) 
heavenly (ones). For they, he says, who obtain their shares (in this mystery), receive greater portions. For 
this, he says, is the gate of heaven; and this a house of God, where the Good Deity dwells alone. And into 
this (gate), he says, no unclean person shall enter, nor one that is natural or carnal; but it is reserved for the 
spiritual only. And those who come hither ought to cast off(1) their garments, and become all of them 
bridegrooms, emasculated through the virginal spirit. For this is the virgin(2) who carries in her womb and 
conceives and brings forth a son, not animal, not corporeal, but blessed for evermore. Concerning these, it 
is said, the Saviour has expressly declared that "straight and narrow is the way that leadeth unto life, and 
few there are that enter upon it; whereas broad and spacious is the way that leadeth unto destruction, and 
many there are that pass through it."(3) 

CHAP. IV.-FURTHER USE MADE OF THE SYSTEM OF THE PHRYGIANS; MODE OF 
CELEBRATING THE MYSTERIES; THE MYSTERY OF THE "GREAT MOTHER;" THESE 
MYSTERIES HAVE A JOINT OBJECT OF WORSHIP WITH THE NAASSENI; THE 
NAASSENI ALLEGORIZE THE SCRIPTURAL ACCOUNT OF THE GARDEN OF EDEN; THE 
ALLEGORY APPLIED TO THE LIFE OF JESUS. 

The Phrygians, however, further assert that the father of the universe is "Amygdalus," not a tree, he says, but 
that he is "Amygdalus" who previously existed; and he having in himself the perfect fruit, as it were, throbbing 
and moving in the depth, rent his breasts, and produced his now invisible, and nameless, and ineffable 
child, respecflng whom we shall speak. For the word "Amyxai" signifles, as it were, to burst and sever 
through, as he says (happens) in the case of inflamed bodies, and which have in themselves any tumour; 

and when doctors have cut this, they call it "Amychai." In this way, he says, the Phrygians call him 
"Amygdalus," from which proceeded and was born the Invisible (One), "by whom all things were made, and 
nothing was made without Him. "(4) And the Phrygians say that what has been thence produced is "Syrictas" 
(piper), because the Spirit that is born is harmonious. "For God," he says, "is Spirit; wherefore," he affirms, 
"neither in this mountain do the true worshippers worship, nor in Jerusalem, but in spirit. For the adoration of 
the perfect ones," he says, "is spiritual, not carnal. "(5) The Spirit, however, he says, is there where likewise 
the Father is named, and the Son is there born from this Father. This, he says, is the many-named, 
thousand-eyed Incomprehensible One, of whom every nature-each, however, differently-is desirous. This, 
he says, is the word of God, which, he says, is a word of revelation of the Great Power. Wherefore it will be 
sealed, and hid, and concealed, lying in the habitation where lies the basis of the root of the universe, viz. 
Aeons, Powers, Intelligences, Gods, Angels, delegated Spirits, Entities, Nonentities, Generables, 
Ingenerables, Incomprehensibles, Comprehensibles, Years, Months, Days, Hours, (and) Invisible Point 
from which(6) what is least begins to increase gradually. That which is, he says, nothing, and which consists 
of nothing, inasmuch as it is indivisible-(l mean) a point-will become through its own reflective power a 
certain incomprehensible magnitude. This, he says, is the kingdom of heaven, the grain of mustard seed, (7) 
the point which is indivisible in the body; and, he says, no one knows this (point) save the spiritual only. This, 
he says, is what has been spoken: "There is no speech nor language where their voice is not heard. "(8) 
They rashly assume in this manner, that whatsoever things have been said and done by all men, (may be 
made to harmonize) with their own particular mental view, alleging that all things become spiritual. Whence 
likewise they assert, that those exhibiting themselves in theatres,-not even these say or do anything without 
premeditation. Therefore, he says, when, on the people assembling in the theatres, any one enters clad in a 
remarkable robe, carrying a harp and playing a tune (upon it, accompanying it) with a song of the great 
mysteries, he speaks as follows, not knowing what he says: "Whether (thou art) the race of Saturn or happy 
Jupiter,(9) or mighty Rhea, Hail, Attis, gloomy mutilation of Rhea. Assyrians style thee thrice-longed-for 
Adonis, and the whole of Egypt (calls thee) Osiris, celestial horn of the moon; Greeks denominate (thee) 
Wisdom; Samothracians, venerable Adam; Haemonians, Corybas; and them Phrygians (name thee) at one 
time Papa, at another time Corpse, or God, or Fruitless, or Aipolos, or green Ear of Corn that has been 
reaped, or whom the very fertile Amygdalus produced-a man, a musician." This, he says, is multiform Attis, 
whom while they celebrate in a hymn, they utter these words: "I will hymn Attis, son of Rhea, not with the 
buzzing sounds of trumpets, or of Idaean pipers, which accord with (the voices of) the Curetes; but I will 
mingle (my song) with Apollo's music of harps, 'evoe, evan,' inasmuch as thou art Pan, as thou art Bacchus, 
as thou art shepherd of brilliant stars." 

On account of these and such like reasons, these constantly attend the mysteries called those of the "Great 
Mother," supposing especially that they behold by means of the ceremonies performed there the entire 
mystery. For these have nothing more than the ceremonies that are performed there, except that they are 
not emasculated: they merely complete the work of the emasculated. For with the utmost severity and 
vigilance they enjoin (on their votaries) to abstain, as if they were emasculated, from intercourse with a 
woman. The rest, however, of the proceeding (observed in these mysteries), as we have declared at some 
length, (they follow) just as (if they were) emasculated persons. And they do not worship any other object but 
Naas, (from thence) being styled Naasseni. But Naas is the serpent from whom, i.e., from the word Naas, 
(the Naassene) says, are all that under heaven are denominated temples (Naous). And (he states) that to 
him alone-that is, Naas-is dedicated every shrine and every initiatory rite, and every mystery; and, in 
general, that a religious ceremony could not be discovered under heaven, in which a temple (Naos) has no 
existence; and in the temple itself is Naas, from whom it has received its denomination of temple (Naos). 
And these affirm that the serpent is a moist substance, just as Thales also, the Milesian, (spoke of water as 
an originating principle,) and that nothing of existing things, immortal or mortal, animate or inanimate, could 
consist at all without him. And that all things are subject unto him, and that he is good, and that he has all 
things in himself, as in the horn of the one-horned bull;(1) so as that he imparts beauty and bloom to all things 
that exist according to their own nature and peculiarity, as if passing through all, just as ("the river) 
proceeding forth from Edem, and dividing itself into four heads. "(2) 

They assert, however, that Edem is the brain, as it were, bound and tightly fastened in encircling robes, as if 
(in) heaven. But they suppose that man, as far as the head only, is Paradise, therefore that "this river, which 
proceeds out of i Edem," that is, from the brain, "is divided into four heads, (3) and that the name of the first 
river is called Phison; this is that which encompasseth all the land of Havilath: there is gold, and the gold of 
that land is excellent, and there is bdellium and the onyx stone." This, he says, is the eye, which, by its 
honour (among the rest of the bodily organs), and its colours, furnishes testimony to what is spoken. "But the 
name of the second river is Gihon: this is that which compasseth the land of Ethiopia." This, he says, is 
hearing, since Gihon is (a tortuous stream), resembling a sort of labyrinth. "And the name of the third is 
Tigris. This is that which floweth over against (the country of) the Assyrians." This, he says, (4) is smelling, 
employing the exceedingly rapid current of the stream (as an analogy of this sense). But it flows over 

against (the country of) the Assyrians, because in every act of respiration following upon expiration, the 
breath drawn in from the external atmosphere enters with swifter motion and greater force. For this, he says, 
is the nature of respiration. "But the fourth river is Euphrates." This, they assert, is the mouth, through which 
are the passage outwards of prayer, and the passage inwards of nourishment. (The mouth) makes glad, 
and nurtures and fashions the Spiritual Perfect Man. This, he says, is "the water that is above the 
firmament,"(5) concerning which, he says, the Saviour has declared, "If thou knewest who it is that asks, thou 
wouldst have asked from Him, and He would have given you to drink living, bubbling water."(6) Into this 
water, he says, every nature enters, choosing its own substances; and its peculiar quality comes to each 
nature from this water, he says, more than iron does to the magnet, and the gold to the backbone(7) of the 
sea falcon, and the chaff to the amber. 

But if any one, he says, is blind from birth, and has never beheld the true light, "which lighteneth every man 
that Cometh into the world, "(8) by us let him recover his sight, and behold, as it were, through some paradise 
planted with every description of tree, and supplied with abundance of fruits, water coursing its way through 
all the trees and fruits; and he will see that from one and the same water the olive chooses for itself and 
draws the oil, and the vine the wine; and (so is it with) the rest of plants, according to each genus. That Man, 
however, he says, is of no reputation in the world, but of illustrious fame in heaven, being betrayed by those 
who are ignorant (of his perfections) to those who know him not, being accounted as a drop from a cask.(9) 
We, however, he says, are spiritual, who, from the life-giving water of Euphrates, which flows through the 
midst of Babylon, choose our own peculiar quality as we pass through the true gate, which is the blessed 
Jesus. And of all men, we Christians alone are those who in the third gate celebrate the mystery, and are 
anointed there with the unspeakable chrism from a horn, as David (was anointed), not from an earthen 
vessel, (1) he says, as (was) Saul, who held converse with the evil demon(2) of carnal concupiscence. 

CHAP. V. --EXPLANATION OF THE SYSTEM OF THE NAASSENI TAKEN FROM ONE OF 
THEIR HYMNS. 

The foregoing remarks, then, though few out of many, we have thought proper to bring forward. For 
innumerable are the silly and crazy attempts of folly. But since, to the best of our ability, we have explained 
the unknown Gnosis, it seemed expedient likewise to adduce the following point. This psalm of theirs has 
been composed, by which they seem to celebrate all the mysteries of the error (advanced by) them in a 
hymn, couched in the following terms:- 

The world's producing law was Primal Mind, (3) 

And next was First-born's outpoured Chaos; 

And third, the soul received its law of toil: 

Encircl'd, therefore, with an acqueous(4) form. 

With care o'erpowered it succumbs to death. 

Now holding sway, it eyes the light. 

And now it weeps on misery flung; 

Now it mourns, now it thrills with joy; 

Now it wails, now it hears its doom; 

Now it hears its doom, now it dies. 

And now it leaves us, never to return. 

It, hapless straying, treads the maze of ills. 

But Jesus said. Father, behold, 

A strife of ills across the earth 

Wanders from thy breath (of wrath); 

But bitter Chaos (man) seeks to shun. 

And knows not how to pass it through. 

On this account, O Father, send me; 

Bearing seals, I shall descend; 

Through ages whole I'll sweep. 

All mysteries I'll unravel. 

And forms of Gods I'll show; 

And secrets of the saintly path. 

Styled "Gnosis," I'll impart. 

CHAP. VI. -THE OPHITES THE GRAND SOURCE OF HERESY. 

These doctrines, then, the Naasseni attempt to establish, calling themselves Gnostics. But since the error is 

many-headed and diversified, resembling, in trutii, tiie iiydra tiiat we read of in iiistory; wiien, at one blow, we 
have struck off the heads of this (delusion) by means of refutation, employing the wand of truth, we shall 
entirely exterminate the monster. For neither do the remaining heresies present much difference of aspect 
from this, having a mutual connection through (the same) spirit of error. But since, altering the words and the 
names of the serpent, they wish that there should be many heads of the serpent, neither thus shall we fail 
thoroughly to refute them as they desire. 

CHAP. VII. -THE SYSTEM OF THE PERATAE; THEIR TRITHEISM; EXPLANATION OF THE 
INCARNATION. 

There is also unquestionably a certain other (head of the hydra, (5) namely, the heresy) of the Peratae,(6) 
whose blasphemy against Christ has for many years escaped notice. And the present is a fitting opportunity 
for bringing to light the secret mysteries of such (heretics). These allege that the world is one, triply divided. 
And of the triple division with them, one portion is a certain single originating principle, just as it were a huge 
fountain, which can be divided mentally into infinite segments. Now the first segment, and that which, 
according to them, is (a segment) in preference (to others), (7) is a triad, and it is called a Perfect Good, (and) 
a Paternal Magnitude. And the second portion of the triad of these is, as it were, a certain infinite crowd of 
potentialities that are generated(8) from themselves, (while) the third is formal. (9) And the first, which is good, 
is unbegotten, and the second is a self-producing good, and the third is created; and hence it is that they 
expressly declare that there are three Gods, three Logoi, three Minds, three Men. For to each portion of the 
world, after the division has been made, they assign both Gods, and Logoi, and Minds, and Men, and the 
rest; but that from unorigination and the first segment(IO) of the world, when afterwards the world had attained 
unto its completion, there came down from above, for causes that we shall afterwards declare, in the time of 
Herod a certain man called Christ, with a threefold nature, and a threefold body, and a threefold power, 
(and) having in himself all (species of) concretions and potentialities (derivable) from the three divisions of 
the world; and that this, says (the Peratic), is what is spoken: "It pleased him that in him should dwell all 
fulness bodily, "(1) and in Him the entire Divinity resides of the triad as thus divided. For, he says, that from 
the two superjacent worlds-namely, from that (portion of the triad) which is unbegotten, and from that which is 
self-producing-there have been conveyed down into this world in which we are, seeds of all sorts of 
potentialities. What, however, the mode of the descent is, we shall afterwards declare. 
(The Peratic) then says that Christ descended from above from unorigination, that by His descent all things 
triply divided might be saved. For some things, he says, being borne down from above, will ascend through 
Him, whereas whatever (beings) form plots against those which are carried down from above are cast off,(2) 
and being placed in a state of punishment, are renounced. This, he says, is what is spoken: "For the Son of 
man came not into the world to destory the world, but that the world through Him might be saved." The world, 
he says, he denominates those two parts that are situated above, viz., both the unbegotten (portion of the 
triad), and the self-produced one. And when Scripture, he says, uses the words, "that we may not be 
condemned with the world," it alludes to the third portion of (the triad, that is) the formal world. For the third 
portion, which he styles the world (in which we are), must perish; but the two (remaining portions), which are 
situated above, must be rescued from corruption. 

CHAP. VIM. --THE PERATAE DERIVE THEIR SYSTEM FROM THE ASTROLOGERS; THIS 
PROVED BY A STATEMENT OF THE ASTROLOGICAL THEORIES OF THE ZODIAC; 
HENCE THE TERMINOLOGY OF THE PERATIC HERETICS. 

Let us, then, in the first place, learn how (the Peratists), deriving this doctrine from astrologers, act 
despitefully towards Christ, working destruction for those who follow them in an error of this description. For 
the astrologers, alleging that there is one world, divide it into the twelve fixed portions of the zodiacal signs, 
and call the world of the fixed zodiacal signs one immoveable world; and the other they affirm to be a world 
of erratic (signs), both in power, and position, and number, and that it extends as far as the moon. (3) And 
(they lay down), that (one) world derives from (the other) world a certain power, and mutual participation (in 
that power), and that the subjacent obtain this participation from the superjacent (portions). In order, 
however, that what is (here) asserted may be perspicuous, I shall one by one employ those very 
expressions of the astrologers; (and in doing so) I shall only be reminding my readers of statements 
previously made in the department of the work where we have explained the entire art of the astrologers. 
What, then, the opinions are which those (speculators) entertain, are as follow:- 
(Their doctrine is), that from an emanation of the stars the generations of the subjacent (parts) is 
consummated. For, as they wistfully gazed upward upon heaven, the Chaldeans asserted that (the seven 
stars)(4) contain a reason for the efficient causes of the occurrence of all the events that happen unto us, and 
that the parts of the fixed zodiacal signs co-operate (in this influence). Into twelve (parts they divide the 

zodiacal circle), and each zodiacal sign into thirty portions, and each portion into sixty diminutive parts; for 
so they denominate the very smallest parts, and those that are indivisible. And of the zodiacal signs, they 
term some male, but others feminine; and some with two bodies, but others not so; and some tropical, 
whereas others firm. The male signs, then, are either feminine, which possess a co-operative nature for the 
procreation of males, (or are themselves productive of females.) For Aries is a male zodiacal sign, but 
Taurus female; and the rest (are denominated) according to the same analogy, some male, but others 
female. And I suppose that the Pythagoreans, being swayed from such (considerations), style the Monad 
male, and the Duad female; and, again, the Triad male, and analogically the remainder of the even and 
odd numbers. Some, however, dividing each zodiacal sign into twelve parts, employ almost the same 
method. For example, in Aries, they style the first of the twelve parts both Aries and a male, but the second 
both Taurus and a female, and the third both Gemini and a male; and the same plan is pursued in the case 
of the rest of the parts. And they assert that there are signs with two bodies, viz., Gemini and the signs 
diametrically opposite, namely Sagittarius, and Virgo, and Pisces, and that the rest have not two bodies. 
And (they state) that some are likewise tropical, and when the sun stands in these, he causes great 
turnings(5) of the surrounding (sign). Aries is a sign of this description, and that which is diametrically 
opposite to it, just as Libra, and Capricorn, and Cancer. For in Aries is the vernal turning, and in Capricorn 
that of winter, and in Cancerthat of summer, and in Librathat of autumn. 

The details, however, concerning this system we have minutely explained in the book preceding this; and 
from it any one who wishes instruction (on the point), may learn how it is that the originators of this Peratic 
heresy, viz., Euphrates the Peratic, and Celbes the Carystian,(1) have, in the transference (into their own 
system of opinions from these sources), made alterations in name only, while in reality they have put 
forward similar tenets. (Nay more), they have, with immoderate zeal, themselves devoted (their attention) to 
the art (of the astrologers). For also the astrologers speak of the limits of the stars, in which they assert that 
the dominant stars have greater influence; as, for instance, on some they act injuriously, while on others they 
act well. And of these they denominate some malicious, and some beneficent. And (stars) are said to look 
upon one another, and to harmonize with each other, so that they appear according to (the shape of) a 
triangle or square. The stars, looking on one another, are figured according to (the shape of(2)) a triangle, 
having an intervening distance of the extent of three zodiacal signs; whereas (those that have an interval of) 
two zodiacal signs are figured according to (the shape of) a square. And (their doctrine is), that as in the 
same way as in a man, the subjacent parts sympathize with the head, and the head likewise sympathizes 
with the subjacent parts, so all terrestrial (sympathize) with super-lunar(3) objects. But (the astrologers go 
further than this(4)); for there exists (according to them) a certain difference and incompatibility(5) between 
these, so as that they do not involve one and the same union. This combination and divergence of the stars, 
which is a Chaldean (tenet), has been arrogated to themselves by those of whom we have previously 
spoken. 

Now these, falsifying the name of truth, proclaim as a doctrine of Christ an insurrection of Aeons and revolts 
of good into (the ranks of) evil powers; and they speak of the confederations of good powers with wicked 
ones. Denominating them, therefore, TOPARCHAI and PR0ASTI0I,(6) and (though thus) framing for 
themselves very many other names not suggested (to them from other sources), they have yet unskilfully 
systematized the entire imaginary doctrine of the astrologers concerning the stars. And since they have 
introduced a supposition pregnant with immense error, they shall be refuted through the instrumentality of 
our admirable arrangement. For I shall set down, in contrast with the previously mentioned Chaldaic art of 
the astrologers, some of the Peratic(7) treatises, from which, by means of comparison, there will be an 
opportunity of perceiving how the Peratic doctrines are those confessedly of the astrologers, not of Christ. 

CHAP. IX. --SYSTEM OF THE PERATAE EXPLAINED OUT OF ONE OF THEIR OWN BOOKS. 

It seems, then, expedient to set forth a certain one of the books held(8) in repute amongst them, in which the 
following passage(9) occurs: "I am a voice of arousal from slumber in the age of night. Henceforward I 
commence to strip the power which is from chaos. The power is that of the lowest depth of mud, which 
uproars the slime of the incorruptible (and) humid expanse of space. And it is the entire power of the 
convulsion, which, ever in motion, and presenting the colour of water, whirls things on that are stationary, 
restrains things tremulous, sets things free as they proceed, lightens(IO) things as they abide, removes 
things on the increase, a faithful steward of the track of the breezes, enjoying the things disgorged from the 
twelve eyes of the law, (11) (and) manifesting a seal(12) to the power which along with itself distributes the 
downborne invisible waters, and has been called Thalassa. This power ignorance has been accustomed 
to denominate Cronus, guarded with chains because he tightly bound the fold of the dense and misty and 
obscure and murky Tartarus. According to the image of this were produced Cepheus, Prometheus, (and) 
Japetus. The Power to which has been entrusted Thalassa(l) is hermaphrodite. And it fastens the hissing 
sound arising from the twelve mouths into twelve pipes, and pours it forth. And the power itself is subtle, and 

removes the controlling, boisterous, upward motion (of the sea), and seals the tracks of its paths, lest (any 
antagonistic power) should wage war or introduce, any alteration. The tempestuous daughter of this one is a 
faithful protectress of all sorts of waters. Her name is Chorzar. Ignorance is in the habit of styling this (power) 
Neptune, according to whose image was produced Glaucus, Melicertes, Ino, Nebroe.(2) He that is 
encircled with the pyramid of twelve angels, (3) and darkens the gate into the pyramid with various colours, 
and completes the entire in the sable hues of Night: this one ignorance denominated Cronus. (4) And his 
ministers were five,-first U, second Aoai, third Uo, fourth Uoab, fifth ... Other trustworthy managers (there are) 
of his province of night and day, who repose in their own power. Ignorance denominated these the erratic 
stars, from whom depends a corruptible generation. Manager of the rising of the star(5) is 
Carphacasemeocheir, (and) Eccabbacara (is the same). Ignorance is in the habit of denominating these 
Curetes chief of the winds; third in order is Ariel, according to whose image was generated Aeolus, Briares. 
And chief of the twelve-houred nocturnal (power) is Sedan, whom ignorance is accustomed to style Osiris; 
(and) according to the image of this one was born Admetus, Medea, Helen, Aethusa. Chief of the 
twelve-houred diurnal power is Euno. This is manager of the rising of the star Protocamarus and of the 
ethereal (region), but ignorance has denominated him Isis. A sign of this one is the Dog-star, according to 
whose image were born Ptolemaeus son of Arsinoe, Didyma, Cleopatra, and Olympias. God's right-hand 
power is that which ignorance has denominated Rhea, according to whose image were produced Attis, 
Mygdon,(6) (and) (Enone. The left-hand power has lordship over sustenance, and ignorance is in the habit 
of styling this Ceres, (while) her name is Bona; and according to the image of this one were born Celeus, 
Triptolemus, Misyr, and Praxidica.(7) The right-hand power has lordship over fruits. This one ignorance has 
denominated Mena, according to whose image were born Bumegas,(8) Ostanes, Mercury Trismegistus, 
Curites, Petosiris, Zodarium, Berosus, Astrampsuchus, (and) Zoroaster. The left-hand power is (lord) of fire, 
(and) ignorance has denominated this one Vulcan, according to whose image were born Ericthonius, 
Achilles, Capaneus, Phaethon,(9) Meleager, Tydeus, Enceladus, Raphael, Suriel, (and) Omphale. There 
are three intermediate powers suspended from air, authors of generation. These ignorance has been in the 
habit of denominating Fates; and according to the image of these were produced the house of Priam, the 
house of Laius, Ino, Autonoe, Agave, Athamas, Procne, Danaides, and Peliades. A power (there is) 
hermaphrodite, always continuing in infancy, never waxing old, cause of beauty, pleasure, maturity, desire, 
and concupiscence; and ignorance has been accustomed to style this Eros, according to whose image 
were born Paris, Narcissus, Ganymede, Endymion, Tithonus, Icarius, Leda, Amymone, Thetis, Hesperides, 
Jason, Leander, (and) Hero." These are PROASTIOI up to AEther, for with this title also he inscribes the 
book. 

CHAP. X.-THE PERATIC HERESY NOMINALLY DIFFERENT FROM ASTROLOGY,BUT 
REALLY THE SAME SYSTEM ALLEGORIZED. 

It has been easily made evident to all, that the heresy of the Peratae is altered in name only from the (art) of 
the astrologers. And the rest of the books of these (heretics) contain the same method, if it were agreeable 
to any one to wade through them all. For, as I said, they suppose that the causes of the generation of all 
begotten things are things unbegotten and superjacent, and that the world with us has been produced after 
the mode of emanation, which (world) they denominate formal. And (they maintain) that all those stars 
together which are beheld in the firmament have been causes of the generation of this world. They have, 
however, altered the name of these, as one may perceive from the PROASTIOI by means of a comparison 
(of the two systems). And secondly, according to the same method as that whereby the world was made 
from a supernal emanation, they affirm that in this manner objects here derive from the emanation of the 
stars their generation, and corruption, and arrangement. Since, then, astrologers are acquainted with the 
horoscope, and meridian, and setting, and the point opposite the meridian; and since these stars occupy at 
different times different positions(l) in space, on account of the perpetual revolution of the universe, there 
are (necessarily) at different periods different declinations towards a centre, and (different) ascensions to 
centres. (2) (Now the Peratic here-ties), affixing an allegorical import to this arrangement of the astrologers, 
delineate the centre, as it were, a god and monad and lord over universal generation, whereas the 
declination (is regarded by them as a power) on the left, and ascension on the right. When any one, 
therefore, falling in with the treatises of these (heretics), finds mention among them of right or left power, let 
him recur to the centre, and the declination, and the ascension (of the Chaldean sages, and) he will clearly 
observe that the entire system of these (Peratae) consists of the astrological doctrine. 

CHAP. XI. -WHY THEY CALL THEMSELVES PERATAE; THEIR THEORY OF GENERATION 
SUPPORTED BY AN APPEAL TO ANTIQUITY; THEIR INTERPRETATION OF THE EXODUS 
OF ISRAEL; THEIR SYSTEM OF "THE SERPENT;" DEDUCED BY THEM FROM 
SCRIPTURE; THIS THE REAL IMPORT OF THE DOCTRINES OF THE ASTROLOGERS. 

They denominate themselves, however, Peratae, imagining that none of those things existing by generation 
can escape the determined lot for those things that derive their existence from generation. For if, says (the 
Peratic), anything be altogether begotten, it also perishes, as also is the opinion of the Sibyl. (3) But we 
alone, he says, who are conversant with the necessity of generation, and the paths through which man has 
entered into the world, and who have been accurately instructed (in these matters), we alone are competent 
to proceed through and pass beyond destruction. (4) But water, he says, is destruction; nor did the world, he 
says, perish by any other thing quicker than by water. Water, however, is that which rolls around among the 
PROASTIOI, (and) they assert (it to be) Cronus. For such a power, he says, is of the colour of water; and this 
power, he says-that is, Cronus-none of those things existent by generation can escape. For Cronus is a 
cause to every generation, in regard of succumbing under destruction, and there could not exist (an 
instance of) generation in which Cronus does not interfere. This, he says, is what the poets also affirm, and 
what even appals the gods:- 

"For know, he says, this earth and spacious heaven above. 

And Styx' flooded water, which is the oath 

That greatest is, and dreaded most by gods of happy life." 

And not only, he says, do the poets make this statement, but already also the very wisest men among the 
Greeks. And Heraclitus is even one of these, employing the following words: "For to souls water becomes 
death." This death, (the Peratic) says, seizes the Egyptians in the Red Sea, along with their chariots. All, 
however, who are ignorant (of this fact), he says, are Egyptians. And this, they assert, is the departure from 
Egypt, (that is,) from the body. For they suppose little Egypt to be body, and that it crosses the Red Sea-that 
is, the water of corruption, which is Cronus-and that it reaches a place beyond the Red Sea, that is, 
generation; and that it comes into the wilderness, that is, that it attains a condition independent of generation, 
where there exist promiscuously all the gods of destruction and the God of salvation. 
Now, he says, the stars are the gods of destruction, which impose upon existent things the necessity of 
alterable generation. These, he says, Moses denominated serpents of the wilderness, which gnaw and 
utterly ruin those who imagined that they had crossed the Red Sea. To those, then, he says, who of the 
children of Israel were bitten in the wilderness, Moses exhibited the real and perfect serpent; and they who 
believed on this serpent were not bitten in the wilderness, that is, (were not assailed) by (evil) powers. No 
one therefore, he says, is there who is able to save and deliver those that come forth from Egypt, that is, 
from the body and from this world, unless alone the serpent that is perfect and replete with fulness. Upon this 
(serpent), he says, he who fixes his hope is not destroyed by the snakes of the wilderness, that is, by the 
gods of generation. (This statement) is written, he says, in a book of Moses. This serpent, he says, is the 
power that attended Moses, (5) the rod that was turned into a serpent. The serpents, however, of the 
magicians-(that is,) the gods of destruction-withstood the power of Moses in Egypt, but the rod of Moses 
reduced them all to subjection and slew them. This universal serpent is, he says, the wise discourse of Eve. 
This, he says, is the mystery of Edem, this the river of Edem; this the mark that was set upon Cain, that any 
one who findeth him might not kill him. This, he says, (6) is Cain, (7) whose sacrifice(8) the god of this world did 
not accept. The gory sacrifice, however, of Abel he approved of; for the ruler of this world rejoices in 
(offerings of) blood. This, he says, is he who appeared in the last days, in form of a man, in the times of 
Herod, being born after the likeness of Joseph, who was sold by the hand of his brethren, to whom alone 
belonged the coat of many colours. This, he says, is he who is according to the likeness of Esau, whose 
garment-he not being himself present-was blessed; who did not receive, he says, the benediction uttered 
by him of enfeebled vision. (1) He acquired, however, wealth from a source independent of this, receiving 
nothing from him whose eyes were dim; and Jacob saw his countenance, (2) as a man beholds the face of 
God. In regard of this, he says, it has been written that "Nebrod was a mighty hunter before the Lord. "(3) And 
there are, he says, many who closely imitate this (Nimrod): as numerous are they as the gnawing (serpents) 
which were seen in the wilderness by the children of Israel, from which that perfect serpent which Moses set 
up delivered those that were bitten. This, he says, is that which has been declared: "In the same manner as 
Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so also must the Son of man be lifted up."(4) According to the 
likeness of this was made in the desert the brazen serpent which Moses set up. Of this alone, he says, the 
image is in heaven, always conspicuous in light. 

This, he says, is the great beginning respecting which Scripture has spoken. Concerning this, he says it has 
been declared: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. This 
was in the beginning with God, all things were made by Him, and without Him was not one thing that was 
made. And what was formed in Him is life. "(5) And in Him, he says, has been formed Eve; (now) Eve is life. 
This, however, he says, is Eve, mother of all living, (6)-a common nature, that is, of gods, angels, immortals, 
mortals, irrational creatures, (and) rational ones. For, he says, the expression "all" he uttered of all 

(existences). And if the eyes of any, lie says, are blessed, tiiis one, lool<ing upward on tiie firmament, will 
behold at the mighty summit(7) of heaven the beauteous image of the serpent, turning itself, and becoming 
an originating principle of every (species of) motion to all things that are being produced. He will (thereby) 
know that without him nothing consists, either of things in heaven, or things on earth, or things under the earth. 
Not night, not moon, not fruits, not generation, not wealth, not sustenance, not anything at all of existent things, 
is without his guidance. In regard of this, he says, is the great wonder which is beheld in the firmament by 
those who are able to observe it. For, he says, at this top of his head, a fact which is more incredible than all 
things to those who are ignorant, "are setting and rising mingled one with other." This it is in regard of which 
ignorance is in the habit of affirming: in heaven 

"Draco revolves, marvel mighty of monster dread. "(8) 

And on both sides of him have been placed Corona and Lyra; and above, near the top itself of the head, is 
visible the piteous man "Engonasis," 

"Holding the right foot's end of Draco fierce. "(9) 

And at the back of Engonasis is an imperfect serpent, with both hands tightly secured by Anguitenens, and 
being hindered from touching Corona that lies beside the perfect serpent. 

CHAP. XII. -COMPENDIOUS STATEMENT OF THE DOCTRINES OF THE PERATAE. 

This is the diversified wisdom of the Peratic heresy, which it is difficult to declare in its entirety, so intricate is 
it on account of its seeming to consist of the astrological art.' As far forth, then, as this is possible, we shall 
briefly explain the whole force of this (heresy). In order, however, that we may by a compendious statement 
elucidate the entire doctrine of these persons, it appears expedient to subjoin the following observations. 
According to them, the universe is Father, Son, (and) Matter; (but) each of these three has endless 
capacities in itself. Intermediate, then, between the Matter and the Father sits the Son, the Word, the Serpent, 
always being in motion towards the unmoved Father, and (towards) Matter itself in motion. And at one time 
he is turned towards the Father, and receives the powers into his own person; but at another time takes up 
these powers, and is turned towards Matter. And Matter, (though) devoid of attribute, and being unfashioned, 
moulds (into itself) forms from the Son which the Son moulded from the Father. 

But the Son derives shape from the Father after a mode ineffable, and unspeakable, and unchangeable; 
(that is,) in such a manner as Moses says that tire colours of the conceived (kine) flowed from the rods(10) 
which were fixed in the drinking-troughs. And in like manner, again, that capacities flowed also from the Son 
into Matter, similarly to the power in reference to conception which came from the rods upon the conceived 
(kine). And the difference of colours, and the dissimilarity which flowed from the rods through the waters upon 
the sheep, is, he says, the difference of corruptible and incorruptible generation. As, however, one who 
paints from nature, though he takes nothing away from animals, transfers by his pencil all forms to the 
canvas; so the Son, by a power which belongs to himself, transfers paternal marks from the Father into 
Matter. All the paternal marks are here, and there are not any more. For if any one, he says, of those 
(beings) which are here will have strength to perceive that he is a paternal mark transferred hither from 
above, (and that he is) incarnate-just as by the conception resulting from the rod a something white is 
produced,-he is of the same substance altogether with the Father in heaven, and returns thither. If, however, 
he may not happen upon this doctrine, neither will he understand the necessity of generation, just as an 
abortion born at night will perish at night. When, therefore, he says, the Saviour observes, "your Father which 
is in heaven, "(1) he alludes to that one from whom the Son deriving his characteristics has transferred them 
hither. When, however, (Jesus) remarks, "Your father is a murderer from the beginning, "(2) he alludes to the 
Ruler and Demiurge of matter, who, appropriating the marks delivered from the Son, generated him here 
who from the beginning was a murderer, for his work causes corruption and death. 

No one, then, he says, can be saved or return (into heaven) without the Son, and the Son is the Serpent. For 
as he brought down from above the paternal marks, so again he carries up from thence those marks roused 
from a dormant condition and rendered paternal characteristics, substantial ones from the unsubstantial 
Being, transferring them hither from thence. This, he says, is what is spoken: "I am the door."(3) And he 
transfers (those marks), he says, (4) to those who close the eyelid, as the naphtha drawing the fire in every 
direction towards itself; nay rather, as the magnet (attracting) the iron and not anything else, or just as the 
backbone of the sea falcon, the gold and nothing else, or as the chaff is led by the amber. In this manner, he 
says, is the portrayed, perfect, and con-substantial genus drawn again from the world by the Serpent; nor 
does he (attract) anything else, as it has been sent down by him. For a proof of this, they adduce the 
anatomy(5) of the brain, assimilating, from the fact of its immobility, the brain itself to the Father, and the 

cerebellum to the Son, because of its being moved and being of the form of (the head of) a serpent. And 
they allege that this (cerebellum), by an ineffable and inscrutable process, attracts through the pineal gland 
the spiritual and life-giving substance emanating from the vaulted chamber(6) (in which the brain is 
embedded). And on receiving this, the cerebellum in an ineffable manner imparts the ideas, just as the Son 
does, to matter; or, in other words, the seeds and the genera of the things produced according to the flesh 
flow along into the spinal marrow. Employing this exemplar, (the heretics) seem to adroitly introduce their 
secret mysteries, which are delivered in silence. Now it would be impious for us to declare these; yet it is 
easy to form an idea of them, by reason of the many statements that have been made. 

CHAP. XIII. -THE PERATIC HERESY NOT GENERALLY KNOWN. 

But since I consider that I have plainly explained the Peratic heresy, and by many (arguments) have 
rendered evident (a system that hitherto) has always escaped notice, and is altogether(7) a tissue of fable, 
and one that disguises its own peculiar venom, it seems expedient to advance no further statement beyond 
those already put forward; for the opinions propounded by (the heretics) themselves are sufficient for their 
own condemnation. 

CHAP. XIV.-THE SYSTEM OF THE SETHIANS; THEIR TRIAD OF INFINITE PRINCIPLES; 
THEIR HERESY EXPLAINED; THEIR INTERPRETATION OF THE INCARNATION. 

Let us then see what the Sithians(8) affirm. To these it appears that there are three definite principles of the 
universe, and that each of these principles possesses infinite powers. And when they speak of powers(9) let 
him that heareth take into account that they make this statement. Everything whatsoever you discern by an 
act of intelligence, or also omit (to discern) as not being understood, this by nature is fitted to become each 
of the principles, as in the human soul every art whatsoever which is made the subject of instruction. Just for 
instance, he says, this child will be a musician, having waited the requisite time for (acquiring a knowledge 
of) the harp; or a geometrician, (having previously undergone the necessary study for acquiring a 
knowledge) of geometry; (or) a grammarian, (after having sufficiently studied) grammar; (or) a workman, 
(having acquired a practical acquaintance) with a handicraftsman's business; and to one brought into 
contact with the rest of the arts a similar occurrence will take place. Now of principles, he says, the 
substances are light and darkness; and of these, spirit is intermediate without admixture. The spirit, 
however, is that which has its appointed place in the midst of darkness which is below, and light which is 
above. It is not spirit as a current of wind, or some gentle breeze that can be felt; but, as it were, some odour 
of ointment or of incense formed out of a compound. (It is) a subtle power, that insinuates itself by means of 
some impulsive quality in a fragrance, which is inconceivable and better than could be expressed by 
words. Since, however, light is above and darkness below, and spirit is intermediate in such a way as 
stated between these; and since light is so constituted, that, like a ray of the sun, it shines from above upon 
the underlying darkness; and again, since the fragrance of the spirit, holding an intermediate place, is 
extended and carried in every direction, as in the case of incense-offerings placed upon fire, we detect the 
fragrance that is being wafted in every direction: when, I say, there is a power of this description belonging 
unto the principles which are classified under three divisions, the power of spirit and light simultaneously 
exists in the darkness that is situated underneath them. But the darkness is a terrible water, into which light is 
absorbed and translated into a nature of the same description with spirit. The darkness, however, is not 
devoid of intelligence, but altogether reflective, and is conscious that, where the light has been abstracted 
from the darkness, the darkness remains isolated, invisible, obscure, impotent, inoperative, (and) feeble. 
Wherefore it is constrained, by all its reflection and understanding, to collect into itself the lustre and 
scintillation of light with the fragrance of the spirit. And it is possible to behold an image of the nature of these 
in the human countenance; for instance, the pupil of the eye, dark from the subjacent humours, (but) 
illuminated with spirit. As, then, the darkness seeks after the splendour, that it may keep in bondage the 
spark, and may have perceptive power, so the light and spirit seek after the power that belongs to 
themselves, and strive to uprear, and towards each other to carry up their intermingled powers into the dark 
and formidable water lying underneath. 

But all the powers of the three originating principles, which are as regards number indefinitely infinite, are 
each according to its own substance reflective and intelligent, unnumbered in multitude. And since what are 
reflective and intelligent are numberless in multitude, while they continue by themselves, they are all at rest. 
If, however, power approaches power, the dissimilarity of (what is set in) juxtaposition produces a certain 
motion and energy, which are formed from the motion resulting from the concourse effected by the 
juxtaposition of the coalescing powers. For the concourse of the powers ensues, just like any mark of a seal 
that is impressed by means of the concourse correspondingly with (the seal) which prints the figure on the 
substances that are brought up (into contact with it). Since, therefore, the powers of the three principles are 

infinite in number, and from infinite powers (arise) infinite concourses, images of infinite seals are 
necessarily produced. These images, therefore, are the forms of the different sorts of animals. From the first 
great concourse, then, of the three principles, ensues a certain great form, a seal of heaven and earth. The 
heaven and the earth have a figure similar to the womb, having a navel in the midst; and if, he says, any one 
is desirous of bringing this figure under the organ of vision, let him artfully scrutinize the pregnant womb of 
whatsoever animal he wishes, and he will discover an image of the heaven and the earth, and of the things 
which in the midst of all are unalterably situated underneath. 

(And so it is, that the first great concourse of the three principles) has produced such a figure of heaven and 
earth as is similar to a womb after the first coition. But, again, in the midst of the heaven and the earth have 
been generated infinite concourses of powers. And each concourse did not effect and fashion anything else 
than a seal of heaven and earth similar to a womb. But, again, in the earth, from the infinite seals are 
produced infinite crowds of various animals. But into all this infinity of the different animals under heaven is 
diffused and distributed, along with the light, the fragrance of the Spirit from above. From the water, therefore, 
has been produced a first-begotten originating principle, viz., wind, (which is) violent and boisterous, and a 
cause of all generation. For producing a sort of ferment in the waters, (the wind) uplifts waves out of the 
waters; and the motion(2) of the waves, just as when some impulsive power of pregnancy is the origin of the 
production of a man or mind, (3) is caused when (the ocean), excited by the impulsive power of spirit, is 
propelled forward. When, however, this wave that has been raised out of the water by the wind, and 
rendered pregnant in its nature, has within itself obtained the power, possessed by the female, of 
generation, it holds together the light scattered from above along with the fragrance of the spirit-that is, mind 
moulded in the different species. And this (light) is a perfect God, who from the unbegotten radiance above, 
and from the spirit, is borne down into human nature as into a temple, by the impulsive power of Nature, and 
by the motion of wind. And it is produced from water being commingled(l) and blended with bodies as if it 
were a salt(2) of existent things, and a light of darkness. And it struggles to be released from bodies, and is 
not able to find liberation and an egress for itself For a very diminutive spark, a severed splinter from above 
like the ray of a star, has been mingled in the much compounded waters of many (existences), (3) as, says 
he, (David) remarks in a psalm. (4) Every thought, then, and solicitude actuating the supernal light is as to 
how and in what manner mind may be liberated, by the death of the depraved and dark body, from the 
Father that is below, which is the wind that with noise(5) and tumult uplifted the waves, and who generated a 
perfect mind his own Son; not, however, being his peculiar (offspring) substantially. For he was a ray (sent 
down) from above, from that perfect light, (and) was overpowered in the dark,(6) and formidable, and bitter, 
and defiled water; and he is a luminous spirit borne down over the water.(7) When, therefore, the waves that 
have been upreared from the waters have received within themselves the power of generation possessed 
by females, they contain, as a certain womb, in different species, the infused radiance, so as that it is visible 
in the case of all animals. (8) But the wind, at the same time fierce and formidable, (9) whirling along, is, in 
respect of its hissing sound, like a serpent.(IO) 

First, then, from the wind-that is, from the serpent-has resulted the originating principle of generation in the 
manner declared, all things having simultaneously received the principle of generation. After, then, the light 
and the spirit had been received, he says, into the polluted and baneful (and) disordered womb, the 
serpent-the wind of the darkness, the first-begotten of the waters-enters within and produces man, and the 
impure womb neither loves nor recognises any other form. The perfect Word of supernal light being 
therefore assimilated (in form) to the beast, (that is,) the serpent, entered into the defiled womb, having 
deceived (the womb) through the similitude of the beast itself, in order that (the Word) may loose the chains 
that encircle the perfect mind which has been begotten amidst impurity of womb by the primal offspring of 
water, (namely,) serpent, wind, (and) beast.(1 1) This, he says, is the form of the servant,(12) and this the 
necessity of the Word of God coming down into the womb of a virgin. But he says it is not sufficient that the 
Perfect Man, the Word, has entered into the womb of a virgin, and loosed the pangs(13) which were in that 
darkness. Nay, more than this was requisite; for after his entrance(14) into the foul mysteries of the womb, he 
was washed, and drank of the cup of life-giving bubbling water.(15) And it was altogether needful that he 
should drink who was about to strip off the servile form, and assume celestial raiment. 

CHAP. XV. -THE SETHIANS SUPPORT THEIR DOCTRINES BY AN ALLEGORICAL 
INTERPRETATION OF SCRIPTURE; THEIR SYSTEM REALLY DERIVED FROM NATURAL 
PHILOSOPHERS AND FROM THE ORPHIC RITES; ADOPT THE HOMERIC COSMOGONY. 

These are the statements which the patrons(16) of the Sethian doctrines make, as far as it is possible to 
declare in a few words. Their system, however, is made up (of tenets) from natural (philosophers), and of 
expressions uttered in reference to different other subjects; and transferring (the sense of) these to the 
Eternal(17) Logos, they explain them as we have declared. But they assert likewise that Moses confirms 
their doctrine when he says, "Darkness, and mist, and tempest." These, (the Sethian) says, are the three 

principles (of our system); or wiien lie states tiiat tiiree were born in paradise-Adam, Eve, tiie serpent; or 
wiien lie speal<s of tiiree (persons, nameiy) Cain, Abel, Seth; and again of three (others)-Shem, Ham,(1) 
Japheth; or when he mentions three patriarchs -Abraham, Isaac, Jacob; or when he speaks of the existence 
of three days before sun and moon; or when he mentions three laws-prohibitory, permissive, and 
adjudicatory of punishment. Now, a prohibitory law is as follows: "Of every tree that is in paradise thou 
mayest freely eat; but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil thou mayest not eat."(2) But in the 
passage, "Come forth from thy land and from thy kindred, and hither into a land which I shall show thee, "(3) 
this law, he says, is permissive; for one who is so disposed may depart, and one who is not so disposed 
may remain. But a law adjudicatory of punishment is that which makes the following declaration: "Thou shall 
not commit adultery, thou shall not kill, thou shall not steal;"(4) for a penalty is awarded to each of these acts 
of wickedness. 

The entire system of their doctrine, however, is (derived) from(5) the ancient theologians Musaeus, and 
Linus, and Orpheus, (6) who elucidates especially the ceremonies of initiation, as well as the mysteries 
themselves. For their doctrine concerning the womb is also the tenet of Orpheus; and the (idea of the) 
navel, (7) which is harmony, (8) is (to be found) with the same symbolism attached to it in the Bacchanalian 
orgies of Orpheus. But prior to the observance of the mystic rite of Celeus, and Triptolemus, and Ceres, and 
Proserpine, and Bacchus in Eleusis, these orgies have been celebrated and handed down to men in 
Phlium of Attica. (9) For antecedent to the Eleusinian mysteries, there are (enacted) in Phlium the orgies(1 0) 
of her denominated the "Great (Mother)." There is, however, a portico in this (city), and on the portico is 
inscribed a representation, (visible) up to the present day, of all the words which are spoken (on such 
occasions). Many, then, of the words inscribed upon that portico are those respecting which Plutarch 
institutes discussions in his ten books against(11) Empedocles. And in the greater(12) number of these 
books is also drawn the representation of a certain aged man, grey-haired, winged, (13) having his 
pudendum erectum, pursuing a retreating woman of azure colour. (1 4) And over the aged man is the 
inscription "phaos ruentes," and over the woman "pereaphicola."(15) But "phaos ruentes"(16) appears to be 
the light (which exists), according to the doctrine of the Sethians, and "phicola" the darkish water; while the 
space in the midst of these seems to be a harmony constituted from the spirit that is placed between. The 
name, however, of "phaos ruentes" manifests, as they allege, the flow from above of the light downwards. 
Wherefore one may reasonably assert that the Sethians celebrate rites among themselves, very closely 
bordering upon those orgies of the "Great (Mother" which are observed among) the Phliasians. And the 
poet likewise seems to bear his testimony to this triple division, when he remarks, "And all things have been 
triply divided, and everything obtains its (proper) distinction;"(17) that is, each member of the threefold 
division has obtained (a particular) capacity. But now, as regards the tenet that the subjacent water below, 
which is dark, ought, because the light has set (over it), to convey upwards and receive the spark borne 
clown from (the light) itself; in the assertion of this tenet. I say, the all-wise Sethians appear to derive (their 
opinion) from Homer:- 

"By earth I sware, and yon broad Heaven above. 
And Stygian stream beneath, the weightiest oath 
Of solemn power, to bind the blessed gods. "(18) 

That is, according to Homer, the gods suppose water to be loathsome and horrible. Now, similar to this is 
the doctrine of the Sethians, which affirms (water) to be formidable to the mind. (19) 

CHAP. XVI. -THE SETHIAN THEORY CONCERNING "MIXTURE" AND "COMPOSITION;" 
APPLICATION OF IT TO CHRIST; ILLUSTRATION FROM THE WELL OF AMPA. 

These, and other assertions similar to these, are made (by the Sethians) in their interminable 
commentaries. They, however, persuade their disciples to become conversant with the theory respecting 
composition and mixture. But this theory has formed a subject of meditation to many, but (among others) 
also to Andronicus the Peripatetic. The Sethians, then, affirm that the theory concerning composition and 
mixture is constituted according to the following method: The luminous ray from above is intermingled, and 
the very diminutive spark is delicately blended in the dark waters beneath; and (both of these) become 
united, and are formed into one compound mass, just as a single savour (results) from the mixture of many 
incense-offerings in the fire, and (just as) an adept, by having a test in an acute sense of smell, ought to be 
able from the single odour of the incense to distinguish accurately each (ingredient) of the incense-offerings 
that have been mingled in the fire, -whether, for example, storax, and myrrh, and frankincense, or whatever 
other (ingredient) may be mixed (in the incense). They, however, employ also other examples, saying both 
that brass is mixed with gold, and that some art has been discovered which separates the brass from the 
gold. And, in like manner, if tin or brass, or any substance homogeneous with it, be discovered mixed with 

silver, these likewise, by some art superior to that of mixing, are distinguished. But already some one also 
distinguishes water mingled with wine.(1) So, say they, though all things are commingled, they are capable 
of being separated. Nay, but, he says, derive the same lesson from the case of animals. For when the 
animal is dead, each of its parts is separated; and when dissolution takes place, the animal in this way 
vanishes. This is, he says, what has been spoken: "I came not to send peace on the earth, but a 
sword, "(2)-that is, the division and separation of the things that have been commingled. For each of the 
things that have been commingled is separated and divided when it reaches its proper place. For as there 
is one place of mixture for all animals, so also has there been established one (locality) of separation. And, 
he says, no one is aware of this (place), save we alone that have been born again, spiritual, not carnal, 
whose citizenship is in heaven above. 

In this manner insinuating themselves, they corrupt their pupils, partly by misusing the words spoken (by 
themselves), while they wickedly pervert, to serve any purpose they wish, what has been admirably said (in 
Scripture); and partly by concealing their nefarious conduct, by means of whatever comparisons they 
please. All these things, then, he says, that have been com-mingled, possess, as has been declared, their 
own particular place, and hurry towards their own peculiar (substances), as iron towards the magnet, and the 
chaff to the vicinity of amber, and the gold to the spur(3) of the sea falcon. In like manner, the ray(4) of light 
which has been com-mingled with the water, having obtained from discipline and instruction its own proper 
locality, hastens towards the Logos that comes from above in servile form; and along with the Logos exists 
as a logos in that place where the Logos is still: (the light, I say, hastens to the Logos with greater speed) 
than the iron towards the magnet. 

And that these things, he says, are so, and that all things that have been commingled are separated in their 
proper places, learn. There is among the Persians in a city Ampa,(5) near the river Tills, a well; and near the 
well, at the top, has been constructed a certain reservoir, supplied with three outlets; and when one pumps 
from this well, and draws off some of its contents in a vessel, what is thus pumped out of the well, whatever it 
is at all, he pours into the reservoir hard by. And when what is thus infused reaches the outlets, and when 
what is taken up (out of each outlet) in a single vessel is examined, a separation is observed to have taken 
place. And in the first of the outlets is exhibited a concretion of salt, and in the second of asphalt, and in the 
third of oil; and the oil is black, just as, he says, Herodotus(6) also narrates, and it yields a heavy smell, and 
the Persians call this "rhadinace." The similitude of the well is, say the Sethians, more sufficient for the 
demonstration of their proposition than all the statements that have been previously made. 

CHAP. XVII. --THE SETHIAN DOCTRINES TO BE LEARNED FROM THE "PARAPHRASE OF 
SETH." 

The opinion of the Sethians appears to us to have been sufficiently elucidated. If, however, any one is 
desirous of learning the entire doctrine according to them, let him read a book inscribed Paraphrase of 
Seth; for all their secret tenets he will find deposited there. But since we have explained the opinions 
entertained by the Sethians, let us see also what are the doctrines advanced by Justinus. 

CHAP. XVIII. -THE SYSTEM OF JUSTINUS ANTISCRIPTURAL AND ESSENTIALLY 
PAGAN. 

Justinus(1) was entirely opposed to the teaching of the holy Scriptures, and moreover to the written or oral 
teaching of the blessed evangelists, according as the Logos was accustomed to instruct His disciples, 
saying, "Go not into the way of the Gentiles;"(2) and this signifies that they should not attend to the futile 
doctrine of the Gentiles. This (heretic) endeavours to lead on his hearers into an acknowledgment of 
prodigies detailed by the Gentiles, and of doctrines inculcated by them. And he narrates, word for word, 
legendary accounts prevalent among the Greeks, and does not previously teach or deliver his perfect 
mystery, unless he has bound his dupe by an oath. Then he brings forward (these) fables for the purpose of 
persuasion, in order that they who are conversant with the incalculable trifling of these books may have 
some consolation in the details of these legends. Thus it happens as when in like manner one making a 
long journey deems it expedient, on having fallen in with an inn, to take repose. And so it is that, when once 
more they are induced to turn towards studying the diffuse doctrine of these lectures, they may not abhor 
them while they, undergoing instruction unnecessarily prolix, rush stupified into the transgression devised by 
(Justinus); and previously he binds his followers with horrible oaths, neither to publish nor abjure these 
doctrines, and forces upon them an acknowledgment (of their truth). And in this manner he delivers the 
mysteries impiously discovered by himself, partly, according to the statements previously made, availing 
himself of the Hellenic legends, and partly of those pretended books which, to some extent, bear a 
resemblance to the foresaid heresies. For all, forced together by one spirit, are drawn into one profound 
abyss of pollution, inculcating the same tenets, and detailing the same legends, each after a different 

method. All those, however, style themselves Gnostics in this peculiar sense, that they alone themselves 
have imbibed the marvellous knowledge of the Perfect and Good (Being). 

CHAP. XIX. -THE JUSTINIAN HERESY UNFOLDED IN THE "BOOK OF BARUCH." 

But swear, says Justinus, if you wish to know "what eye hath not seen, and ear hath not heard, and the things 
which have not entered into the heart;"(3) that is, if you wish to know Him who is good above all. Him who is 
more exalted, (swear) that you will preserve the secrets (of the Justinian) discipline, as intended to be kept 
silent. For also our Father, on beholding the Good One, and on being initiated with Him, preserved the 
mysteries respecting which silence is enjoined, and sware, as it has been written, "The Lord sware, and will 
not repent."(4) Having, then, in this way set the seal to these tenets, he seeks to inveigle (his followers) with 
more legends, (which are detailed) through a greater number of books; and so he conducts (his readers) to 
the Good One, consummating the initiated (by admitting them into) the unspeakable My stories. (5) In order, 
however, that we may not wade through more of their volumes, we shall illustrate the ineffable Mysteries (of 
Justinus) from one book of his, inasmuch as, according to his supposition, it is (a work) of high repute. Now 
this volume is inscribed Baruch; and one fabulous account out of many which is explained by (Justinus) in 
this (volume), we shall point out, inasmuch as it is to be found in Herodotus. But after imparting a different 
shape to this (account), he explains it to his pupils as if it were something novel, being under the impression 
that the entire arrangement of his doctrine (springs) out of it. 

CHAP. XX.--THE COSMOGONY OF JUSTINUS AN ALLEGORICAL EXPLANATION OF 
HERODOTUS' LEGEND OF HERCULES. 

Herodotus, (6) then, asserts that Hercules, when driving the oxen of Geryon from Erytheia,(7) came into 
Scythia, and that, being wearied with travel-ling, he retired into some desert spot and slept for a short time. 
But while he slumbered his horse disappeared, seated on which he had performed his lengthened journey. 
On being aroused from repose, he, however, instituted a diligent search through the desert, endeavouring to 
discover his horse. And though he is unsuccessful in his search after the horse, he yet finds in the desert a 
certain damsel, half of whose form was that of woman, and proceeded to question her if she had seen the 
horse anywhere. The girl, however, replies that she had seen (the animal), but that she would not show him 
unless Hercules previously would come along with her for the purpose of sexual intercourse. Now 
Herodotus informs us that her upper parts as far as the groin were those of a virgin, but that everything below 
the body after the groin presented some horrible appearance of a snake. In anxiety, however, for the 
discovery of his horse, Hercules complies with the monster's request; for he knew her (carnally), and made 
her pregnant. And he foretold, after coition, that she had by him in her womb three children at the same time, 
who were destined to become illustrious. And he ordered that she, on bringing forth, should impose on the 
children as soon as born the following names: Agathyrsus, Gelonus, and Scytha. And as the reward of this 
(favour) receiving his horse from the beast-like damsel, he went on his way, taking with him the cattle also. 
But after these (details), Herodotus has a protracted account; adieu, however, to it for the present.(1) But 
what the opinions are of Justinus, who transfers this legend into (his account of) the generation of the 
universe, we shall explain. 

CHAP. XXI.--JUSTINUS' TRIAD OF PRINCIPLES; HIS ANGELOGRAPHY FOUNDED ON 
THIS TRIAD; HIS EXPLANATION OF THE BIRTH, LIFE, AND DEATH OF OUR LORD. 

This (heresiarch) makes the following statement. There are three unbegotten principles of the universe, two 
male (and) one female. Of the male (principles), however, a certain one, is denominated good, and it alone 
is called after this manner, and possesses a power of prescience concerning the universe. But the other is 
father(2) of all begotten things, devoid of prescience, (3) and invisible. And the female (principle) is devoid of 
prescience, passionate, two-minded, (4) two-bodied, in every respect answering (the description of) the girl 
in the legend of Herodotus, as far as the groin a virgin, and (in) the parts below (resembling) a snake, as 
Justinus says. But this girl is styled Edem and Israel. And these principles of the universe are, he says, roots 
and fountains from which existing things have been produced, but that there was not anything else. The 
Father, then, who is devoid of prescience, beholding that half-woman Edem, passed into a concupiscent 
desire for her. But this Father, he says, is called Elohim. Not less did Edem also long for Elohim, and the 
mutual passion brought them together into the one nuptial couch of love. (5) And from such an intercourse the 
Father generates out of Edem unto himself twelve angels. And the names of the angels begotten by the 
Father are these: Michael, Amen, (6) Baruch, Gabriel, Esaddaeus. ... And of the maternal angels which Edem 
brought forth, the names in like manner have been subjoined, and they are as follows: Babel, (7) Achamoth, 
Naas, Bel, Bellas, Satan, Sael, Adonaeus, Leviathan, (8) Pharao, Carcamenos, (and) Lathen. 

Of these twenty-four angels the paternal ones are associated with the Father, and do all things according to 
His will; and the maternal (angels are associated with) Edem the Mother. And the multitude of all these 
angels together is Paradise, he says, concerning which Moses speaks: "God planted a garden in Eden 
towards the east,"(9) that is, towards the face of Edem, that Edem might behold the garden-that is, the 
angels-continually. Allegorically the angels are styled trees of this garden, and the tree of life is the third of 
the paternal angels-Baruch. And the tree of the knowledge of good and evil is the third of the maternal 
angels-Naas. For so, (10) says (Justinus), one ought to interpret the words of Moses, observing, "Moses 
said these things disguisedly, from the fact that all do not attain the truth." And, he says. Paradise being 
formed from the conjugal joy of Elohim and Edem, the angels of Elohim receiving from the most beauteous 
earth, that is, not from tile portion of Edem resembling a monster, but from the parts above the groin of 
human shape, and gentle-in aspect,-make man out of the earth. But out of the parts resembling a monster 
are produced wild beasts, and the rest of the animal creation. They made man, therefore, as a symbol of 
the unity and love (subsisting) between them; and they depute their own powers unto him, Edem the soul, but 
Elohim the spirit. And the man Adam is produced as some actual seal and memento of love, and as an 
everlasting emblem of the marriage of Edem and Elohim. And in like manner also Eve was produced, he 
says, as Moses has described, an image and emblem (as well as) a seal, to be preserved for ever, of 
Edem. And in like manner also a soul was deposited in Eve, -an image-from Edem, but a spirit from 
Elohim. And there were given to them commandments, "Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, "(1 1) 
that is, Edem; for so he wishes that it had been written. For the entire of the power belonging unto herself, 
Edem conferred upon Elohim as a sort of nuptial dowry. Whence, he says, from imitation of that primary 
marriage up to this day, women bring a dowry to their husbands, complying with a certain divine and 
paternal law that came into existence on the part of Edem towards Elohim. 

And when all things were created as has been described by Moses-both heaven and earth, and the things 
therein(1)-the twelve angels of the Mother were divided into four principles, and each fourth part of them is 
called a river-Phison, and Gehon, and Tigris, and Euphrates, as, he says, Moses states. These twelve 
angels, being mutually connected, go about into four parts, and manage the world, holding from Edem a 
sort of viceregal(2) authority over the world. But they do not always continue in the same places, but move 
around as if in a circular dance, changing place after place, and at set times and intervals retiring to the 
localities subject to themselves. And when Phison holds sway over places, famine, distress, and affliction 
prevail in that part of the earth, for the battalion of these angels is niggardly. In like manner also there belong 
to each part of the four, according to the power and nature of each, evil times and hosts of diseases. And 
continually, according to the dominion(3) of each fourth part, this stream of evil, just (like a current) of rivers, 
careers, according to the will of Edem, uninterruptedly around the world. And from some cause of this 
description has arisen the necessity of evil. 

When Elohim had prepared and created the world as a result from joint pleasure. He wished to ascend up 
to the elevated parts of heaven, and to see that not anything of what pertained to the creation laboured 
under deficiency. And He took His Own angels with Him, for His nature was to mount aloft, leaving Edem 
below:(4) for inasmuch as she was earth, she was not disposed to follow upward her spouse. Elohim, then, 
coming to the highest part of heaven above, and beholding a light superior to that which He Himself had 
created, exclaimed, "Open me the gates, that entering in I may acknowledge the Lord; for I considered 
Myself to be Lord. "(5) A voice was returned to Him from the light, saying, "This is the gate of the Lord: 
through this the righteous enter in. "(6) And immediately the gate was opened, and the Father, without the 
angels, entered, (advancing) towards the Good One, and beheld "what eye hath not seen, and ear hath not 
heard, and what hath not entered into the heart of man to (conceive). "(7) 

Then the Good One says to him, "Sit thou on my right hand. "(8) And the Father says to the Good One, 
"Permit me. Lord, to overturn the world which I have made, for my spirit is bound to men. (9) And I wish to 
receive it back (from them." Then the Good One replies to him, "No evil canst thou do while thou art with me, 
for both thou and Edem made the world as a result of conjugal joy. Permit Edem, then, to hold possession of 
the world as long as she wishes; but do you remain with me." Then Edem, knowing that she had been 
deserted by Elohim, was seized with grief, and placed beside herself her own angels. And she adorned 
herself after a comely fashion, if by any means Elohim, passing into concupiscent desire, might descend 
(from heaven) to her. When, however, Elohim, overpowered by the Good One, no longer descended to 
Edem, Edem commanded Babel, which is Venus, to cause adulteries and dissolutions of marriages among 
men. (And she adopted this expedient) in order that, as she had been divorced from Elohim, so also the 
spirit of Elohim, which is in men, being wrong with sorrow, might be punished by such separations, and might 
undergo precisely the sufferings which (were being endured by) the deserted Edem. And Edem gives great 
power to her third angel, Naas, that by every species of punishment she might chasten the spirit of Elohim 
which is in men, in order that Elohim, through the spirit, might be punished for having deserted his spouse, in 
violation of the agreements entered into between them. Elohim the father, seeing these things, sends forth 
Baruch, the third angel among his own, to succour the spirit that is in all men.(1 0) Baruch then coming, stood 

in the midst of tiie angels of Edem, tiiat is, in tiie midst of paradise-for paradise is tiie angels, in the midst of 
whom he stood, -and issued to the man the following injunction: "Of every tree that is in paradise thou 
mayest freely eat, but thou mayest not eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, "(1 1) which is Naas. 
Now the meaning is, that he should obey the rest of the eleven angels of Edem, for the eleven possess 
passions, but are not guilty of transgression. Naas, however, has committed sin, for he went in unto Eve, 
deceiving her, and debauched her; and (such an act as) this is a violation of law. He, however, likewise went 
in unto Adam, and had unnatural intercourse with him; and this is itself also a piece of turpitude, whence 
have arisen adultery and sodomy. 

Henceforward vice and virtue were prevalent among men, arising from a single source-that of the Father. 
For the Father having ascended to the Good One, points out from time to time the way to those desirous of 
ascending (to him likewise). After having, however, departed from Edem, he caused an originating principle 
of evil for the spirit of the Father that is in men.(1) Baruch therefore was despatched to Moses, and through 
him spoke to the children of Israel, that they might be converted unto the Good One. But the third angel 
(Naas), by the soul which came from Edem upon Moses, as also upon all men, obscured the precepts of 
Baruch, and caused his own peculiar injunctions to be hearkened unto. For this reason the soul is arrayed 
against the spirit, and the spirit against the soul. (2) For the soul is Edem, but the spirit Elohim, and each of 
these exists in all men, both females and males. Again, after these (occurrences), Baruch was sent to the 
Prophets, that through the Prophets the spirit that dwelleth in men(3) might hear (words of warning), and might 
avoid Edem and the wicked fiction, just as the Father had fled from Elohim. In like manner also-by the 
prophets(4)-Naas, by a similar device, through the soul(5) that dwells in man, along with the spirit of the 
Father, enticed away the prophets, and all (of them) were allured after him, and did not follow the words of 
Baruch, which Elohim enjoined. 

Ultimately Elohim selected Hercules, an uncircumcised prophet, and sent him to quell the twelve angels of 
Edem, and release the Father from the twelve angels, those wicked ones of the creation. These are the 
twelve conflicts of Hercules which Hercules underwent, in order, from first to last, viz.. Lion, and Hydra, and 
Boar, and the others successively. For they say that these are the names (of them) among the Gentiles, and 
they have been derived with altered denominations from the energy of the maternal angels. When he 
seemed to have vanquished his antagonists, Omphale-now she is Babel or Venus-clings to him and 
entices away Hercules, and divests him of his power, viz., the commands of Baruch which Elohim issued. 
And in place (of this power. Babel) envelopes him in her own peculiar robe, that is, in the power of Edem, 
who is the power below; and in this way the prophecy of Hercules remained unfulfilled, and his works. 
Finally, however, in the days of Herod the king, Baruch is despatched, being sent down once more by 
Elohim; and coming to Nazareth, he found Jesus, son of Joseph and Mary, a child of twelve years, feeding 
sheep. And he announces to him all things from the beginning, whatsoever had been done by Edem and 
Elohim, and whatsoever would be likely to take place hereafter, and spoke the following words: "All the 
prophets anterior to you have been enticed. Put forth an effort, therefore, Jesus, Son of man, not to be 
allured, but preach this word unto men, and carry back tidings to them of things pertaining to the Father, and 
things pertaining to the Good One, and ascend to the Good One, and sit there with Elohim, Father of us all." 
And Jesus was obedient unto the angel, saying that, "I shall do all things. Lord," and proceeded to preach. 
Naas therefore wished to entice this one also. (Jesus, however, was not disposed to listen to his 
overtures(6)), for he remained faithful to Baruch. Therefore Naas, being inflamed with anger because he 
was not able to seduce him, caused him to be crucified. He, however, leaving the body of Edem on the 
(accursed) tree, ascended to the Good One; saying, however, to Edem, "Woman, thou retainestthy son, "(7) 
that is, the natural and the earthly man. But (Jesus) himself commending his spirit into the hands of the 
Father, ascended to the Good One. Now the Good One is Priapus, (and) he it is who antecedently caused 
the production of everything that exists. On this account he is styled Priapus, because he previously 
fashioned all things (according to his own design). For this reason, he says, in every temple is placed his 
statue, which is revered by every creature; and (there are images of him) in the highways, carrying over his 
head ripened fruits, that is, the produce of the creation, of which he is the cause, having in the first instance 
formed, (according to His own design), the creation, when as yet it had no existence. When, therefore, he 
says, you hear men asserting that the swan went in unto Leda, and begat a child from her, (learn that) the 
swan is Elohim, and Leda Edem. And when people allege that an eagle went in unto Ganymede, (know that) 
the eagle is Naas, and Ganymede Adam. And when they assert that gold (in a shower) went in unto Danae 
and begat a child from her, (recollect that) the gold is Elohim, and Danae is Edem. And similarly, in the 
same manner adducing all accounts of this description, which correspond with (the nature of) legends, they 
pursue the work of instruction. When, therefore, the prophet says, "Hearken, O heaven, and give ear, O 
earth; the Lord hath spoken," he means by heaven, (Justinus) says, the spirit which is in man from Elohim; 
and by earth, the soul which is in man along with the spirit; and by Lord, Baruch; and by Israel, Edem, for 
Israel as well as Edem is called the spouse of Elohim. "Israel," he says, "did not know me (Elohim); for had 
he known me, that I am with the Good One, he would not have punished through paternal ignorance the spirit 

which is in men." 

CHAP. XXII. -OATH USED BY THE JUSTINIAN HERETICS; THE BOOK OF BARUCH; THE 
REPERTORY OF THEIR SYSTEM. 

Hence(1) also, in the first bool< inscribed "Baruch," has been written the oath which they compel those to 
swear who are about to hear these mysteries, and be initiated with the Good One. (2) And this oath, (Justinus) 
says, our Father Elohim sware when He was beside the Good One, and having sworn He did not repent (of 
the oath), respecting which, he says, it has been written, "The Lord sware, and will not repent."(3) Now the 
oath is couched in these(4) terms: "I swear by that Good One who is above all, to guard these mysteries, 
and to divulge them to no one, and not to relapse from the Good One to the creature." And when he has 
sworn this oath, he goes on to the Good One, and beholds "whatever things eye hath not seen, and ear hath 
not heard, and which have not entered into the heart of man;"(5) and he drinks from life-giving water, which is 
to them, as they suppose, a bath, (6) a fountain of life-giving, bubbling water.(7) For there has been a 
separation made between water and water; and there is water, that below the firmament of the wicked 
creation, in which earthly and animal men are washed; and there is life-giving water, (that) above the 
firmament,(8) of the Good One, in which spiritual (and) living men are washed; and in this Elohim washed 
Himself, and having washed did not repent. And when, he says, the prophet affirms, "Take unto yourself a 
wife of whoredom, since the earth has abandoned itself to fornication, (departing) from (following) after the 
Lord;"(9) that is, Edem (departs) from Elohim. (Now) in these words, he says, the prophet clearly declares 
the entire mystery, and is not hearkened unto by reason of the wicked machinations of Naas. According to 
that same manner, they deliver other prophetical passages in a similar spirit of interpretation throughout 
numerous books. The volume, however, inscribed "Baruch," is pre-eminently to them the one in which the 
reader(10) will ascertain the entire explanation of their legendary system (to be contained). Beloved, though 
I have encountered many heresies, yet with no wicked (heresiarch) worse than this (Justinus) has it been my 
lot to meet. But, in truth, (the followers of Justinus) ought to imitate(1 1) the example of his Hercules, and to 
cleanse, as the saying is, the cattle-shed of Augias, or rather I should say, a ditch, (12) into which, as soon as 
the adherents of this (heresiarch) have fallen, they can never be cleansed; nay, they will not be able even to 
raise their heads. 

CHAP. XXIII. -SUBSEQUENT HERESIES DEDUCIBLE FROM THE SYSTEM OF JUSTINUS. 

Since, then, we have explained the attempts (at a system) of the pseudo-gnostic Justinus, it appears 
likewise expedient in the following books to elucidate the opinions put forward in heresies following (in the 
way of consequence upon the doctrines of Justinus), and to leave not a single one of these (speculators) 
unrefuted. Our refutation will be accomplished by adducing the assertions made by them; such (at least of 
their statements) as are sufficient for making a public example (of these heretics). (And we shall attain our 
purpose), even though there should only be condemned(13) the secret and ineffable (mysteries) practised 
amongst them, into which, silly mortals that they are, scarcely (even) with considerable labour are they 
initiated. Let us then see what also Simon affirms. 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

BOOK VI. 

CONTENTS. 

THE following are the contents of the sixth book of the Refutation of all Heresies:- 

What the opinions are that are attempted (to be established) by Simon, and that his doctrine derives its 

force from the (lucubrations) of magicians and poets. 

What are the opinions propounded by Valentinus, and that his system is not constructed out of the 

Scriptures, but out of the Platonic and Pythagorean tenets. 

And what are the opinions of Secundus, and Ptolemaeus, and Heracleon, as persons also who themselves 

advanced the same doctrines as the philosophers among the Greeks, but enunciated them in different 

phraseology. 

And what are the suppositions put forward by Marcus and Colarbasus, and that some of them devoted their 

attention to magical arts and the Pythagorean numbers. 

CHAP. 1.(1)-THE OPHITES THE PROGENITORS OF SUBSEQUENT HERESIES. 

Whatever opinions, then, were entertainedby those who derived the first principles (of their doctrine) from the 
serpent, and in process of time(2) deliberately(3) brought forward into public notice their tenets, we have 
explained in the book preceding this, (and) which is the fifth of the Refutation of Heresies. But now also I shall 
not be silent as regards the opinions of (heresiarchs) who follow these (Ophites in succession); nay, not one 
(speculation) will I leave unrefuted, if it is possible to remember all (their tenets), and the secret orgies of 
these (heretics) which one may fairly style orgies,-forthey who propagate such audacious opinions are not 
far distant from the anger (of God), -that I may avail myself of the assistance of etymology. 

CHAP. II. -SIMON MAGUS. 

It seems, then, expedient likewise to explain now the opinions of Simon, (4) a native of Gitta, a village of 
Samaria; and we shall also prove that his successors, taking a starting-point from him, have endeavoured 
(to establish) similar opinions under a change of name. This Simon being an adept in sorceries, both 
making a mockery of many, partly according to the art of Thrasymedes, in the manner in which we have 
explained above, (5) and partly also by the assistance of demons perpetrating his villany, attempted to deify 
himself. (But) the man was a (mere) cheat, and full of folly, and the Apostles reproved him in the Acts. (6) With 
much greater wisdom and moderation than Simon, did Apsethus the Libyan, inflamed with a similar wish, 
endeavour to have himself considered a god in Libya, And inasmuch as his legendary system does not 
present any wide divergence from the inordinate desire of that silly Simon, it seems expedient to furnish an 
explanation of it, as one worthy of the attempt made by this man. 

CHAP. III. -STORY OF APSETHUS THE LIBYAN. 

Apsethus(7) the Libyan inordinately longed to become a god; but when, after repeated intrigues, he 
altogether failed to accomplish his desire, he nevertheless wished to appear to have become a god; and 
he did at all events appear, as time wore on, to have in reality become a god. For the foolish Libyans were 
accustomed to sacrifice unto him as to some divine power, supposing that they were yielding credence to a 
voice that came down from above, from heaven. For, collecting into one and the same cage a great number 
of birds, -parrots,-he shut them up. Now there are very many parrots throughout Libya, and very distinctly 
these imitate the human voice. This man, having for a time nourished the birds, was in the habit of teaching 
them to say, "Apsethus is a god." After, however, the birds had practised this for a long period, and were 
accustomed to the utterance of that which bethought, when said, would make it supposed that Apsethus 
was a god, then, opening the habitation (of the birds), he let forth the parrots, each in a different direction. 
While the birds, however, were on the wing, their sound went out into all Libya, and the expressions of these 
reached as far as the Hellenic country. And thus the Libyans, being astonished at the voice of the birds, and 

not perceiving tiie l<navery perpetrated by Apsetiius, iield Apsetiius to be a god. Some one, iiowever, of tiie 
Greel<s, by accurate examination, perceiving tiie tricl< of tiie supposed god, by means of tiiose same 
parrots not only refutes, but also utterly destroys, that boastful and tiresome fellow. Now the Greek, by 
confining many of the parrots, taught them anew to say, "Apsethus, having caged us, compelled us to say, 
Apsethus is a god." But having heard of the recantation of the parrots, the Libyans, coming together, all 
unanimously decided on burning Apsethus. 

CHAP. IV. --SIMON'S FORCED INTERPRETATION OF SCRIPTURE; PLAGIARIZES FROM 
HERACLITUS AND ARISTOTLE; SIMON'S SYSTEM OF SENSIBLE AND INTELLIGIBLE 
EXISTENCES. 

In this way we must think concerning Simon the magician, so that we may compare him unto the Libyan, far 
sooner than unto Him who, though made man,(1) was in reality God. If, however, the assertion of this 
likeness is in itself accurate, and the sorcerer was the subject of a passion similar to Apsethus, let us 
endeavour to teach anew the parrots of Simon, that Christ, who stood, stands, and will stand, (that is, was, is, 
and is to come,) was not Simon. But (Jesus) was man, offspring of the seed of a woman, born of blood and 
the will of the flesh, as also the rest (of humanity). And that these things are so, we shall easily prove as the 
discussion proceeds. 

Now Simon, both foolishly and knavishly paraphrasing the law of Moses, makes his statements (in the 
manner following): For when Moses asserts that "God is a burning and consuming fire, "(2) taking what is 
said by Moses not in its correct sense, he affirms that fire is the originating principle of the universe. (But 
Simon) does not consider what the statement is which is made, namely, that it is not that God is a fire, but a 
burning and consuming fire, (thereby) not only putting a violent sense upon the actual law of Moses, but 
even plagiarizing from Heraclitus the Obscure. And Simon denominates the originating principle of the 
universe an indefinite power, expressing himself thus: "This is the treatise of a revelation of (the) voice and 
name (recognisable) by means of intellectual apprehension of the Great Indefinite Power. Wherefore it will 
be sealed, (and) kept secret, (and) hid, (and) will repose in the habitation, at the foundation of which lies the 
root of all things." And he asserts that this man who is born of blood is (the aforesaid) habitation, and that in 
him resides an indefinite power, which he affirms to be the root of the universe. 

Now the indefinite power which is fire, constitutes, according to Simon, not any uncompounded (essence, in 
conformity with the opinion of those who) assert that the four elements are simple, and who have (therefore) 
likewise imagined that fire, (which is one of the four,) is simple. But (this is far from being the case): for there 
is, (he maintains,) a certain twofold nature of fire;(3) and of this twofold (nature) he denominates one part a 
something secret, and another a something manifest, and that the secret are hidden in the manifest portions 
of the fire, and that the manifest portions of the fire derive their being from its secret (portions). This, however, 
is what Aristotle denominates by (the expressions) "potentiality" and "energy," or (what) Plato (styles) 
"intelligible" and "sensible." And the manifest portion of the fire comprises all things in itself, whatsoever any 
one might discern, or even whatever objects of the visible creation(4) he may happen to overlook. But the 
entire secret (portion of the fire) which one may discern is cognised by intellect, and evades the power of the 
senses; or one fails to observe it, from want of a capacity for that particular sort of perception. In general, 
however, inasmuch as all existing things fall under the categories, namely, of what are objects of Sense, 
and what are objects of Intellect, and as for the denomination of these (Simon) employs the terms secret 
and manifest; it may, (I say, in general,) be affirmed that the fire, (I mean) the super-celestial (fire), is a 
treasure, as it were a large tree, just such a one as in a dream was seen by Nabuchodonosor,(1) out of 
which all flesh is nourished. And the manifest portion of the fire he regards as the stem, the branches, the 
leaves, (and) the external rind which overlaps them. All these (appendages), he says, of the Great Tree 
being kindled, are made to disappear by reason of the blaze of the all-devouring fire. The fruit, however, of 
the tree, when it is fully grown, and has received its own form, is deposited in a granary, not (flung) into the 
fire. For, he says, the fruit has been produced for the purpose of being laid in the storehouse, whereas the 
chaff that it may be delivered over to the fire. (2) (Now the chaff) is stem, (and is) generated not for its own 
sake, but for that of the fruit. 

CHAP. V. -SIMON APPEALS TO SCRIPTURE IN SUPPORT OF HIS SYSTEM. 

And this, he says, is what has been written in Scripture: "For the vineyard of the Lord of Sabaoth is the house 
of Israel, and the man of Judah is His beloved plant." If, however, the man of Judah (is) the beloved plant, it 
has been proved, he says, that there is not any other tree but that man. But concerning the secretion and 
dissolution of this (tree). Scripture, he says, has spoken sufficiently. And as regards instruction for those who 
have been fashioned after the image (of him), that statement is enough which is made (in Scripture), that "all 
flesh is grass, and all the glory of flesh, as it were, a flower of grass. The grass withereth, and its flower 

falleth; but the word of the Lord abideth for ever."(3) The word of the Lord, he says, is that word which is 
produced in the mouth, and(is) a Logos, but nowhere else exists there a place of generation. 

CHAP. VI. --SIMON'S SYSTEM EXPOUNDED IN THE WORK, GREAT ANNOUNCEMENT; 
FOLLOWS EMPEDOCLES. 

Now, to express myself briefly, inasmuch as the fire is of this description, according to Simon, and since all 
things are visible and invisible, (and) in like manner resonant and not resonant, numerable and not subjects 
of numeration; he denominates in the Great Announcement a perfect intelligible (entity), after such a mode, 
that each of those things which, existing indefinitely, may be infinitely comprehended, both speaks, and 
understands, and acts in such a manner as Empedocles(4) speaks of:- 

"For earth, indeed, by earth we see, and water by water. 

And air divine by air, and fire fierce by fire. 

And love by love, and also strife by gloomy strife." 

CHAP. VII. -SIMON'S SYSTEM OF A THREEFOLD EMANATION BY PAIRS. 

For, he says, he is in the habit of considering that all these portions of the fire, both visible and invisible, are 
possessed of perception and a share of intelligence. (5) The world, therefore, that which is generated, was 
produced from the unbegotten fire. It began, however, to exist, he says, according to the following manner. 
He who was begotten from the principle of that fire took six roots, and those primary ones, of the originating 
principle of generation. And, he says that the roots were made from the fire in pairs, which roots he terms 
"Mind" and "Intelligence," "Voice" and "Name," "Ratiocination" and "Reflection." And that in these six roots 
resides simultaneously the entire indefinite power potentially, (however) not actually. And this indefinite 
power, he says, is he who stood, stands, and will stand. Wherefore, whensoever he may be made into an 
image, inasmuch as he exists in the six powers, he will exist (there) substantially, potentially, quantitively, 
(and) completely. (And he will be a power) one and the same with the unbegotten and indefinite power, and 
not labouring under any greater deficiency than that unbegotten and unalterable (and) indefinite power. If, 
however, he may continue only potentially in the six powers, and has not been formed into an image, he 
vanishes, he says, and is destroyed in such a way as the grammatical or geometrical capacity in man's 
soul. For when the capacity takes unto itself an art, a light of existent things is produced; but when (the 
capacity) does not take unto itself (an art), unskilfulness and ignorance are the results; and just as when (the 
power) was non-existent, it perishes along with the expiring man. 

CHAP. VIM. -FURTHER PROGRESSION OF THIS THREEFOLD EMANATION; 
CO-EXISTENCE WITH THE DOUBLE TRIAD OF A SEVENTH EXISTENCE. 

And of those six powers, (6) and of the seventh which co-exists with them, the first pair. Mind and Intelligence, 
he calls Heaven and Earth. And that one of these, being of male sex, beholds from above and takes care of 
his partner, but that the earth receives below the rational fruits, akin to the earth, which are borne down from 
the heaven. On this account, he says, the Logos, frequently looking towards the things that are being 
generated from Mind and Intelligence, that is, from Heaven and Earth, exclaims, "Hear, O heaven, and give 
ear, O earth, because the Lord has spoken. I have brought forth children, and exalted them; and these have 
rejected me." Now, he who utters these words, he says, is the seventh power-he who stood, stands, and will 
stand; for he himself is cause of those beauteous objects of creation which Moses commended, and said 
that they were very good. But Voice and Name (the second of the three pairs) are Sun and Moon; and 
Ratiocination and Reflection (the third of the three pairs) are Air and Water. And in all these is intermingled 
and blended, as I have declared, the great, the indefinite, the (self-) existing power. 

CHAP. IX. -SIMON'S INTERPRETATION OF THE MOSAIC HEXAEMERON; HIS 
ALLEGORICAL REPRESENTATION OF PARADISE. 

When, therefore, Moses has spoken of "the six days in which God made heaven and earth, and rested on 
the seventh from all His works, "(1) Simon, in a manner already specified, giving (these and other passages 
of Scripture) a different application (from the one intended by the holy writers), deifies himself. When, 
therefore, (the followers of Simon) affirm that there are three days begotten before sun and moon, they 
speak enigmatically of Mind and Intelligence, that is. Heaven and Earth, and of the seventh power, (I mean) 
the indefinite one. For these three powers are produced antecedent to all the rest. But when they say, "He 
begot me prior to all the Ages, "(2) such statements, he says, are alleged to hold good concerning the 

seventh power. Now this seventh power, which was a power existing in the indefinite power, which was 
produced prior to all the Ages, this is, he says, the seventh power, respecting which Moses utters the 
following words: "And the Spirit of God was wafted over(3) the water;" that is, says (the Simonian), the Spirit 
which contains all things in itself, and is an image of the indefinite power about which Simon speaks,-"an 
image from an incorruptible form, that alone reduces all things into order." For this power that is wafted over 
the water, being begotten, he says, from an incorruptible form alone, reduces all things into order. When, 
therefore, according to these (heretics), there ensued some such arrangement, and (one) similar (to it) of the 
world, the Deity, he says, proceeded to form man, taking clay from the earth. And He formed him not 
uncompounded, but twofold, according to (His own) image and likeness. (4) Now the image is the Spirit that 
is wafted over the water; and whosoever is not fashioned into a figure of this, will perish with the world, 
inasmuch as he continues only potentially, and does exist actually. This, he says, is what has been spoken, 
"that we should not be condemned with the world. "(5) If one, however, be made into the figure of (the Spirit), 
and be generated from an indivisible point, as it has been written in the Announcement, (such a one, albeit) 
small, will become great. But what is great will continue unto infinite and unalterable duration, as being that 
which no longer is subject to the conditions of a generated entity. 

How then, he says, and in what manner, does God form man? In Paradise; for so it seems to him. Grant 
Paradise, he says, to be the womb; and that this is a true (assumption) the Scripture will teach, when it utters 
the words, "I am He who forms thee in thy mother's womb. "(6) For this also he wishes to have been written 
so. Moses, he says, resorting to allegory, has declared Paradise to be the womb, if we ought to rely on his 
statement. If, however, God forms man in his mother's womb-that is, in Paradise-as I have affirmed, let 
Paradise be the womb, and Edem the after-birth, (7) "a river flowing forth from Edem, for the purpose of 
irrigating Paradise, "(8) (meaning by this) the navel. This navel, he says, is separated into four principles; for 
on either side of the navel are situated two arteries, channels of spirit, and two veins channels of blood. But 
when, he says, the umbilical vessels(9) proceed forth from Edem, that is, the caul in which the foetus is 
enveloped grows into the (foetus) that is being formed in the vicinity of the epigastrium,-(now) all in common 
denominate this a navel,-these two veins through which the blood flows, and is conveyed from Edem. the 
after-birth, to what are styled the gates of the liver; (these veins, I say,) nourish the foetus. But the arteries 
which we have spoken of as being channels of spirit, embrace the bladder on both sides, around the pelvis, 
and connect it with the great artery, called the aorta, in the vicinity of the dorsal ridge. And in this way the 
spirit, making its way through the ventricles to the heart, produces a movement of the foetus. For the infant 
that was formed in Paradise neither receives nourishment through the mouth, nor breathes through the 
nostrils: for as it lay in the midst of moisture, at its feet was death, if it attempted to breathe; for it would (thus) 
have been drawn away from moisture, and perished (accordingly). But (one may go further than this); for the 
entire (foetus) is bound tightly round by a covering styled the caul, and is nourished by a navel, and it 
receives through the (aorta), in the vicinity of the dorsal ridge, as I have stated, the substance of the spirit. 

CHAP. X. -SIMON'S EXPLANATION OF THE FIRST TWO BOOKS OF MOSES. 

The river, therefore, he says, which proceeds out of Edem is divided into four principles, four channels-that 
is, into four senses, belonging to the creature that is being born, viz., seeing, smelling, taste, and touch; for 
the child formed in Paradise has these senses only. This, he says, is the law which Moses appointed; and 
in reference to this very law, each of his books has been written, as the inscriptions evince. The flrst book is 
Genesis. The inscription of the book is, he says, sufficient for a knowledge of the universe. For this is 
(equivalent in meaning with) generation, (that is,) vision, into which one section of the river is divided. For the 
world was seen by the power of vision. Again, the inscription of the second book is Exodus. For what has 
been produced, passing through the Red Sea, must come into the wilderness,-now they say he calls the 
Red (Sea) blood,-and taste bitter water. For bitter, he says, is the water which is (drunk) after (crossing) the 
Red Sea; which (water) is a path to be trodden, that leads (us) to a knowledge in (this) life of (our) toilsome 
and bitter lot. Altered, however, by Moses-that is, by the Logos-that bitter (water) becomes sweet. And that 
this is so we may hear in common from all who express themselves according to the (senflments of the) 
poets :- 

"Dark at the root, like milk, the flower, 
Gods call it 'Moly,' and hard for mortal men 
To dig, but power divine is boundless. "(1) 

CHAP. XI. -SIMON'S EXPLANATION OF THE THREE LAST BOOKS OF THE 
PENTATEUCH. 

What is spoken by the Gentiles is sufficient for a knowledge of the universe to those who have ears 

(capable) of hearing. For whosoever, he says, has tasted this fruit, is not the only one that is changed by 
Circe into a beast; but also, employing the power of such a fruit, he forms anew and moulds afresh, and 
re-entices into that primary peculiar character of theirs, those that already have been altered into beasts. But 
a faithful man, and beloved by that sorceress, is, he says, discovered through that milk-like and divine fruit. 
In like manner, the third book is Leviticus, which is smelling, or respiration. For the entire of that book is (an 
account) of sacrifices and offerings. Where, however, there is a sacrifice, a certain savour of the fragrance 
arises from the sacrifice through the incense-offerings; and in regard of this fragrance (the sense of) smelling 
is a test. Numbers, the fourth of the books, signifies taste, where the discourse is operative. For, from the fact 
of its speaking all things, it is denominated by numerical arrangement. But Deuteronomy, he says, is written 
in reference to the (sense of) touch possessed by the child that is being formed. For as touch, by seizing the 
things that are seen by the other senses, sums them up and ratifies them, testing what is rough, or warm, or 
clammy, (or cold); so the fifth book of the law constitutes a summary of the four books preceding this. 
All things, therefore, he says, when unbegotten, are in us potentially, not actually, as the grammatical or 
geometrical (art). If, then, one receives proper instruction and teaching, and (where consequently) what is 
bitter will be altered into what is sweet,-that is, the spears into pruning-hooks, and the swords into 
plough-shares, (2)-there will not be chaff and wood begotten for fire, but mature fruit, fully formed, as I said, 
equal and similar to the unbegotten and indefinite power. If, however, a tree continues alone, not producing 
fruit fully formed, it is utterly destroyed. For somewhere near, he says, is the axe (which is laid) at the roots of 
the tree. Every tree, he says, which does not produce good fruit, is hewn down and cast into fire. (3) 

CHAP. XII. -FIRE A PRIMAL PRINCIPLE, ACCORDING TO SIMON. 

According to Simon, therefore, there exists that which is blessed and incorruptible in a latent condition in 
every one-(that is,) potentially, not actually; and that this is He who stood, stands, (4) and is to stand. (5) He 
has stood above in unbegotten power. He stands below, when in the stream of waters He was begotten in a 
likeness. He is to stand above, beside the blessed indefinite power, if He be fashioned into an image. For, 
he says, there are three who have stood; and except there were three AEons who have stood, the 
unbegotten one is not adorned. (Now the unbegotten one) is, according to them, wafted over the water, and 
is re-made, according to the similitude (of an eternal nature), a perfect celestial (being), in no (quality of) 
intelligence formed inferior to the unbegotten power: that is what they say-l and you, one; you, before me; I, 
that which is after you. This, he says, is one power divided above (and) below, generating itself, making 
itself grow, seeking itself, finding itself, being mother of itself, father of itself, sister of itself, spouse of itself, 
daughter of itself, son of itself, mother, father, a unit, being a root of the entire circle of existence. 
And that, he says, the originating principle of the generation of things begotten is from fire, he discerns after 
some such method as the following. Of all things, (i.e.) of whatsoever there is a generation, the beginning of 
the desire of the generation is from fire. Wherefore the desire after mutable generation is denominated "to 
be inflamed." For when the fire is one, it admits of two conversions. For, he says, blood in the man being 
both warm and yellow, is converted as a figured flame into seed; but in the woman this same blood is 
converted into milk. And the conversion of the male becomes generation, but the conversion of the female 
nourishment for the foetus. This, he says, is "the flaming sword, which turned to guard the way of the tree of 
life."(1) For the blood is converted into seed and milk, and this power becomes mother and father-father of 
those things that are in process of generation, and the augmentation of those things that are being 
nourished; (and this power is) without further want, (and) self-sufficient. And, he says, the tree of life is 
guarded, as we have stated, by the brandished flaming sword. And it is the seventh power, that which (is 
produced) from itself, (and) which contains all (powers, and) which reposes in the six powers. For if the 
flaming sword be not brandished, that good tree will be destroyed, and perish. If, however, these be 
converted into seed and milk, the principle that resides in these potentially, and is in possession of a proper 
position, in which is evolved a principle of souls, (such a principle,) beginning, as it were, from a very small 
spark, will be altogether magnified, and will increase and become a power indefinite (and) unalterable, 
(equal and similar) to an unalterable age, which no longer passes into the indefinite age. 

CHAP. XIII. -HIS DOCTRINE OF EMANATION FURTHER EXPANDED. 

Therefore, according to this reasoning, Simon became confessedly a god to his silly followers, as that 
Libyan, namely, Apsethus-begotten, no doubt, and subject to passion, when he may exist potentially, but 
devoid of propensions. (And this too, though born from one having pro-pensions, and uncreated though 
born) from one that is begotten, when He may be fashioned into a figure, and, becoming perfect, may come 
forth from two of the primary powers, that is. Heaven and Earth. For Simon expressly speaks of this in the 
"Revelation" after this manner: "To you, then, I address the things which I speak, and (to you) I write what I 
write. The writing is this: there are two offshoots from all the AEons, having neither beginning nor end, from 

one root. And this is a power, viz., Sige, (wiio is) invisible (and) incompreiiensible. And one of tiiese 
(offsiioots) appears from above, wiiicii constitutes a great power, (tiie creative) IVIind of tiie universe, wiiicii 
manages all things, (and is) a male. The other (offshoot), however, is from below, (and constitutes) a great 
Intelligence, and is a female which produces all things. From whence, ranged in pairs opposite each other, 
they undergo conjugal union, and manifest an intermediate interval, namely, an incomprehensible air, which 
has neither beginning nor end. But in this is a father who sustains all things, and nourishes things that have 
beginning and end. This is he who stood, stands, and will stand, being an hermaphrodite power according 
to the pre-existent indefinite power, which has neither beginning nor end. Now this (power) exists in isolation. 
For Intelligence, (that subsists) in unity, proceeded forth from this (power), (and) became two. And that 
(father) was one, for having in himself this (power) he was isolated, and, however. He was not primal though 
pre-existent; but being rendered manifest to himself from himself, he passed into a state of duality. But 
neither was he denominated father before this (power) would style him father. As, therefore, he himself, 
bringing forward himself by means of himself, manifested unto himself his own peculiar intelligence, so also 
the intelligence, when it was manifested, did not exercise the function of creation. But beholding him, she 
concealed the Father within herself, that is, the power; and it is an hermaphrodite power, and an intelligence. 
And hence it is that they are ranged in pairs, one opposite the other; for power is in no wise different from 
intelligence, inasmuch as they are one. For from those things that are above is discovered power; and from 
those below, intelligence. So it is, therefore, that likewise what is manifested from these, being unity, is 
discovered (to be) duality, an hermaphrodite having the female in itself. This, (therefore,) is Mind (subsisting) 
in Intelligence; and these are separable one from the other, (though both taken together) are one, (and) are 
discovered in a state of duality." 

CHAP. XIV. --SIMON INTERPRETS HIS SYSTEM BY THE MYTHOLOGICAL 
REPRESENTATION OF HELEN OF TROY; GIVES AN ACCOUNT OF HIMSELF IN 
CONNECTION WITH THE TROJAN HEROINE; IMMORALITY OF HIS FOLLOWERS; 
SIMON'S VIEW OF CHRIST; THE SIMONISTS' APOLOGY FOR THEIR VICE. 

Simon then, after inventing these (tenets), not only by evil devices interpreted the writings of Moses in 
whatever way he wished, but even the (works) of the poets. (1) For also he fastens an allegorical meaning on 
(the story of) the wooden horse and Helen with the torch, and on very many other (accounts), which he 
transfers to what relates to himself and to Intelligence, and (thus) furnishes a fictitious explanation of them. 
He said, however, that this (Helen) was the lost sheep. And she, always abiding among women, 
confounded the powers in the world b reason of her surpassing beauty. Whence, likewise, the Trojan war 
arose on her account. For in the Helen born at that time resided this Intelligence; and thus, when all the 
powers were for claiming her (for themselves), sedition and war arose, during which (this chief power) was 
manifested to nations. And from this circumstance, without doubt, we may believe that Stesichorus, who had 
through (some) verses reviled her, was deprived of the use of his eyes; and that, again, when he repented 
and composed recantations, in which he sung (Helen's) praises, he recovered the power of vision. But the 
angels and the powers below-who, he says, created the world-caused the transference from one body to 
another of (Helen's soul); and subsequently she stood on the roof of a house in Tyre, a city of Phoenicia, 
and on going down thither (Simon professed to have) found her. For he stated that, principally for the 
purpose of searching after this (woman), he had arrived (in Tyre), in order that he might rescue her from 
bondage. And after having thus redeemed her, he was in the habit of conducting her about with himself, 
alleging that this (girl) was the lost sheep, and affirming himself to be the Power above all things. But the 
filthy(2) fellow, becoming enamoured of this miserable woman called Helen, purchased her (as his slave), 
and enjoyed her person. (3) He, (however,) was likewise moved with shame towards his disciples, and 
concocted this figment. 

But, again, those who become followers of this impostor-l mean Simon the sorcerer-indulge in similar 
practices, and irrationally allege the necessity of promiscuous intercourse. They express themselves in the 
manner following: "All earth is earth, and there is no difference where any one sores, provided he does 
sow." But even they congratulate themselves on account of this indiscriminate intercourse, asserting that this 
is perfect love, and employing the expressions, "holy of holies," and "sanctify one another."(4) For (they 
would have us believe) that they are not overcome by the supposed vice, for that they have been 
redeemed. "And (Jesus), by having redeemed Helen in this way," (Simon says,) "has afforded salvation to 
men through his own peculiar intelligence. For inasmuch as the angels, by reason of their lust for 
pre-eminence, improperly managed the world, (Jesus Christ) being transformed, and being assimilated to 
the rulers and powers and angels, came for the restoration (of things). And so (it was that Jesus) appeared 
as man, when in reality he was not a man. And (so it was) that likewise he suffered-though not actually 
undergoing suffering, but appearing to the Jews to do so(5)-in Judea as 'Son,' and in Samaria as 
'Father,'(6) and among the rest of the Gentiles as 'Holy Spirit.' "And (Simon alleges) that Jesus tolerated 

being styled by whichever name (of the three just mentioned) men might wish to call him. "And that the 
prophets, deriving their inspiration from the world-making angels, uttered predictions (concerning him)." 
Wherefore, (Simon said,) that towards these (prophets) those felt no concern up to the present, who believe 
on Simon and Helen, and that they do whatsoever they please, as persons free; for they allege that they are 
saved by grace. For that there is no reason for punishment, even though one shall act wickedly; for such a 
one is not wicked by nature, but by enactment. "For the angels who created the world made," he says, 
"whatever enactments they pleased," thinking by such (legislative) words to enslave those who listened to 
them. But, again, they speak of a dissolution(7) of the world, for the redemption of his own particular 
adherents. 

CHAP. XV. --SIMON'S DISCIPLES ADOPT THE MYSTERIES; SIMON MEETS ST. PETER AT 
ROME; ACCOUNT OF SIMON'S CLOSING YEARS. 

The disciples, then, of this (Magus), celebrate magical rites, and resort to incantations. And (they profess to) 
transmit both love-spells and charms, and the demons said to be senders of dreams, for the purpose of 
distracting whomsoever they please. But they also employ those denominated Paredroi. "And they have an 
image of Simon (fashioned) into the figure of Jupiter, and (an image) of Helen in the form of Minerva; and 
they pay adoration to these." But they call the one Lord and the other Lady. And if any one amongst them, on 
seeing the images of either Simon or Helen, would call them by name, he is cast off, as being ignorant of the 
mysteries. This Simon, deceiving many(1) in Samaria by his sorceries, was reproved by the Apostles, and 
was laid under a curse, as it has been written in the Acts. But he afterwards abjured the faith, and attempted 
these (aforesaid practices). And journeying as far as Rome, (2) he fell in with the Apostles; and to him, 
deceiving many by his sorceries, Peter offered repeated opposition. This man, ultimately repairing to ... 
(and) sitting under a plane tree, continued to give instruction (in his doctrines). And in truth at last, when 
conviction was imminent, in case he delayed longer, be stated that, if he were buried alive, he would rise the 
third day. And accordingly, having ordered a trench to be dug by his disciples, (3) he directed himself to be 
interred there. They, then, executed the injunction given; whereas he remained (in that grave) until this day, 
for he was not the Christ. This constitutes the legendary system advanced by Simon, and from this 
Valentinus derived a starting-point (for his own doctrine. This doctrine, in point of fact, was the same with the 
it Simonian, though Valentinus) denominated under different titles: for "Nous," and "Aletheia," and "Logos," 
and "Zoe," and "Anthropos," and "Ecclesia," and Aeons of Valentinus, are confessedly the six roots of 
Simon, viz., "Mind" and "Intelligence," "Voice" and "Name," "Ratiocination" and "Reflection." But since it 
seems to us that we have sufficiently explained Simon's tissue of legends, let us see what also Valentinus 
asserts. 

CHAP. XVI. -HERESY OF VALENTINUS; DERIVED FROM PLATO AND PYTHAGORAS. 

The heresy of Valentinus(4) is certainly, then, connected with the Pythagorean and Platonic theory. For 
Plato, in the Timaeus, altogether derives his impressions from Pythagoras, and therefore Timaeus himself 
is his Pythagorean stranger. Wherefore, it appears expedient that we should commence by reminding (the 
reader) of a few points of the Pythagorean and Platonic theory, and that (then we should proceed) to 
declare the opinions of Valentinus. (5) For even although in the books previously finished by us with so much 
pains, are contained the opinions advanced by both Pythagoras and Plato, yet at all events I shall not be 
acting unreasonably, in now also calling to the recollection of the reader, by means of an epitome, the 
principal heads of the favourite tenets of these (speculators). And this (recapitulation) will facilitate our 
knowledge of the doctrines of Valentinus, by means of a nearer comparison, and by similarity of 
composition (of the two systems). For (Pythagoras and Plato) derived these tenets originally from the 
Egyptians, and introduced their novel opinions among the Greeks. But (Valentinus took his opinions) from 
these, because, although he has suppressed the truth regarding his obligations to (the Greek 
philosophers), and in this way has endeavoured to construct a doctrine, (as it were,) peculiarly his own, yet, 
in point of fact, he has altered the doctrines of those (thinkers) in names only, and numbers, and has 
adopted a peculiar terminology (of his own). Valentinus has formed his definitions by measures, in order 
that he may establish an Hellenic heresy, diversified no doubt, but unstable, and not connected with Christ. 

CHAP. XVII. -ORIGIN OF THE GREEK PHILOSOPHY. 

The origin, then, from which Plato derived his theory in the Timaeus, is (the) wisdom of the Egyptians. (1) For 
from this source, by some ancient and prophetical tradition, Solon(2) taught his entire system concerning the 
generation and destruction of the world, as Plato says, to the Greeks, who were (in knowledge) young 
children, and were acquainted with no theological doctrine of greater antiquity. In order, therefore, that we 

may trace accurately the arguments by which Valentinus established his tenets, I shall now explain what are 
the principles of the philosophy of Pythagoras of Samos,-a philosophy (coupled) with that Silence so 
celebrated by the Greeks. And next in this manner (I shall elucidate) those (opinions) which Valentinus 
derives from Pythagoras and Plato, but refers with all solenmity of speech to Christ, and before Christ to the 
Father of the universe, and to Silence conjoined with the Father. 

CHAP. XVIII. -PYTHAGORAS' SYSTEM OF NUMBERS. 

Pythagoras, then, declared the originating principle of the universe to be the unbegotten monad, and the 
generated duad, and the rest of the numbers. And he says that the monad it the father of the duad, and the 
duad the mother of all things that are being begotten-the begotten one (being mother) of the things that arc 
begotten. And Zaratas, the pupil of Pythagoras, was in the habit of denominating unity a father, and duality a 
mother. For the duad has been generated from the monad, according to Pythagoras; and the monad is 
male and primary, but the duad female (and secondary). And from the duad, again, as Pythagoras states, 
(are generated) the triad and the succeeding numbers up to ten. For Pythagoras is aware that this is the only 
perfect number-l mean the decade-for that eleven and twelve are an addition and repetition of the decade; 
not, however, that what is added(3) constitutes the generation of another number. And all solid bodies he 
generates from incorporeal (essences). For he asserts that an element and principle of both corporeal and 
incorporeal entities is the point which is indivisible. And from a point, he says, is generated a line, and from a 
line a surface; and a surface flowing out into a height becomes, he says, a solid body. Whence also the 
Pythagoreans have a certain object of adjuration, viz., the concord of the four elements. And they swear in 
these words:- 

"By him who to our head quaternion gives, 

A font that has the roots of everlasting nature. "(4) 

Now the quaternion is the originating principle of natural and solid bodies, as the monad of intelligible ones. 
And that likewise the quaternion generates, (5) he says, the perfect number, as in the case of intelligibles (the 
monad) does the decade, they teach thus. If any, beginning to number, says one, and adds two, then in like 
manner three, these (together) will be six, and to these (add) moreover four, the entire (sum), in like manner, 
will be ten. For one, two, three, four, become ten, the perfect number. Thus, he says, the quaternion in every 
respect imitated the intelligible monad, which was able to generate a perfect number. 

CHAP. XIX. -PYTHAGORAS' DUALITY OF SUBSTANCES; HIS "CATEGORIES." 

There are, then, according to Pythagoras, two worlds: one intelligible, which has the monad for an 
originating principle; and the other sensible. But of this (latter) is the quaternion having the iota the one 
tittle, (6) a perfect number. And there likewise is, according to the Pythagoreans, the i, the one tittle, which is 
chief and most dominant, and enables us to apprehend the substance of those intelligible entities which are 
capable of being understood through the medium of intellect and of sense. (And in this substance inhere) 
the nine incorporeal accidents which cannot exist without substance, viz., "quality," and "quantity," and 
"relation," and "where," and "when," and "position," and "possession," and "action," and "passion." These, 
then, are the nine accidents (inhering in) substance, and when reckoned with these (substances), contains 
the perfect number, the i. Wherefore, the universe being divided, as we said, into the intelligible and 
sensible world, we have also reason from the intelligible (world), in order that by reason we may behold the 
substance of things that are cognised by intellect, and are incorporeal and divine. But we have, he says, 
five senses-smelling, seeing, hearing, taste, and touch. Now, by these we arrive at a knowledge of things 
that are discerned by sense; and so, he says, the sensible is divided from the intelligible world. And that we 
have for each of these an instrument for attaining knowledge, we perceive from the following consideration. 
Nothing, he says, of intelligibles can be known to us from sense. For he says neither eye has seen, nor ear 
heard, nor any whatsoever of the other senses known that (which is cognised by mind). Neither, again, by 
reason is it possible to arrive at a knowledge of any of the things discernible by sense. But one must see 
that a thing is white, and taste that it is sweet, and know by hearing that it is musical or out of tune. And 
whether any odour is fragrant or disagreeable, is the function of smell, not of reason. It is the same with 
objects of touch; for anything rough, or soft, or warm, or cold, it is not possible to know by hearing, but (far 
from it), for touch is the judge of such (sensations). Things being thus constituted, the arrangement of things 
that have been made and are being made is observed to happen in conformity with numerical 
(combinations). For in the same manner as, commencing from monad, by an addition of monads or triads, 
and a collection of the succeeding numbers, we make some one very large complex whole of number; 
(and) then, again, from an amassed number thus formed by addition, we accomplish, by means of a certain 

subtraction and re-calculation, a solution of the totality of the aggregate numbers; so likewise he asserts that 
the world, bound by a certain arithmetical and musical chain, was, by its tension and relaxation, and by 
addition and subtraction, always and for ever preserved in-corrupt. 

CHAP. XX. --PYTHAGORAS' COSMOGONY; SIMILAR TO THAT OF EMPEDOCLES. 

The Pythagoreans therefore declare their opinion concerning the continuance of the world in some such 
manner as this:- 

"For heretofore it was and will be; never, I ween. 
Of both of these will void the age eternal be." 

Of these;" but what are they? Discord and Love. Now, in their system. Love forms the world incorruptible 
(and) eternal, as they suppose. For substance and the world are one. Discord, however, separates and 
puts asunder, and evinces numerous attempts by subdividing to form the world. It is just as if one severs into 
small parts, and divides arithmetically, the myriad into thousands, and hundreds, and tens; and drachmae 
into oboli and small farthings. In this manner, he says. Discord severs the substance of the world into 
animals, plants, metals and things similar to these. And the fabricator of the generation of all things 
produced is, according to them. Discord; whereas Love, on the other hand, manages and provides for the 
universe in such a manner that it enjoys permanence. And conducting together(1) into unity the divided and 
scattered parts of the universe, and leading them forth from their (separate) mode of existence, (Love) unites 
and adds to the universe, in order that it may enjoy permanence; and it thus constitutes one system. They 
will not therefore cease, -neither Discord dividing the world, nor Love attaching to the world the divided 
parts. Of some such description as this, so it appears, is the distribution of the world according to 
Pythagoras. But Pythagoras says that the stars are fragments from the sun, and that the souls(2) of animals 
are conveyed from the stars; and that these are mortal when they are in the body, just as if buried, as it were, 
in a tomb: whereas that they rise (out of this world) and become immortal, when we are separated from our 
bodies. Whence Plato, being asked by some one, "What is philosophy?" replied, "It is a separation of soul 
from body." 

CHAP. XXI. -OTHER OPINIONS OF PYTHAGORAS. 

Pythagoras, then, became a student of these doctrines likewise, in which he speaks both by enigmas and 
some such expressions as these: "When you depart from your own (tabernacle), return not;(3) if, however, 
(you act) not (thus), the Furies, auxiliaries to justice, will overtake you, "-denominating the body one's own 
(tabernacle), and its passions the Furies. When, therefore, he says, you depart, that is, when you go forth 
from the body, do not earnestly crave for this; but if you are eagerly desirous (for departure), the passions 
will once more confine you within the body. For these suppose that there is a transition of souls from one 
body to another, as also Empedocles, adopting the principles of Pythagoras, affirms. For, says he, souls 
that are lovers of pleasure, as Plato states, (4) if, when they are in the condition of suffering incidental to man, 
they do not evolve theories of philosophy, must pass through all animals and plants (back) again into a 
human body. And when (the soul) may form a system of speculation thrice in the same body, (he maintains) 
that it ascends up to the nature of some kindred star. If, however, (the soul) does not philosophize, (it must 
pass) through the same (succession of changes once more). He affirms, then, that the soul sometimes may 
become even mortal, if it is overcome by the Furies, that is, the passions (of the body); and immortal, if it 
succeeds in escaping the Furies, which are the passions. 

CHAP. XXII. -THE "SAYINGS" OF PYTHAGORAS. 

But since also we have chosen to mention the sayings darkly expressed by Pythagoras to his disciples by 
means of symbols, it seems likewise expedient to remind (the reader) of the rest (of his doctrines. And we 
touch on this subject) on account also of the heresiarchs, who attempt by some method of this description to 
converse by means of symbols; and these are not their own, but they have, (in propounding them,) taken 
advantage of expressions employed by the Pythagoreans. (1) Pythagoras then instructs his disciples, 
addressing them as follows: "Bind up the sack that carries the bedding." (Now,) inasmuch as they who 
intend going upon a journey tie their clothes into a wallet, to be ready for the road; so, (in like manner,) he 
wishes his disciples to be prepared, since every moment death is likely to come upon them by surprise. (2) 
(In this way Pythagoras sought to effect) that (his followers) should labour under no deficiency in the 
qualifications required in his pupils. (3) Wherefore of necessity he was in the habit, with the dawn of day, of 
instructing the Pythagoreans to encourage one another to bind up the sack that carries the bedding, that is. 

to be ready for death. "Do not stir fire witii a sword;"(4) (meaning,) do not, by addressing iiim, quarrel witii an 
enraged man; for a person in a passion is lil<e fire, wiiereas tiie sword is tiie uttered expression. "Do not 
trample on a besom;"(5) (meaning,) despise not a small matter. "Plant not a palm tree in a house;" 
(meaning,) foment not discord in a family, for the palm tree is a symbol of battle and slaughter.(6) "Eat not 
from a stool;" (meaning,) do not undertake an ignoble art, in order that you may not be a slave to the body, 
which is corruptible, but make a livelihood from literature. 

For it lies within your reach both to nourish the body, and make the soul better.(7) "Don't take a bite out of an 
uncut loaf;" (meaning,) diminish not thy possessions, but live on the profit (of them), and guard thy substance 
as an entire loaf.(8) "Feed not on beans; (meaning,) accept not the government of a city, for with beans they 
at that time were accustomed to ballot for their magistrates. (9) 

CHAP. XXIII. --PYTHAGORAS' ASTRONOMIC SYSTEM. 

These, then, and such like assertions, the Pythagoreans put forward; and the heretics, imitating these, are 
supposed by some to utter important truths. The Pythagorean system, however, lays down that the Creator 
of all alleged existences is the Great Geometrician and Galculator-a sun; and that this one has been fixed in 
the whole world, just as in the bodies a soul, according to the statement of Plato. For the sun (being of the 
nature of) fire, (10) resembles the soul, but the earth (resembles the) body. And, separated from fire, there 
would be nothing visible, nor would there be any object of touch without something solid; but not any solid 
body exists without earth. Whence the Deity, locating air in the midst, fashioned the body of the universe out 
of fire and earth. And the Sun, he says, calculates and geometrically measures the world in some such 
manner as the following: The world is a unity cognizable by sense; and concerning this (world) we now 
make these assertions. But one who is an adept in the science of numbers, and a geometrician, has 
divided it into twelve parts. And the names of these parts are as follow: Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, 
Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces. Again, he divides each of the twelve parts 
into thirty parts, and these are days of the month. Again, he divides each part of the thirty parts into sixty 
small divisions, and (each) of these small (divisions) he subdivides into minute portions, and (these again) 
into portions still more minute. And always doing this, and not intermitting, but collecting from these divided 
portions (an aggregate), and constituting it a year; and again resolving and dividing the compound, (the 
sun) completely finishes the great and everlasting world. (1) 

CHAP. XXIV.-VALENTINUS CONVICTED OF PLAGIARISMS FROM THE PLATONIC AND 
PYTHAGORIC PHILOSOPHY; THE VALENTINIAN THEORY OF EMANATION BY DUADS. 

Of some such nature, as I who have accurately examined their systems (have attempted) to state 
compendiously, is the opinion of Pythagoras and Plato. And from this (system), not from the Gospels, 
Valentinus, as we have proved, has collected the (materials of) heresy-l mean his own (heresy)-and may 
(therefore) justly be reckoned a Pythagorean and Platonist, not a Christian. Valentinus, therefore, and 
Heracleon, and Ptolemaeus, and the entire school of these (heretics), as disciples of Pythagoras and Plato, 
(and) following these guides, have laid down as e fundamental principle of their doctrine the arithmetical 
system. For, likewise, according to these (Valentinians), the originating cause of the universe is a Monad, 
unbegotten, imperishable, incomprehensible, inconceivable, productive, and a cause of the generation of 
all existent things. And the aforesaid Monad is styled by them Father. There is, however, discoverable 
among them some considerable diversity of opinion. For some of them, in order that the Pythagorean 
doctrine of Valentinus may be altogether free from admixture (with other tenets), suppose that the Father is 
unfeminine, and unwedded, and solitary. But others, imagining it to be impossible that from a male only 
there could proceed a generation at all of any of those things that have been made to exist, necessarily 
reckon along with the Father of the universe, in order that he may be a father, Sige as a spouse. But as to 
Sige, whether at any time she is united in marriage (to the Father) or not, this is a point which we leave them 
to wrangle about among themselves. We at present, keeping to the Pythagorean principle, which is one, 
and unwedded, unfeminine, (and) deficient in nothing, shall proceed to give an account of their doctrines, as 
they themselves inculcate them. There is, says (Valentinus), not anything at all begotten, but the Father is 
alone unbegotten, not subject to the condition of place, not (subject to the condition of) time, having no 
counsellor, (and) not being any other substance that could be realized according to the ordinary methods of 
perception. (The Father,) however, was solitary, subsisting, as they say, in a state of quietude, and Himself 
reposing in isolation within Himself. When, however. He became productive, (2) it seemed to Him expedient 
at one time to generate and lead forth the most beautiful and perfect (of those germs of existence) which He 
possessed within Himself, for (the Father) was not fond of solitariness. For, says he. He was all love, but 
love is not love except there may be some object of affection. The Father Himself, then, as He was solitary, 
projected and produced Nous and Aletheia, that is, a duad which became mistress, (3) and origin, and 

mother of all the Aeons computed by them (as existing) within the Pleroma. Nous and Aletheia being 
projected from the Father,(4) one capable of continuing generation, deriving existence from a productive 
being, (Nous) himself likewise, in imitation of the Father, projected Logos and Zoe; and Logos and Zoe 
project Anthropos and Ecclesia. But Nous and Aletheia, when they beheld that their own offspring had been 
born productive, returned thanks to the Father of the universe, and offer unto Him a perfect number, viz., ten 
Aeons. For, he says. Nous and Aletheia could not offer unto the Father a more perfect (one) than this 
number. For the Father, who is perfect, ought to be celebrated by a perfect number, and ten is a perfect 
number, because this is first of those (numbers) that are formed by plurality, (and therefore) perfect.(5) The 
Father, however, being more perfect, because being alone unbegotten, by means of the one primary 
conjugal union of Nous and Aletheia, found means of projecting all the roots of existent things. 

CHAP. XXV.--THE TENET OF THE DUAD MADE THE FOUNDATION OF VALENTINUS' 
SYSTEM OF THE EMANATION OF AEONS. 

Logos himself also, and Zoe, then saw that Nous and Aletheia had celebrated the Father of the universe by 
a perfect number; and Logos himself likewise with Zoe wished to magnify their own father and mother. Nous 
and Aletheia. Since, however. Nous and Aletheia were begotten, and did not possess paternal (and) 
perfect uncreatedness. Logos and Zoe do not glorify Nous their father with a perfect number, but far from it, 
with an imperfect one.(1) For Logos and Zoe offer twelve Aeons unto Nous and Aletheia. For, according to 
Valentinus, these-namely. Nous and Aletheia, Logos and Zoe, Anthropos and Ecclesia-have been the 
primary roots of the Aeons. But there are ten the Aeons proceeding from Nous and Aletheia, and twelve 
from Logos and Zoe-twenty and eight in all. (2) And to these (ten) they give these following 
denominations:(3) Bythus and Mixis, Ageratus and Henosis, Autophyes and Hedone, Acinetus and 
Syncrasis, Monogenes and Macaria.(4) These are ten Aeons whom some say (have been projected) by 
Nous and Aletheia, but some by Logos and Zoe. Others, however, affirm that the twelve (Aeons have been 
projected) by Anthropos and Ecclesia, while others by Logos and Zoe. And upon these they bestow these 
following names:(5) Paracletus and Pistis, Patricus and Elpis, Metricus and Agape, Aeinous and Synesis, 
Ecclesiasticus and Macariotes, Theletus and Sophia. But of the twelve, the twelfth and youngest of all the 
twenty-eight Aeons, being a female, and called Sophia, observed the multitude and power of the besetting 
Aeons, and hurried back into the depth of the Father. And she perceived that all the rest of the Aeons, as 
being begotten, generate by conjugal intercourse. The Father, on the other hand, alone, without copulation, 
has produced (an offspring). She wished to emulate the Father,(6) and to produce (offspring) of herself 
without a marital partner, that she might achieve a work in no wise inferior(7) to (that of) the Father. (Sophia, 
however,) was ignorant that the Unbegotten One, being an originating principle of the universe, as well as 
root and depth and abyss, alone possesses the power of self-generation. But Sophia, being begotten, and 
born after many more (Aeons), is not able to acquire possession of the power inherent in the Unbegotten 
One. For in the Unbegotten One, he says, all things exist simultaneously, but in the begotten (Aeons) the 
female is projective of substance, and the male is formative of the substance which is projected by the 
female. Sophia, therefore, prepared to project that only which she was capable (of projecting), viz., a 
formless and undigested substance. (8) And this, he says, is what Moses asserts: "The earth was invisible, 
and unfashioned." This (substance) is, he says, the good (and) the heavenly Jerusalem, into which God has 
promised to conduct the children of Israel, saying, "I will bring you into a land flowing with milk and honey." 

CHAP. XXVI. -VALENTINUS' EXPLANATION OF THE EXISTENCE OF CHRIST AND THE 
SPIRIT. 

Ignorance, therefore, having arisen within the Pleroma in consequence of Sophia, and shapelessness in 
consequence of the offspring of Sophia, confusion arose in the Pleroma. (For all) the Aeons that were 
begotten (became overwhelmed with apprehension, imagining) that in like manner formless and incomplete 
progenies of the Aeons should be generated; and that some destruction, at no distant period, should I at 
length seize upon the Aeons. All the AEons, then, betook themselves to supplication of the Father, that he 
would tranquillize the sorrowing Sophia; for she continued weeping and bewailing on account of the abortion 
produced by her,-for so they, term it. The Father, then, compassionating the tears of Sophia, and accepting 
the supplication of the Aeons, orders a further projection. For he did not, (Valentinus) says, himself project, 
but Nous and Aletheia (projected) Christ and the Holy Spirit for the restoration of Form, and the destruction of 
the abortion, and (for) the consolation and cessation of the groans of Sophia. And thirty Aeons came into 
existence along with Christ and the Holy Spirit. Some of these (Valentinians) wish that this should be a 
triacontad of Aeons, whereas others desire that Sige should exist along with the Father, and that the Aeons 
should be reckoned along with them. 
Christ, therefore, being additionally projected, and the Holy Spirit, by Nous and Aletheia, immediately this 

abortion of Sophia, (wiiicii was) siiapeless, (and) born of iierself only, and generated witiiout conjugal 
intercourse, separates from the entire of the Aeons, lest the perfect Aeons, beholding this (abortion), should 
be disturbed by reason of its shapelessness. In order, then, that the shapelessness of the abortion might not 
at all manifest itself to the perfect Aeons, the Father also again projects additionally one Aeon, viz., Staurus. 
And he being begotten great, as from a mighty and perfect father, and being projected for the guardianship 
and defence of the Aeons, becomes a limit of the Pleroma, having within itself all the thirty Aeons together, 
for these are they that had been projected. Now this (Aeon) is styled Horos, because he separates from the 
Pleroma the Hysterema that is outside. And (he is called) Metocheus, because he shares also in the 
Hysterema. And (he is denominated) Staurus, because he is fixed inflexibly and inexorably, so that nothing 
of the Hysterema can come near the Aeons who are within the Pleroma. Outside, then, Horos, (or) 
Metocheus, (1) (or) Staurus, is the Ogdoad, as it is called, according to them, and is that Sophia which is 
outside the Pleroma, which (Sophia) Christ, who was additionally projected by Nous and Aletheia, formed 
and made a perfect Aeon so that in no respect she should be inferior in power to any of the Aeons within the 
Pleroma. (2) Since, however, Sophia was formed outside, and it was not possible and equitable that Christ 
and the Holy Spirit, who were projected from Nous and Aletheia, should remain outside the Pleroma, Christ 
hurried away, and the Holy Spirit, from her who had had shape imparted to her, unto Nous and Aletheia 
within the Limit, in order that with the rest of the Aeons they might glorify the Father. 

CHAP. XXVII. -VALENTINUS' EXPLANATION OF THE EXISTENCE OF JESUS; POWER OF 
JESUS OVER HUMANITY. 

After, then, there ensued some one (treaty of) peace and harmony between all the Aeons within the 
Pleroma, it appeared expedient to them not only by a conjugal union to have magnified the Son, but also 
that by an offering of ripe fruits they should glorify the Father. Then all the thirty Aeons consented to project 
one Aeons, joint fruit of the Pleroma, that he might be (an earnest) of their union, (3) and unanimity, and 
peace. And he alone was projected by all the Aeons in honour of the Father. This (one) is styled among 
them "Joint Fruit of the Pleroma." These (matters), then, took place within the Pleroma in this way. And the 
"Joint Fruit of the Pleroma" was projected, (that is,) Jesus, -for this is his name,-the great High Priest. 
Sophia, however, who was outside the Pleroma in search of Christ, who had given her form, and of the Holy 
Spirit, became involved in great terror that she would perish, if he should separate from her, who had given 
her form and consistency. And she was seized with grief, and fell into a state of considerable perplexity, 
(while) reflecting who was he who had given her form, what the Holy Spirit was, whither he had departed, who 
it was that had hindered them from being present, who it was that had been envious of that glorious and 
blessed spectacle. While involved in sufferings such as these, she turns herself to prayer and supplication 
of him who had deserted her. During the utterance of her entreaties, Christ, who is within the Pleroma, had 
mercy upon (her), and all the rest of the Aeons (were similarly affected); and they send forth beyond the 
Pleroma "the Joint Fruit of the Pleroma" as a spouse for Sophia, who was outside, and as a rectifier of those 
sufferings which she underwent in searching after Christ. 

"The Fruit," then, arriving outside the Pleroma, and discovering (Sophia) in the midst of those four primary 
passions, both fear and sorrow, and perplexity and entreaty he rectified her affections. While, however, 
correcting them, he observed that it would not be proper to destroy these, inasmuch as they are (in their 
nature) eternal, and peculiar to Sophia; and yet that neither was it seemly that Sophia should exist in the 
midst of such passions, in fear and sorrow, supplication (and) perplexity. He therefore, as an Aeons so 
great, and (as) offspring of the entire Pleroma, caused the passions to depart from her, and he made these 
substantially-existent essences. (4) He altered fear into animal desire, (5) and (made) grief material, and 
(rendered) perplexity (the passion) of demons. But conversion, (6) and entreaty, and supplication, he 
constituted as a path to repentance and power over the animal essence, which is denominated right. (7) The 
Creator(8) (acted) from fear; (and) that is what, he says. Scripture affirms: "The fear of the Lord is the 
beginning of wisdom. "(9) For this is the beginning of the affections of Sophia, for she was seized with fear, 
next with grief, then with perplexity, and so she sought refuge in entreaty and supplication. And the animal 
essence is, he says, of a fiery nature, and is also termed by them the super-celestial Topos, and 
Hebdomad, (1) and "Ancient of Days. "(2) And whatever other such statements they advance respecting this 
(Aeon), these they allege to hold good of the animalish (one), whom they assert to be creator of the world. 
Now he is of the appearance of fire. Moses also, he says, expresses himself thus: "The Lord thy God is a 
burning and consuming fire. "(3) For he, likewise, wishes (to think) that it has been so written. There is, 
however, he says, a twofold power of the fire; for fire is all-consuming, (and) cannot he quenched. According, 
therefore, to this division, there exists, subject to death, a certain soul which is a sort of mediator, for it is a 
Hebdomad and Cessation. (4) For underneath the Ogdoad, where Sophia is, but above Matter, which is the 
Creator, a day has been formed, (5) and the "Joint Fruit of the Pleroma." If the soul has been fashioned in the 
image of those above, that is, the Ogdoad, it became immortal and repaired to the Ogdoad, which is, he 

says, heavenly Jerusalem. If, however, it has been fashioned in the image of Matter, that is, the corporeal 
passions, the soul is of a perishable nature, and is (accordingly) destroyed. 

CHAP. XXVIII. -THE VALENTINIAN ORIGIN OF THE CREATION. 

As, therefore, the primary and greatest power(6) of the animal essence came into existence, an image (of 
the only begotten Son); so also the devil, who is the ruler of this world, constitutes the power of the material 
essence, as Beelzebub is of the essence of demons which emanates from anxiety. (In consequence of 
this,) Sophia from above exerted her energy from the Ogdoad to the Hebdomad. For the Demiurge, they 
say, knows nothing at all, but is, according to them, devoid of understanding, and silly, and is not conscious 
of what he is doing or working at. But in him, while thus in a state of ignorance that even he is producing, 
Sophia wrought all sorts of energy, and infused vigour (into him). And (although Sophia) was really the 
operating cause, he himself imagines that he evolves the creation of the world out of himself: whence he 
commenced, saying, "I am God, and beside me there is no other."(7) 

CHAP. XXIX.-THE OTHER VALENTINIAN EMANATIONS IN CONFORMITY WITH THE 
PYTHAGOREAN SYSTEM OF NUMBERS. 

The quaternion, then, advocated by Valentinus, is "a source of the everlasting nature having roots;"(8) and 
Sophia (is the power) from whom the animal and material creation has derived its present condition. But 
Sophia is called "Spirit," and the Demiurge "Soul," and the Devil "the ruler of this world," and Beelzebub "the 
(ruler) of demons." These are the statements which they put forward. But further, in addition to these, 
rendering, as I have previously mentioned, their entire system of doctrine (akin to the) arithmetical (art), (they 
determine) that the thirty Aeons within the Pleroma have again, in addition to these, projected other Aeons, 
according to the (numerical) proportion (adopted by the Pythagoreans), in order that the Pleroma might be 
formed into an aggregate, according to a perfect number. For how the Pythagoreans divided (the celestial 
sphere) into twelve and thirty and sixty parts, and how they have minute parts of diminutive portions, has 
been made evident. 

In this manner these (followers of Valentinus) subdivide the parts within the Pleroma. Now likewise the parts 
in the Ogdoad have been subdivided, and there has been projected Sophia, which is, according to them, 
mother of all living creatures, and the "Joint Fruit of the Pleroma," (who is) the Logos, (9) (and other Aeons,) 
who are celestial angels that have their citizenship in Jerusalem which is above, which is in heaven. For this 
Jerusalem is Sophia, she (that is) outside (the Pleroma), and her spouse is the "Joint Fruit of the Pleroma." 
And the Demiurge projected souls; for this (Sophia) is the essence of souls. This (Demiurge), according to 
them, is Abraham, and these (souls) the children of Abraham. From the material and divilish essence the 
Demiurge fashioned bodies for the souls. This is what has been declared: "And God formed man, taking 
clay from the earth, and breathed upon his face the breath of life, and man was made into a living soul. "(10) 
This, according to them, is the inner man, the natural (man), residing in the material body: Now a material 
(man) is perishable, incomplete, (and) formed out of the devilish essence. And this is the material man, as it 
were, according to them an inn, or domicile, at one time of soul only, at another time of soul and demons, at 
another time of soul and Logoi.(2) And these are the Logoi that have been dispersed from above, from the 
"Joint Fruit of the Pleroma" and (from) Sophia, into this world. And they dwell in an earthly body, with a soul, 
when demons do not take up their abode with that soul. This, he says, is what has been written in Scripture: 
"On this account I bend my knees to the God and Father and Lord of our Lord Jesus Christ, that God would 
grant you to have Christ dwelling in the inner man,"(3)-that is, the natural (man), not the corporeal (one),-" 
that you may be able to understand what is the depth," which is the Father of the universe, "and what is the 
breadth," which is Staurus, the limit of the Pleroma, "or what is the length," that is, the Pleroma of the Aeons. 
Wherefore, he says, "the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness 
unto him; "(4) but folly, he says, is the power of the Demiurge, for he was foolish and devoid of 
understanding, and imagined himself to be fabricating the world. He was, however, ignorant that Sophia, the 
Mother, the Ogdoad, was really the cause of all the operations performed by him who had no 
consciousness in reference to the creation of the world. 

CHAP. XXX. --VALENTINUS' EXPLANATION OF THE BIRTH OF JESUS; TWOFOLD 
DOCTRINE ON THE NATURE OF JESUS' BODY; OPINION OF THE ITALIANS, THAT IS, 
HERACLEON AND PTOLEMAEUS; OPINION OF THE ORIENTALS, THAT IS, AXIONICUS 
AND BARDESANES. 

All the prophets, therefore, and the law spoke by means of the Demiurge, -a silly god, (5) he says, (and 
themselves) fools, who knew nothing. On account of this, he says, the Saviour observes: "All that came 

before me are thieves and robbers. "(6) And the apostle (uses these words) "The mystery which was not 
made l<nown to former generations. "(7) For none of the prophets, he says, said anything concerning the 
things of which we speal<; for (a prophet) could not but be ignorant of all (these) things, inasmuch as they 
certainly had been uttered by the Demiurge only. When, therefore, the creation received completion, and 
when after (this) there ought to have been the revelation of the sons of God-that is, of the Demiurge, which 
up to this had been concealed, and in which obscurity the natural man was hid, and had a veil upon the 
heart;-when (it was time), then, that the veil should be taken away, and that these mysteries should be seen, 
Jesus was born of Mary the virgin, according to the declaration (in Scripture), "The Holy Ghost will come 
upon thee"-Sophia is the Spirit-" and the power of the Highest will overshadow thee"-the Highest is the 
Demiurge,-"wherefore that which shall be born of thee shall be called holy. "(8) For he has been generated 
not from the highest alone, as those created in (the likeness of) Adam have been created from the highest 
alone-that is, (from) Sophia and the Demiurge. Jesus, however, the new man, (has been generated) from 
the Holy Spirit-that is, Sophia and the Demiurge-in order that the Demiurge may complete the conformation 
and constitution of his body, and that the Holy Spirit may supply his essence, and that a celestial Logos 
may proceed from the Ogdoad being born of Mary. 

Concerning this (Logos) they have a great question amongst them-an occasion both of divisions and 
dissension. And hence the doctrine of these has become divided: and one doctrine, according to them, is 
termed Oriental, and the other Italian. They from Italy, of whom is Heracleon and Ptolemaeus, say that the 
body of Jesus was (an) animal (one). And on account of this, (they maintain) that at his baptism the Holy 
Spirit as a dove came down-that is, the Logos of the mother above, (I mean Sophia)-and became (a 
voice) to the animal (man), and raised him from the dead. This, he says, is what has been declared: "He 
who raised Christ from the dead will also quicken your mortal and natural bodies. "(9) For loam has come 
under a curse; "for," says he, "dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return. "(1 0) The Orientals, on the other 
hand, of whom is Axionicus(11) and Bardesianes,(12) assert that the body of the Saviour was spiritual; for 
there came upon Mary the Holy Spirit-that is, Sophia and the power of the highest. This is the creative art, 
(and was vouchsafed) in order that what was given to Mary by the Spirit might be fashioned. 

CHAP. XXXI.--FURTHER DOCTRINES OF VALENTINUS RESPECTING THE AEONS; 
REASONS FOR THE INCARNATION. 

Let, then, those (heretics) pursue these inquiries among themselves, (and let others do so likewise,) if it 
should prove agreeable to anybody else to investigate (such points. Valentinus) subjoins, however, the 
following statement: That the trespasses appertaining to the Aeons within (the Pleroma) had been 
corrected; and likewise had been rectified the trespasses appertaining to the Ogdoad, (that is,) Sophia, 
outside (the Pleroma); and also (the trespasses) appertaining to the Hebdomad (had been rectified). For 
the Demiurge had been taught by Sophia that He is not Himself God alone, as He imagined, and that 
except Himself there is not another (Deity). But when taught by Sophia, He was made to recognise the 
superior (Deity). For He was instructed(l) by her, and initiated and indoctrinated into the great mystery of the 
Father and of the Aeons, and divulged this to none. This is, as he says, what (God) declares to Moses: "I am 
the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; and my name I have not announced to 
them;"(2) that is, I have not declared the mystery, nor explained who is God, but I have preserved the 
mystery which I have heard from Sophia in secrecy with myself. When, then, the trespasses of those above 
had been rectified, it was necessary, according to the same consequence, that the (transgressions) here 
likewise should obtain rectification. On this account Jesus the Saviour was born of Mary that he might rectify 
(the trespasses committed) here; as the Christ who, having been projected additionally from above by 
Nous and Aletheia, had corrected the passions of Sophia-that is, the abortion (who was) outside (the 
Pleroma). And, again, the Saviour who was born of Mary came to rectify the passions(3) of the soul. There 
are therefore, according to these (heretics), three Christs: (the first the) one additionally projected by Nous 
and Aletheia, along with the Holy Spirit; and (the second) the "Joint Fruit of the Pleroma," spouse of Sophia, 
who was outside (the Pleroma). And she herself is likewise styled Holy Spirit, but one inferior to the first 
(projection). And the third (Christ is) He who was born of Mary for the restoration of this world of ours. 

CHAP. XXXII. -VALENTINUS CONVICTED OF PLAGIARISMS FROM PLATO. 

I think that the heresy of Valentinus which is of Pythagorean (origin), has been sufficiently, indeed more than 
sufficiently, delineated. It therefore seems also expedient, that having explained his opinions, we should 
desist from (further) refutation (of his system). Plato, then, in expounding mysteries concerning the universe, 
writes to Dionysius expressing himself after some such manner(4) as this: "I must speak to you by riddles, (5) 
in order that if the letter may meet with any accident in its leaves by either sea or land, he who reads (what 
falls into his hands) may not understand it. For so it is. All things are about the King of all, and on his account 

are all things, and he is cause of all the glorious (objects of creation). The second is about the second, and 
the third about the third. But pertaining to the King there is none of those things of which I have spoken. But 
after this the soul earnestly desires to learn what sort these are, looking upon those things that are akin to 
itself, and not one of these is (in itself) sufficient. This is, O son of Dionysius and Doris, the question (of yours) 
which is a cause of all evil things. Nay, but rather the solicitude concerning this is innate in the soul; and if 
one does not remove this, he will never really attain truth. (6) But what is astonishing in this matter, listen. For 
there are men who have heard these things-(men) furnished with capacities for learning, and furnished with 
capacities of memory, and persons who altogether in every way are endued with an aptitude for 
investigation with a view to inference. (These are) at present aged speculators. (7) And they assert that 
opinions which at one time were credible are now incredible, and that things once incredible are now the 
contrary. While, therefore, turning the eye of examination towards these (inquiries), exercise caution, lest at 
any time you should have reason to repent in regard of those things should they happen in a manner 
unbecoming to your dignity. On this account I have written nothing concerning these (points); nor is there any 
treatise of Plato's (upon them), nor ever shall there be. The observations, however, now made are those of 
Socrates, conspicuous for virtue even while he was a young man." 

Valentinus, falling in with these (remarks), has made a fundamental principle in his system "the King of all," 
whom Plato mentioned, and whom this heretic styles Pater, and Bythos, and Proarche(8) over the rest of the 
Aeons. And when Plato uses the words, "what is second about things that are second," Valentinus 
supposes to be second all the Aeons that are within the limit (of the Pleroma, as well as) the limit (itself). And 
when Plato uses the words, what is third about what is third," he has (constituted as third) the entire of the 
arrangement (existing) outside the limit(1) and the Pleroma. And Valentinus has elucidated this 
(arrangement) very succinctly, in a psalm commencing from below, not as Plato does, from above, 
expressing himself thus: "I behold(2) all things suspended in air by spirit, and I perceive all things wafted by 
spirit; the flesh (I see) suspended from soul, but the soul shining out from air, and air depending from aether, 
and fruits produced from Bythus, and the foetus borne from the womb." Thus (Valentinus) formed his opinion 
on such (points). Flesh, according to these (heretics), is matter which is suspended from the soul of the 
Demiurge. And soul shines out from air; that is, the Demiurge emerges from the spirit, (which is) outside the 
Pleroma. But air springs forth from aether; that is, Sophia, which is outside (the Pleroma, is projected from 
the Pleroma) which is within the limit, and (from) the entire Pleroma (generally). And from Bythus fruits are 
produced; (that is,) the entire projection of the Aeons is made from the Father. The opinions, then, advanced 
by Valentinus have been sufficiently declared. It remains for us to explain the tenets of those who have 
emanated from-his school, though each adherent (of Valentinus) entertains different opinions. (3) 

CHAP. XXXIII. -SECUNDUS' SYSTEM OF AEONS; EPIPHANES; PTOLEMAEUS. 

A certain (heretic) Secundus,(4) born about the same time with Ptolemaeus, expresses himself thus: (he 
says) that there is a right tetrad and a left tetrad, -namely, light and darkness. And he affirms that the power 
which withdrew and laboured under deficiency, was not produced from the thirty Aeons, but from the fruits of 
these. Some other (heretic), however-Epiphanes, a teacher among them-expresses himself thus: "The 
earliest originating principle was inconceivable, ineffable, and unnameable;" and he calls this Monotes. 
And (he maintains) that there co-exists with this (principle) a power which he denominates Henotes. This 
Henotes and this Monotes, not by projection (from themselves), sent forth a principle (that should preside) 
over all intelligibles; (and this was) both unbegotten and invisible, and he styles it a Monad. "With this power 
co-exists a power of the same essence, which very (power) I call Unity. These four powers sent forth the 
remainder of the projections of the Aeons." But others, again, denominate the chief and originating Ogdoad, 
(which is) fourth (and) invisible, by the following names: first, Proarche; next, Anennoetus; third, Arrhetus; and 
fourth, Aoratus. And that from the first, Proarche, was projected by a first and fifth place, Arche; and from 
Anennoetus, by a second and sixth place, Acataleptus; and from Arrhetus, by a third and seventh place, 
Anonomastus; and from Aoratus, Agennetus, a complement of the first Ogdoad. They wish that these 
powers should exist before Bythus and Sige. Concerning, however, Bythus himself, there are many different 
opinions. Some affirm him to be unwedded, neither male nor female; but others (maintain) that Sige, who is a 
female, is present with him, and that this constitutes the first conjugal union. 
But the followers of Ptolemaeus(5) assert that (Bythus) has two spouses, which they call likewise 
dispositions, viz., Ennoia and Thelesis (conception and volition). For first the notion was conceived of 
projecting anything; next followed, as they say, the will to do so. Wherefore also these two dispositions and 
powers-namely, Ennoia and Thelesis-being, as it were, mingled one with the other, there ensued a 
projection of Monogenes and Aletheia by means of a conjugal union. And the consequence was, that 
visible types and images of those two dispositions of the Father came forth from the invisible (Aeons), viz., 
from Thelema, Nous, and from Ennoia, Aletheia. And on this account the image of the subsequently 
generated Thelema is (that of a) male; but (the image) of the unbegotten Ennoia is (that of a) female, since 

volition is, as it were, a power of conception. For conception always cherished the idea of a projection, yet 
was not of itself at least able to project itself, but cherished the idea (of doing so). When, however, the power 
of volition (would be present), then it projects the idea which had been conceived. 

CHAP. XXXIV. --SYSTEM OF MARCUS; A MERE IMPOSTOR; HIS WICKED DEVICES UPON 
THE EUCHARISTICCUP. 

A certain other teacher among them, Marcus, (6) an adept in sorcery, carrying on operations(7) partly by 
sleight of hand and partly by demons, deceived many from time to time. This (heretic) alleged that there 
resided in him the mightiest power from invisible and unnameable places. And very often, taking the Cup, as 
if offering up the Eucharistic prayer, and prolonging to a greater length than usual the word of invocation, he 
would cause the appearance of a purple, and sometimes of a red mixture, so that his dupes imagined that a 
certain Grace descended and communicated to the potion a blood-red potency. The knave, however, at 
that time succeeded in escaping detection from many; but now, being convicted (of the imposture), he will 
be forced to desist from it. For, infusing secretly into the mixture some drug that possessed the power of 
imparting such a colour (as that alluded to above), uttering for a, considerable time nonsensical 
expressions, he was in the habit of waiting, (in expectation) that the (drug), obtaining a supply of moisture, 
might be dissolved, and, being intermingled with the potion, might impart its colour to it. The drugs, however, 
that possess the quality of furnishing this effect we have previously mentioned in the book on magicians. (1) 
And here we have taken occasion to explain how they make dupes of many, and thoroughly ruin them. And 
if it should prove agreeable to them to apply their attention with greater accuracy to the statement made by 
us, they will become aware of the deceit of Marcus. 

CHAP. XXXV.-FURTHER ACTS OF JUGGLERY ON THE PART OF MARCUS. 

And this (Marcus), infusing (the aforesaid) mixture into a smaller cup, was in the habit of delivering it to a 
woman to offer up the Eucharistic prayer, while he himself stood by, and held (in his hand) another empty 
(chalice) larger than that. And after his female dupe had pronounced the sentence of Consecration, (2) 
having received (the cup from her), he proceeded to infuse (its contents) into the larger (chalice), and, 
pouring them frequently from one cup to the other, was accustomed at the same time to utter the following 
invocation: "Grant that the inconceivable and ineffable Grace which existed prior to the universe, may fill 
thine inner man, and make to abound in thee the knowledge of this (grace), as She disseminates the seed 
of the mustard-tree upon the good soil." And simultaneously pronouncing some such words as these, and 
astonishing both his female dupe and those that are present, he was regarded as one performing a miracle; 
while the larger was being filled from the smaller chalice, in such a way as that (the contents), being 
superabundant, flowed over. And the contrivance of this (juggler) we have likewise explained in the 
aforesaid (fourth) book, where we have proved that very many drugs, when mingled in this way with liquid 
substances, are endued with the quality of yielding augmentation, more particularly when diluted in wine. 
Now, when (one of these impostors) previously smears, in a clandestine manner, an empty cup with any 
one of these drugs, and shows it (to the spectators) as if it contained nothing, by infusing into it (the contents) 
from the other cup, and pouring them back again, the drug, as it is of a flatulent nature, is dissolved(3) by 
being blended with the moist substance. And the effect of this was, that a superabundance of the mixture 
ensued, and was so far augmented, that what was infused was put in motion, such being the nature of the 
drug. And if one stow away (the chalice) when it has been filled, (what has been poured into it) will after no 
long time return to its natural dimensions, inasmuch as the potency of the drug becomes extinct by reason of 
the continuance of moisture. Wherefore he was in the habit of hurriedly presenting the cup to those present, 
to drink; but they, horrified at the same time, and eager (to taste the contents of the cup), proceeded to drink 
(the mixture), as if it were something divine, and devised by the Deity .4 

CHAP. XXXVI. -THE HERETICAL PRACTICES OF THE MARCITES IN REGARD OF 
BAPTISM. 

Such and other (tricks) this impostor attempted to perform. And so it was that he was magnified by his 
dupes, and sometimes he was supposed to utter predictions. But sometimes he tried to make others 
(prophesy), partly by demons carrying on these operations, and partly by practising sleight of hand, as we 
have previously stated. Hoodwinking therefore multitudes, he led on (into enormities) many (dupes) of this 
description who had become his disciples, by teaching them that they were prone, no doubt, to sin, but 
beyond the reach of danger, from the fact of their belonging to the perfect power, and of their being 
participators in the inconceivable potency. And subsequent to the (first) baptism, to these they promise 
another, which they call Redemption. And by this (other baptism) they wickedly subvert those that remain 

with them in expectation of redemption, as if persons, after they had once been baptized, could again obtain 
remission. Now, it is by means of such l<navery as this that they seem to retain their hearers. And when they 
consider that these have been tested, and are able to keep (secret the mysteries) committed unto them, 
they then admit them to this (baptism). They, however, do not rest satisfied with this alone, but promise (their 
votaries) some other (boon) for the purpose of confirming them in hope, in order that they may be 
inseparable (adherents of their sect). For they utter something in an inexpressible (tone of) voice, after 
having laid hands on him who is receiving the redemption. And they allege that they could not easily 
declare (to another) what is thus spoken unless one were highly tested, or one were at the hour of death, 
(when) the bishop comes and whispers (it) into the (expiring one's) ear. And this knavish device (is 
undertaken) for the purpose of securing the constant attendance upon the bishop of (Marcus') disciples, as 
individuals eagerly panting to learn what that may be which is spoken at the last, by (the knowledge of) 
which the learner will be advanced to the rank of those admitted into the higher mysteries. And in regard of 
these I have maintained a silence for this reason, lest at any time one should suppose that I was guilty of 
disparaging these (heretics). For this does not come within the scope of our present work, only so far as it 
may contribute to prove from what source (the heretics) have derived the standing-point from which they 
have taken occasion to introduce the opinions advanced by them.(1) 

CHAP. XXXVII. -MARCUS' SYSTEM EXPLAINED BY IRENAEUS; MARCUS' VISION; THE 
VISION OF VALENTINUS REVEALING TO HIM HIS SYSTEM. 

For also the blessed presbyter Irenaeus, having approached the subject of a refutation in a more 
unconstrained spirit, has explained such washings and redemptions, stating more in the way of a rough 
digest(2) what are their practices. (And it appears that some of the Marcosians,) on meeting with (Irenaeus' 
work), deny that they have so received (the secret word just alluded to), but they have learned that always 
they should deny. Wherefore our anxiety has been more accurately to investigate, and to discover minutely 
what are the (instructions) which they deliver in the case of the first bath, styling it by some such name; and in 
the case of the second, which they denominate Redemption. But not even has this secret of theirs escaped 
(our scrutiny). For these opinions, however, we consent to pardon Valentinus and his school. 
But Marcus, imitating his teacher, himself also feigns a vision, imagining that in this way he would be 
magnified. For Valentinus likewise alleges that he had seen an infant child lately born; and questioning (this 
child), he proceeded to inquire who it might be. And (the child) replied, saying that he himself is the Logos, 
and then subjoined a sort of tragic legend; and out of this (Valentinus) wishes the heresy attempted by him 
to consist. Marcus, making a similar attempts with this (heretic), asserts that the Telrad came to him in the 
form of a woman,-since the world could not bear, he says, the male (form) of this Tetrad, and that she 
revealed herself who she was, and explained to this (Marcus) alone the generation of the universe, which 
she never had revealed to any, either of gods or of men, expressing herself after this mode: When first the 
self-existent Father, He who is inconceivable and without substance. He who is neither male nor female, 
willed that His own ineffability should become realized in something spoken, and that His invisibility should 
become realized in form. He opened His mouth, and sent forth similar to Himself a Logos. And this (Logos) 
stood by Him, and showed unto Him who he was, viz., that he himself had been manifested as a (realization 
in) form of the Invisible One. And the pronunciation of the name was of the following description. He was 
accustomed to utter the first word of the name itself, which was Arche, and the syllable of this was 
(composed) of four(4) letters. Then he subjoined the second (syllable), and this was also (composed) of 
four letters. Next he uttered the third (syllable), which was (composed) often letters; and he uttered the fourth 
(syllable), and this was (composed) of twelve letters. Then ensued the pronunciation of the entire name, 
(composed) of thirty letters, but of four syllables. And each of the elements had its own peculiar letters, and 
its own peculiar form, and its own peculiar pronunciation, as well as figures and images. And not one of 
these was there that beholds the form of that (letter) of which this was an element. And of course none of 
them could know the pronunciation of the (letter) next to this, but (only) as he himself pronounces it, (and that 
in such a way) as that, in pronouncing the whole (word), he supposed that he was uttering the entire (name). 
For each of these (elements), being part of the entire (name), he denominates (according to) its own 
peculiar sound, as if the whole (of the word). And he does not intermit sounding until he arrived at the last 
letter of the last element, and uttered it in a single articulation. Then he said, that the restoration of the entire 
ensued when all the (elements), coming down into the one letter, sounded one and the same pronunciation, 
and an image of the pronunciation he supposed to exist when we simultaneously utter the word Amen.(1) 
And that these sounds are those which gave form to the insubstantial and unbegotten Aeon, and that those 
forms are what the Lord declared to be angels-the (forms) that uninterruptedly behold the face of the 
Father. 

CHAP. XXXVIII. --MARCUS' SYSTEM OF LETTERS. 

But the generic and expressed names of the elements he called Aeons, and Logoi, and Roots, and Seeds, 
and Pleromas, and Fruits. (And he maintains) that every one of these, and what was peculiar to each, is 
perceived as being contained in the name of "Ecclesia." And the final letter of the last element sent forth its 
own peculiar articulation. And the sound of this (letter) came forth and produced, in accordance with images 
of the elements, its own peculiar elements. And from these he says that things existing here were garnished, 
and the things antecedent to these were produced. The letter itself certainly, of which the sound was 
concomitant with the sound below, he says, was received up by its own syllable into the complement of the 
entire (name); but that the sound, as if cast outside, remained below. And that the element itself, from which 
the letter along with its own pronunciation descended below, he says, is (composed) of thirty letters, and that 
each one of the thirty letters contains in itself other letters, by means ofwhich the title of the letter is named. 
And again, that the other (letters) are named by different letters, and the rest by different (ones still). So that 
by writing down the letters individually, the number would eventuate in infinity. In this way one may more 
clearly understand what is spoken. The element Delta, (he says,) has five letters in itself, (viz.). Delta, and 
Epsilon, and Lambda, and Tau, and Alpha; and these very letters are (written) by means of other letters. If, 
therefore, the entire substance of the Delta eventuates in infinity, (and if) different letters invariably produce 
different letters, and succeed one another, by how much greater than that element is the more enormous 
sea(2) of the letters? And if one letter is thus infinite, behold the entire name's depth of the letters out ofwhich 
the patient industry, nay, rather (I should say,) the vain toil of Marcus wishes that the Progenitor (of things) 
should consist! Wherefore also (he maintains) that the Father, who knew that He was inseparable from 
Himself, gave (this depth) to the elements, which he likewise denominates Aeons. And he uttered aloud to 
each one of them its own peculiar pronunciation, from the fact that one could not pronounce the entire. 

CHAP. XXXIX. -THE QUATERNION EXHIBITS "TRUTH." 

And (Marcus alleged) that the Quaternion, after having explained these things, spoke as follows: "Now, I 
wish also to exhibit to you Truth herself, for I have brought her down from the mansions above, in order that 
you may behold her naked, and become acquainted with her beauty; nay, also that you may hear her 
speak, and may marvel at her wisdom. Observe," says the Quaternion, "then, first, the head above. Alpha 
(and long) O; the neck, B and P[si]; shoulders, along with hands, G and C[hi]; breasts. Delta and P[hi]; 
diaphragm, (3) Eu; belly, Z and T; pudenda. Eta and S; thighs, T[h] and R; knees, Ip; calves, Ko; ankles, 
Lx[si]; feet, M and N." This is in the body of Truth, according to Marcus. This is the figure of the element; this 
the character of the letter. And he styles this element Man, and affirms it to be the source of every word, and 
the originating principle of every sound, and the realization in speech of everything that is ineffable, and a 
mouth of taciturn silence. And this is the body of (Truth) herself. But do you, raising aloft the conceiving 
power of the understanding, hear from the mouths of Truth (of) the Logos, who is Self-generator(4) and 
Progenitor.(5) 

CHAP. XL.--THE NAME OF CHRIST JESUS. 

But, after uttering these words, (Marcus details) that Truth, gazing upon him, and opening her mouth, spoke 
the discourse (just-alluded to). And (he tells us) that the discourse became a name, and that the name was 
that which we know and utter, viz., Christ Jesus, and that as soon as she had named this (name) she 
remained silent. While Marcus, however, was expecting that she was about to say more, the Quaternion, 
again advancing into the midst, speaks as follows: "Thou didst regard as contemptible(l) this discourse 
which you have heard from the mouth of Truth. And yet this which you know and seem long since to possess 
is not the name; for you have merely the sound of it, but are ignorant of the power. For Jesus is a remarkable 
name, having six letters, (2) invoked(3) by all belonging to the called (of Christ); whereas the other (name, 
that is, Christ,) consists of many parts, and is among the (five) Aeons of the Pleroma. (This name) is of 
another form and a different type, and is recognised by those existences who are connate with him, and 
whose magnitudes subsist with him continually. 

CHAP. XLI. -MARCUS' MYSTIC INTERPRETATION OF THE ALPHABET. 

Know, (therefore,) that these letters which with you are (reckoned at) twenty-four, are emanations from the 
three powers, and are representative(4) of those (powers) which embrace even the entire number of the 
elements. For suppose that there are some letters that are mute-nine of them-of Pater and Aletheia, from 
the fact that these are mute-that is, ineffable and unutterable. And (again, assume) that there are other 
(letters that are) semi-vowels-eight of them-of the Logos and of Zoe, from the fact that these are 
intermediate between consonants and vowels, and receive the emanation(5) of the (letters) above them, but 

the reflux of those below them. (6) And (likewise take for granted) that there are vowels-and these are 
seven-of Anthropos and Ecclesia, inasmuch as the voice of Anthropos proceeded forth, and imparted form 
to the (objects of the) universe. For the sound of the voice produced figure, and invested them with it. From 
this it follows that there are Logos and Zoe, which have eight (semi-vowels); and Anthropos and Ecclesia, 
which have seven (vowels); and Pater and Aletheia, which have nine (mutes). But from the fact that Logos 
wanted(7) (one of being an ogdoad), he who is in the Father was removed (from his seat on God's right 
hand), and came down (to earth). And he was sent forth (by the Father) to him from whom he was separated, 
for the rectification of actions that had been committed. (And his descent took place) in order that the unifying 
process, which is inherent in Agathos, of the Pleromas might produce in all the single power that emanates 
from all. And thus he who is of the seven (vowels) acquired the power of the eight(8) (semi-vowels); and 
there were produced three topoi, corresponding with the (three) numbers (nine, seven, and eight),-(these 
topai) being ogdoads. And these three being added one to the other, exhibited the number of the 
twenty-four (letters). And (he maintains), of course, that the three elements,-(which he himself affirms to be 
(allied) with the three powers by conjugal union, and which (by this state of duality) become six, and from 
which have emanated the twenty-four elements,-being rendered fourfold by the Quaternion's ineffable word, 
produce the same number (twenty-four) with these. And these, he says, belong to Anonomastus. And (he 
asserts) that these are conveyed by the six powers into a similarity with Aoratus. And (he says) that there are 
six double letters of these elements, images of images, which, being reckoned along with the twenty-four 
letters, produce, by an analogical power, the number thirty. 

CHAP. XLII.-HIS SYSTEM APPLIED TO EXPLAIN OUR LORD'S LIFE AND DEATH. 

And he says, as the result of this computation and that proportion, (9) that in the similitude of an image He 
appeared who after the six days Himself ascended the mountain a fourth person, and became the sixth. (10) 
And (he asserts) that He (likewise) descended and was detained by the Hebdomad, and thus became an 
illustious Ogdoad. And He contains in Himself of the elements the entire number which He manifested, as 
He came to His baptism. (And the symbol of manifestation was) the descent of the dove, which is 0[mega] 
and Alpha, and which by the number manifested (by these is) 801 .(1 1) And for this reason (he maintains) that 
Moses says that man was created on the sixth day. And (he asserts) that the dispensation of suffering (took 
place) on the sixth day, which is the preparation; (and so it was) that on this (day) appeared the last man for 
the regeneration of the first man. And that the beginning and end of this dispensation is the sixth hour, at 
which He was nailed to the (accursed) tree. For (he says) that perfect Nous, knowing the sixfold number to 
be possessed of the power of production and regeneration, manifested to the sons of light the regeneration 
that had been introduced into this number by that illustrious one who had appeared. Whence also he says 
that the double letters(l) involve the remarkable number. For the illustious number, being intermingled with 
the twenty-four elements, produced the name (consisting) of the thirty letters. 

CHAP. XLIII.- LETTERS, SYMBOLS OF THE HEAVENS. 

He has, however, employed the instrumentality of the aggregate of the seven numbers, in order that the 
result of the self-devised (counsel)(2) might be manifested. Understand, he says, for the present, that 
remarkable number to be Him who was formed by the illustrious one, and who was, as it were, divided, and 
remained outside. And He, through both His Own power and wisdom, by means of the projection of Himself, 
imparted, in imitation of the seven powers, (3) animation to this world, so as to make it consist of seven 
powers, and constituted (this world) the soul of the visible universe. And therefore this one has resorted to 
such all operation as what was spontaneously undertaken by Himself; and these minister,(4) inasmuch as 
they are imitations of things inimitable, unto the intelligence of the Mother. And the first heaven sounds 
Alpha, (5) and the one after that E[psilon], and the third Eta, and the fourth, even that in the midst of the seven 
(vowels, enunciates) the power of lota, and the fifth of 0[micron], and the sixth of U[psilon], and the seventh 
and fourth from the central(6) one, 0[mega]. And all the powers, when they are connected together in one, 
emit a sound, and glorify that (Being) from whom they have been projected. And the glory of that sound is 
transmitted upwards to the Progenitor. And furthermore, he says that the sound of this ascription of glory 
being conveyed to the earth, became a creator and producer of terrestrial objects. And (he maintains) that 
the proof of this (may be drawn) from the case of infants recently born, whose soul, simultaneously with exit 
from the womb utters similarly this sound of each one of the elements. As, then, he says, the seven powers 
glorify the Logos, so also does the sorrowing soul in babes (magnify Him). (7) And on account of this, he 
says, David likewise has declared, "Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings Thou hast perfected 
praise. "(8) And again, "The heavens declare the glory of God. "(9) When, (10) however, the soul is involved 
in hardships, it utters no other exclamation than the 0[mega], inasmuch as it is afflicted in order that the soul 
above, becoming aware of what is akin to herself (below), may send down one to help this (earthly soul). 

CHAP. XLIV--RESPECTING THE GENERATION OF THE TWENTY-FOUR LETTERS. 

And so far for these points. Respecting, iiowever, tiie generation of tiie twenty-four elements, lie expresses 
iiimself tiius: tiiat Henotes coexists witii IVIonotes, and tiiat from tiiese issue two projections, viz., IVIonas and 
Hen, and tiiat tliese being added togetlier(1 1) become four, for twice two are four. And again, tiie two and 
four (projections) being added togetiier, manifested tiie number six; and tiiese six made fourfold, produce 
the twenty-four forms. (12) And these are the names of the first tetrad, and they are under stood as Holy of 
Holies, and cannot be expressed and they are recognised by the Son alone. These the Father knows 
which they are. Those names which with Him are pronounced in silence and with faith, are Arrhetus and 
Sige, Pater and Aletheia. And of this tetrad the entire number is (that) of twenty-four letters. For Arrhetus has 
seven elements, Sige five, and Pater five, and Aletheia seven. (1 3) And in like manner also (is it with) the 
second tetrad; (for) Logos and Zoe. Anthropos and Ecclesia, exhibited the same number of elements. And 
(he says) that the expressed name-(that is, Jesus)(14)-of the Saviour consists of six letters, but that His 
ineffable(1 5) name, according to the number of the letters, one by one, (16) consists of twenty-four elements, 
but Christ a Son of twelve. And (he says) that the ineffable (name) in Christ consists of thirty letters, and this 
exists, according to the letters I which are in Him, the elements being counted one by one. For the (name) 
Christ(l) consists of eight elements; for Chi(2) consists of three, and R[ho] of two, and El of two, and l[ota], of 
four, S[igma] of five, and T[au] of three, and OU of two, and San of three. Thus the ineffable name in Christ 
consists, they allege, of thirty letters. And they assert that for this reason He utters the words, "I am Alpha and 
Omega," displaying the dove, which (symbolically) has this number, which is eight hundred and one. (3) 

CHAP. XLV.--WHY JESUS IS CALLED ALPHA. 

Now Jesus possesses this ineffable generation. For from the mother of the universe, I mean the first tetrad, 
proceeded forth, in the manner of a daughter, the second tetrad. And it became an ogdoad, from which 
proceeded forth the decade; and thus was produced ten, and next eighteen. The decade, therefore, coming 
in along with the ogdoad, and rendering it tenfold, produced the number eighty; and again making eighty 
tenfold, generated the number eight hundred. (4) And so it is that the entire number of letters that proceeded 
forth from ogdoad into decade is eight hundred and eighty-eight, which is Jesus; for the name Jesus, 
according to the number in letters, is eight hundred and eighty-eight. Now likewise the Greek alphabet has 
eight monads and eight decades, and eight hecatontads; and these exhibit the calculated sum of eight 
hundred and eighty-eight, that is, Jesus, who consists of all numbers. And that on this account He is called 
Alpha (and Omega), indicating His generation (to be) from all. (5) 

CHAP. XLVI. -MARCUS' ACCOUNT OF THE BIRTH AND LIFE OF OUR LORD. 

But concerning the creation of this (Jesus), he expresses himself thus: That powers emanating from the 
second tetrad fashioned Jesus, who appeared on earth, and that the angel Gabriel(6) filled the place of the 
Logos, and the Holy Spirit that of Zoe, and the "Power of the Highest"(7) that of Anthropos, and the Virgin that 
of Ecclesia. (8) And so it was, in IVIarcus' system, that the man (who appeared) in accordance with the 
dispensation was born through l\/lary.(9) And when He came to the water, (he says) that He descended like 
a dove upon him who had ascended above and filled the twelfth number. And in Him resides the seed of 
these, that is, such as are sown along with Him, and that descend with (Him), and ascend with (Him). And that 
this power which descended upon Him, he says, is the seed of the Pleroma, which contains in itself both the 
Father and the Son, and the unnameable power of Sige, which is recognised through these and all the 
Aeons. And that this (seed) is the spirit which is in Him and spoke in Him through the mouth of the Son, the 
confession of Himself as Son of man, and of His being one who would manifest the Father; (and that) when 
this spirit came down upon Jesus, He was united with Him. The Saviour, who was of the dispensation, he 
says, destroyed death, whereas He made known (as) the Father Christ (Jesus). He says that Jesus, 
therefore, is the name of the man of the dispensation, and that it has been set forth for the assimilation and 
formation of Anthropos, who was about to descend upon Him; and that when He had received Him unto 
Himself, He retained possession of Him. And (he says) that He was Anthropos, (that) He (was) Logos, (that) 
He (was) Pater, and Arrhetus, and Sige, and Aletheia, and Ecclesia, and Zoe. 

CHAP. XLVII.--THE SYSTEM OF MARCUS SHOWN TO BE THAT OF PYTHAGORAS, BY 
QUOTATIONS FROM THE WRITINGS OF MARCUS' FOLLOWERS. 

I trust, therefore, that as regards these doctrines it is obvious to all possessed of a sound mind, that (these 
tenets) are unauthoritative, and far removed from the knowledge that is in accordance with Religion, and are 

mere portions of astrological discovery, and the arithmetical art of the Pythagoreans. And this assertion, ye 
who are desirous of learning shall ascertain (to be true, by a reference to the previous books, where,) 
amongst other opinions elucidated by us, we have explained these doctrines likewise. In order, however, 
that we may prove it a more clear statement, viz., that these (Marcosians) are disciples not of Christ but of 
Pythagoras, I shall proceed to explain those opinions that have been derived (by these heretics) from 
Pythagoras concerning the meteoric (phenomena) of the starts(10) as far as it is possible (to do so) by an 
epitome. 

Now the Pythagoreans make the following statements: that the universe consists of a Monad and Duad, and 
that by reckoning from a monad as far as four they thus generate a decade. And again, (1) a duad coming 
forth as far as the remarkable (letter),-for instance, two and four and six, -exhibited the (number) twelve. And 
again, if we reckon from the duad to the decade, thirty is produced; and in this are comprised the ogdoad, 
and decade, and dodecade. And therefore, on account of its having the remarkable (letter), the dodecade 
has concomitant(2) with it a remarkable passion. (3) And for this reason (they maintain) that when an error 
had arisen respecting the twelfth number, the sheep skipped from the flock and wandered away;(4) for that 
the apostasy took place, they say, in like manner from the decade. And with a similar reference to the 
dodecade, they speak of the piece of money which, on losing, a woman, having lit a candle, searched for 
diligently. (And they make a similar application) of the loss (sustained) in the case of the one sheep out of 
the ninety and nine; and adding these one into the other, they give a fabulous account of numbers. And in 
this way, they affirm, when the eleven is multiplied into nine, that it produces the number ninety and nine; and 
on this account that it is said that the word Amen embraces the number ninety-nine. And in regard of another 
number they express themselves in this manner: that the letter Eta along with the remarkable one constitutes 
all ogdoad, as it is situated in the eighth place from Alpha. Then, again, computing the number of these 
elements without the remarkable (letter), and adding them together up to Eta, they exhibit the number thirty. 
For any one beginning from the Alpha(5) to the Eta will, after subtracting the remarkable (letter), discover the 
number of the elements to be the number thirty. Since, therefore, the number thirty is unified from the three 
powers; when multiplied thrice into itself it produced ninety, for thrice thirty is ninety, (and this triad when 
multiplied into itself produced nine). In this way the Ogdoad brought forth the number ninety-nine from the first 
Ogdoad, and Decade, and Dodecade. And at one time they collect the number of this (trio) into an entire 
sum, and produce a triacontad; whereas at another time they subtract twelve, and reckon it at eleven. And in 
like manner, (they subtract) ten and make it nine. And connecting these one into the other, and multiplying 
them tenfold, they complete the number ninety-nine. Since, however, the twelfth Aeon, having left the eleven 
(Aeons above), and departing downwards, withdrew, they allege that even this is correlative (with the 
letters). For the figure of the letters teaches (us as much). For L is placed eleventh of the letters, and this L is 
the number thirty. And (they say) that this is placed according to an image of the dispensation above; since 
from Alpha, irrespective of the remarkable (letter), the number of the letters themselves, added together up 
to L, according to the augmentation of the letters with the L itself, produces the number ninety-nine. But that 
the L, situated in the eleventh (of the alphabet), came down to search after the number similar to itself, in 
order that it might fill up the twelfth number, and that when it was discovered it was filled up, is manifest from 
the shape itself of the letter. For Lambda, when it attained unto, as it were, the investigation of what is similar 
to itself, and when it found such and snatched it away, filled up the place of the twelfth, the letter M, which is 
composed of two Lambdas. And for this reason (it was) that these (adherents of Marcus), through their 
knowledge, avoid the place of the ninety-nine, that is, the Hysterema, a type of the left hand, (6) and follow 
after the one which, added to ninety-nine, they say was transferred to his own right hand 

CHAP. XLVIII. -THEIR COSMOGONY FRAMED ACCORDING TO THESE MYSTIC 
DOCTRINES OF LETTERS. 

And by the Mother, they allege, were created first the four elements, which, they say, are fire, water, earth, air; 
and these have been projected as an image of the tetrad above; and reckoning the energies of these-for 
instance, as hot, cold, moist, dry-they assert that they accurately portray the Ogdoad. And next they 
compute ten powers thus. (There are, they say,) seven orbicular bodies, which they likewise call heavens. 
There is next a circle containing these within its compass, and this also they name an eighth heaven: and in 
addition to these, they affirm the existence of both a sun and moon. And these being ten in number, they say, 
are images of the invisible decade that (emanated) from Logos and Zoe. (They affirm,) however, that the 
dodecade is indicated by what is termed the zodiacal circle. For these twelve zodiacal signs, they say, 
most evidently shadowed forth(1) the daughter of Anthropos and Ecclesia, namely the Dodecade. And 
since, he says, the upper heaven has been united from an opposite direction to the revolutionary motion, 
which is most rapid, of the entire (of the signs); and since (this heaven) within its cavity retards, and by its 
slowness counterpoises, the velocity of those (signs), so that in thirty years it accomplishes its circuit from 
sign to sign, -they therefore assert that this (heaven) is an image of Horos, who encircles the mother of 

these, who has thirty names. And, again, (they affirm) that the moon, which traverses the heaven in thirty 
days, by reason of (these) days portrays the number of the Aeons. And (they say) that the sun, performing its 
circuit, and terminating its exact return to its first position in its orbit in twelve months, manifests the 
dodecade. And also (they say) that the days themselves, involving the measure of twelve hours, constitute 
a type of the empty(2) dodecade; and that the circumference of the actual zodiacal circle consists of three 
hundred and sixty degrees, and that each zodiacal sign possesses thirty divisions. In this way, therefore, 
even by means of the circle, they maintain that the image is preserved(3) of the connection of the twelve with 
the thirty. (4) But, moreover, alleging that the earth was divided into twelve regions, and that according to 
each particular region it receives one power by the latter's being sent down from the heavens, and that it 
produces children corresponding in likeness(5) unto the power which transmitted (the likeness) by 
emanation; (for this reason) they assert that earth is a type of the Dodecade above. 

CHAP. XLIX.-THE WORK OF THE DEMIURGE PERISHABLE. 

And in addition to these (points, they lay down) that the Demiurge of the supernal Ogdoad, desirous of 
imitating the indefinite, and everlasting, and illimitable (one), and (the one) not subject to the condition of 
time; and (the Demiurge) not being able to represent the stability(6) and eternity of this (Ogdoad), on 
account of his being the fruit of the Hysterema, to this end appointed times, and seasons, and numbers, 
measuring many years in reference to the eternity of this (Ogdoad), thinking by the multitude of times to 
imitate its indefiniteness. And here they say, when Truth eluded his pursuit, that Falsehood followed close 
upon him; and that on account of this, when the times were fulfilled, his work unden/vent dissolution. 

CHAP. L. -MARCUS AND COLARBASUS REFUTED BY IRENAEUS. 

These assertions, then, those who are of the school of Valentinus advance concerning both the creation 
and the universe, in each case propagating opinions still more empty. (7) And they suppose this to constitute 
productiveness (in their system), if any one in like manner, making some greater discovery, will appear to 
work wonders. And finding, (as they insinuate,) each of the particulars of Scripture to accord with the 
aforesaid numbers, they (attempt to) criminate Moses and the prophets, alleging that these speak 
allegorically of the measures of the Aeons. And inasmuch as these statements are trifling and unstable, it 
does not appear to me expedient to bring them before (the reader. This, however, is the less requisite,) as 
now the blessed presbyter(8) Irenaeus has powerfully and elaborately refuted the opinions of these 
(heretics). And to him we are indebted for a knowledge of their inventions, (and have thereby succeeded in) 
proving that these heretics, appropriating these opinions from the Pythagorean philosophy, and from 
over-spun theories of the astrologers, cast an imputation upon Christ, as though He had delivered these 
(doctrines). But since I suppose that the worthless opinions of these men have been sufficiently explained, 
and that it has been clearly proved whose disciples are Marcus and Golarbasus, who were successors of 
the school of Valentinus, let us see what statement likewise Basilides advances. 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES 

BOOK VII. 

CONTENTS. 

THE following are the contents of the seventh book of the Refutation of all Heresies :- 

What the opinion of Basilides is, and that, being struck with the doctrines of Aristotle, he out of these framed 

his heresy. (1) 

And what are the statements of Saturnilus,(2) who flourished much about the time of Basilides. 

And how Menander advanced the assertion that the world was made by angels. 

What is the folly of Marcion, and that his tenet is not new, nor (taken) out of the Holy Scriptures, but that he 

obtains it from Empedocles. 

How Carpocrates acts sillily, in himself also alleging that existing things were made by angels. 

That Cerinthus, in no wise indebted to the Scriptures, formed his opinion (not out of them), but from the tenets 

of the Egyptians. (3) 

What are the opinions propounded by the Ebionaeans, and that they in preference adhere to Jewish 

customs. 

How Theodotus has been a victim of error, deriving contributions to his system partly from the Ebionaeans, 

(partly from Cerinthus.)(4) 

And what were the opinions of Gordon, (5) who both enunciated the doctrines of Empedocles, and who 

wickedly induced Marcion to step forward. 

And how Lucian, when he had become a disciple of Marcion, (6) having divested himself of all shame, 

blasphemed God from time to time. 

And Apelles also, having become a disciple of this (heretic), was not in the habit of advancing the same 

opinions with his preceptor; but being actuated (in the formation of his system) from the tenets of natural 

philosophers, assumed the substance of the universe as the fundamental principle of things. (7) 

CHAP. I. --HERESY COMPARED TO (1) THE STORMY OCEAN, (2) THE ROCKS OF THE 
SIRENS; MORAL FROM ULYSSES AND THE SIRENS. 

The pupils of these men, when they perceive the doctrines of the heretics to be like unto the ocean when 
tossed into waves by violence of the winds, ought to sail past in quest of the tranquil haven. For a sea of this 
description is both infested with wild beasts and difficult of navigation, like, as we may say, the Sicilian 
(Sea), in which the legend reports were Gyclops, and Gharybdis, and Scylla, and the rock(8) of the Sirens. 
Now, the poets of the Greeks allege that Ulysses sailed through (this channel), adroitly using (to his own 
purpose) the terribleness of these strange monsters. (9) For the savage cruelty (in the aspect) of these 
towards those who were sailing through was remarkable. The Sirens, however, singing sweetly and 
harmoniously, beguiled the voyagers, luring, by reason of their melodious voice, those who heard it, to steer 
their vessels towards (the promontory). The (poets) report that Ulysses, on ascertaining this, smeared with 
wax the ears of his companions, and, lashing himself to the mast, sailed, free of danger, past the Sirens, 
hearing their chant distinctly. And my advice to my readers is to adopt a similar expedient, viz., either on 
account of their infirmity to smear their ears with wax, and sail (straight on) through the tenets of the heretics, 
not even listening to (doctrines) that are easily capable of enticing them into pleasure, like the luscious lay 
of the Sirens, or, by binding one's self to the Gross(1) of Christ, (and) hearkening with fidelity (to His words), 
not to be distracted, inasmuch as he has reposed his trust in Him to whom ere this he has been firmly knit, 
and (I admonish that man) to continue stedfastly (in this faith). 

CHAP. II. -THE SYSTEM OF BASILIDES DERIVED FROM ARISTOTLE. 

Since, therefore, in the six books preceding this, we have explained previous (heretical opinions), it now 
seems proper not to be silent respecting the (doctrines) of Basilides, (2) which are the tenets of Aristotle the 
Stagyrite, not (those) of Christ. But even though on a former occasion the opinions propounded by Aristotle 
have been elucidated, we shall not even now scruple to set them down beforehand in a sort of synopsis, for 

the purpose of enabling my readers, by means of a nearer comparison of tiie two systems, to perceive witii 
facility that the doctrines advanced by Basilides are (in reality) the clever quibbles of Aristotle. 

CHAP. III. -SKETCH OF ARISTOTLE'S PHILOSOPHY. 

Aristotle, then, makes a threefold division of substance. For one portion of it is a certain genus, and another 
a certain species, as that (philosopher) expresses it, and a third a certain individual. What is individual, 
however, (is so) not through any minuteness of body, but because by nature it cannot admit of any division 
whatsoever. The genus, on the other hand, is a sort of aggregate, made up of many and different germs. 
And from this genus, just as (from) a certain heap, all the species of existent things derive their 
distinctions. (3) And the genus constitutes a competent cause for (the production of) all generated entities. In 
order, however, that the foregoing statement may be clear, I shall prove (my position) through an example. 
And by means of this it will be possible for us to retrace our steps over the entire speculation of the 
Peripatetic (sage). 

CHAP. IV. -ARISTOTLE'S GENERAL IDEA. 

We affirm the existence of animal absolutely, not some animal. And this animal is neither ox, nor horse, nor 
man, nor god; nor is it significant of any of these at all, but is animal absolutely. From this animal the species 
of all particular animals derive their subsistence. And this animality, itself the summum genus, (4) constitutes 
(the originating principle) for all animals produced in those (particular) species, and (yet is) not (itself any 
one) of the things generated. For man is an animal deriving the principle (of existence) from that animality, 
and horse is an animal deriving the principle of existence from that animality. The horse, and ox, and dog, 
and each of the rest of the animals, derive the principle (of existence) from the absolute animal, while 
animality itself is not any of these. 

CHAP. V. -NONENTITY AS A CAUSE. 

If, however, this animality is not any of these (species), the subsistence, according to Aristotle, of the things 
that are generated, derived its reality from non-existent entities. For animality, from whence these singly 
have been derived, is not any one (of them); and though it is not any one of them, it has yet become some 
one originating principle of existing things. But who it is that has established this substance as an originating 
cause of what is subsequently produced, we shall declare when we arrive at the proper place for 
entertaining a discussion of this sort. 

CHAP. VI. -SUBSTANCE, ACCORDING TO ARISTOTLE; THE PREDICATES. 

Since, however, as I have stated, substance is threefold, viz., genus, species, (and) individual; and (since) 
we have set down animality as being the genus, and man the species, as being already distinct from the 
majority of animals, but notwithstanding still to be identified (with animals of his own kind), inasmuch as not 
being yet moulded into a species of realized substance,-(therefore it is, that) when I impart form under a 
name to a man derived from the genus, I style him Socrates or Diogenes, or some one of the many 
denominations (in use). And since (in this way, I repeat,) I comprehend under a name the man who 
constitutes a species that is generated from the genus, I denominate a substance of this description 
individual. For genus has been divided into species, and species into individual. But (as regards) the 
individual, since it has been comprehended under a name, it is not possible that, according to its own 
nature, it could be divided into anything else, as we have divided each of the fore-mentioned (genus and 
species). (5) 

Aristotle primarily, and especially, and preeminently entitles this-substance, inasmuch as it cannot either be 
predicated of any Subject, or exist in a Subject. He, however, predicates of the Subject, just as with the 
genus, what I said constituted animality, (and which is) predicated by means of a common name of all 
particular animals, such as ox, horse, and the rest that are placed under (this genus). For it is true to say that 
man is an animal, and horse an animal, and that ox is an animal, and each of the rest. Now the meaning of 
the expression "predicated of a Subject" is this, that inasmuch as it is one, it can be predicated in like 
manner of many (particulars), even though these happen to be diversified in species. For neither does 
horse nor ox differ from man so far forth as he is an animal, for the definition of animal is said to suit all 
animals alike. For what is an animal? If we define it, a general definition will comprehend all animals. For 
animal is an animated Substance, endued with Sensation. Such are ox, man, horse, and each of the rest (of 
the animal kingdom). But the meaning of the expression "in a Subject" is this, that what is inherent in 
anything, not as a part, it is impossible should exist separately from that in which it is. But this constitutes 

each of the accidents (resident) in Substance, and is what is termed Quality. Now, according to this, we say 
that certain persons are of such a quality; for instance, white, grey, black, just, unjust, temperate, and other 
(characteristics) similar to these. But it is impossible for any one of these to subsist itself by itself; but it must 
inhere in something else. If, however, neither animal which I predicate of all individual animals, nor accidents 
which are discoverable in all things of which they are nonessential qualities, can subsist themselves by 
themselves, and (yet if) individuals are formed out of these, (it follows, therefore, that) the triply divided 
Substance, which is not made up out of other things, consists of nonentities. If, then, what is primarily, and 
pre-eminently, and particularly denominated Substance consists of these, it derives existence from 
nonentities, according to Aristotle. 

CHAP. VII. --ARISTOTLE'S COSMOGONY; HIS "PSYCHOLOGY;" HIS "ENTELECHEIA;" HIS 
THEOLOGY; HIS ETHICS; BASILIDES FOLLOWS ARISTOTLE. 

But concerning Substance, the statements now made will suffice. But not only is Substance denominated 
genus, species, (and) individual, but also matter, and form, and privation. There is, however, (as regards the 
substance,) in these no difference, even though the division be allowed to stand. Now, inasmuch as 
Substance is of this description, the arrangement of the world has taken place according to some such plan 
as the following. The world is divided, according to Aristotle, into very numerous and diversified parts. Now 
the portion of the world which extends from the earth to the moon is devoid of foresight, guideless, and is 
under the sway(1) of that nature alone which belongs to itself. But another (part of the world which lies) 
beyond the moon, and extends to the surface of heaven, is arranged in the midst of all order and foresight 
and governance. Now, the (celestial) superficies constitutes a certain fifth substance, and is remote from all 
those natural elements out of which the cosmical system derives consistence. And this is a certain fifth 
Substance, according to Aristotle, -as it were, a certain super-mundane essence. And (this essence) has 
become (a logical necessity) in his system, in order to accord with the (Peripatetic) division of the world. And 
(the topic of this fifth nature) constitutes a distinct investigation in philosophy. For there is extant a certain 
disquisition, styled A Lecture on Physical (Phenomena), in which he has elaborately treated(2) concerning 
the operations which are conducted by nature and not providence, (in the quarter of space extending) from 
the earth as far as the moon. And there is also extant by him a certain other peculiar treatise on the 
principles of things (in the region) beyond the moon, and it bears the following inscription: Metaphysics. (3) 
And another peculiar dissertation has been (written) by him, entitled Concerning a Fifth Substance, and in 
this work Aristotle unfolds his theological opinions. 

There exists some such division of the universe as we have now attempted to delineate in outline, and 
(corresponding with it is the division) of the Aristotelian philosophy. His work, however, (styled) Concerning 
the Soul, is obscure. For in the entire three books (where he treats of this subject) it is not possible to say 
clearly what is Aristotle's opinion concerning the soul. For, as regards the definition which he furnishes of 
soul, it is easy (enough) to declare this; but what it is that is signified by the definition(4) is difficult to discover. 
For soul, he says, is an entelecheia of a natural organic body; (but to explain) what this is at all, would 
require a very great number of arguments and a lengthened investigation. As regards, however, the Deity, 
the Originator of all those glorious objects in creation, (the nature of) this (First Cause)-even to one 
conducting his speculations by a more prolonged inquiry than that concerning (the soul)-is more difficult to 
know than the soul itself. The definition, however, which Aristotle furnishes of the Deity is, I admit, not difficult 
to ascertain, but it is impossible to comprehend the meaning of it. For, he says, (the Deity) is a "conception 
of conception;" but this is altogether a non-existent (entity). The world, however, is incorruptible (and) eternal, 
according to Aristotle. For it has in itself nothing faulty, (1) inasmuch as it is directed by Providence and 
Nature. And Aristotle has laid down doctrines not only concerning Nature and a cosmical system, and 
Providence, and God, (2) but he has written (more than this); for there is extant by him likewise a certain 
treatise on ethical subjects, and these he inscribes Books of Ethics. (3) But throughout these he aims at 
rendering the habits of his hearers excellent from being worthless. When, therefore, Basilides has been 
discovered, not in spirit alone, but also in the actual expressions and names, transferring the tenets of 
Aristotle into our evangelical and saving doctrine, what remains, but that, by restoring what he has 
appropriated from others, we should prove to the disciples of this (heretic) that Christ will in no wise profit 
them, inasmuch as they are heathenish? 

CHAP. VIM. -BASILIDES AND ISIDORUS ALLEGE APOSTOLIC SANCTION FOR THEIR 
SYSTEMS; THEY REALLY FOLLOW ARISTOTLE. 

Basilides, therefore, and Isidorus, the true son and disciple of Basilides, say that Matthias(4) communicated 
to them secret discourses, which, I being specially instructed, he heard from the Saviour. Let us, then, see 
how clearly Basilides, simultaneously with Isidorus, and the entire band of these (heretics), not only 

absolutely belies Matthias, but even the Saviour Himself. (Time) was, says (Basilides), when there was 
nothing. Not even, however, did that nothing constitute anything of existent things; but, to express myself 
undisguisedly and candidly, and without any quibbling, it is altogether nothing. But when, he says, I employ 
the expression "was, "I do not say that it was; but (I speak in this way) in order to signify the meaning of what I 
wish to elucidate. I affirm then, he says, that it was "altogether nothing." For, he says, that is not absolutely 
ineffable which is named (so), -although undoubtedly we call this ineffable, -but that which is "non-ineffable." 
For that which is "non-ineffable" is not denominated ineffable, but is, he says, above every name that is 
named. For, he says, by no means for the world are these names sufficient, but so manifold are its divisions 
that there is a deficiency (of names). And I do not take it upon myself to discover, he says, proper 
denominations for all things. Undoubtedly, however, one ought mentally, not by means of names, to 
conceive, after an ineffable manner, the peculiarities (of things) denominated. For an equivocal terminology, 
(when employed by teachers,) has created for their pupils confusion and a source of error concerning 
objects. (The Basilidians), in the first instance, laying hold on this borrowed and furtively derived tenet from 
the Peripatetic (sage), play upon the folly of those who herd together with them. For Aristotle, born many 
generations before Basilides, first lays down a system in The Categories concerning homonymous words. 
And these heretics bring this (system) to light as if it were peculiarly their own, and as if it were some novel 
(doctrine), and some secret disclosure from the discourses of Matthias. (5) 

CHAP. IX. -BASILIDES ADOPTS THE ARISTOTELIAN DOCTRINE OF "NONENTITY." 

Since, therefore, "nothing" existed,-(l mean) not matter, nor substance, nor what is insubstantial, nor is 
absolute, nor composite, (6) (nor conceivable, nor inconceivable, (nor what is sensible,) nor devoid of 
senses, nor man, nor angel, nor a god, nor, in short, any of those objects that have names, or are 
apprehended by sense, or that are cognised by intellect, but (are) thus (cognised), even with greater 
minuteness, still, when all things are absolutely removed,-(since, I say, "nothing" existed,) God, 
"non-existent, "-whom Aristotle styles "conception of conception," but these (Basilidians) 
"non-existent, "-inconceivably, insensibly, indeterminately, involuntarily, impassively, (and) unactuated by 
desire, willed to create a world. Now I employ, he says, the expression "willed" for the purpose of signifying 
(that he did so) involuntarily, and inconceivably, and insensibly. And by the expression "world" I do not 
mean that which was subsequently formed according to breadth and division, and which stood apart; nay, 
(far from this,) for (I mean) the germ of a world. The germ, however, of the world had all things in itself. Just as 
the grain of mustard comprises all things simultaneously, holding them (collected) together within the very 
smallest (compass), viz. roots, stem, branches, leaves, and innumerable gains which are produced from the 
plant, (as) seeds again of other plants, and frequently of others (still), that are produced (from them). In this 
way, "non-existent" God made the world out of nonentities, casting and depositing some one Seed that 
contained in itself a conglomeration of the germs of the world. But in order that I may render more clear what 
it is those (heretics) affirm, (I shall mention the following illustration of theirs.) As an egg of some variegated 
and particoloured bird,-for instance the peacock, or some other (bird) still more manifold and 
particoloured, -being one in reality, contains in itself numerous forms of manifold, and particoloured, and 
much compounded substances; so, he says, the nonexistent seed of the world, which has been deposited 
by the non-existent God, constitutes at the same time the germ of a multitude of forms and a multitude of 
substances. 

CHAP. X. --ORIGIN OF THE WORLD; BASILIDES' ACCOUNT OF THE "SONSHIP." 

All things, therefore whatsoever it is possible to declare, and whatever, being not as yet discovered, one 
must omit, were likely to receive adaptation to the world which was about to be generated from the Seed. 
And this (Seed), at the requisite seasons, increases in bulk in a peculiar manner, according to accession, 
as through the instrumentality of a Deity so great, and of this description. (But this Deity) the creature can 
neither express nor grasp by perception. (Now, all these things) were inherent, treasured in the Seed, as we 
afterwards observe in a new-born child the growth of teeth, and paternal substance, and intellect, and 
everything which, though previously having no existence, accrues unto a man, growing little by little, from a 
youthful period of life. But since it would be absurd to say that any projection of a non-existent God became 
anything non-existent (for Basilides altogether sirens and dreads the Substances of things generated in the 
way of projection for, (he asks,) of what sort of projection is there a necessity, or of what sort of matter(1) must 
we assume the previous existence, in order that God should construct a world, as the spider his web; or (as) 
a mortal man, for the purpose of working it, takes a (piece of) brass or of wood, or some other of the parts of 
matter?), -(projection, I say, being out of the question,) certainly, says (Basilides), God spoke the word, and 
it was carried into effect. And this, as these men assert, is that which has been stated by Moses: "Let there 
be light, and there was light."(2) Whence he says, came the light? From nothing. For it has not been written. 

he says, whence, but this only, (that it came) from the voice of him who speal<s the word. And he who speal<s 
the word, he says, was non-existent; nor was that existent which was being produced. (3) The seed of the 
cosmical system was generated, he says, from nonentities; (and I mean by the seed,) the word which was 
spol<en, "Let there be light." And this, he says, is that which has been stated in the Gospels: "He was the true 
light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world. "(4) He derives his originating principles from that 
Seed, and obtains from the same source his illuminating power. This is that seed which has in itself the 
entire conglomeration of germs. And Aristotle affirms this to be genius, and it is distributed by him into infinite 
species; just as from animal, which is non-existent, we sever ox, horse, (and) man. When, therefore, the 
cosmical Seed becomes the basis (for a subsequent development), those (heretics) assert, (to quote 
Basilides' own words:) "Whatsoever I affirm," he says, "to have been made after these, ask no question as 
to whence. For (the Seed) had all seeds treasured and reposing in itself, just as non-existent entities, and 
which were designed to be produced by a non-existent Deity." 

Let us see, therefore, what they say is first, or what second, or what third, (in the development of) what is 
generated from the cosmical Seed. There existed, he says, in the Seed itself, a Sonship, threefold, in every 
respect of the same Substance with the non-existent God, (and) begotten from nonentities. Of this Sonship 
(thus) involving a threefold division, one part was refined, (another gross,) and another requiring purification. 
The refined portion, therefore, in the first place, simultaneously with the earliest deposition of the Seed by 
the non-existent one, immediately burst forth(5) and went upwards and hurried above from below, employing 
a sort of velocity described in poetry ,- 
"... As wing or thought,"(6)- 

and attained, he says, unto him that is nonexistent. For every nature desires that (nonexistent one), on 
account of a superabundance of beauty and bloom. Each (nature desires this), however, after a different 
mode. The more gross portion, however, (of the Sonship) continuing still in the Seed, (and) being a certain 
imitative (principle), was not able to hurry upwards. For (this portion) was much more deficient in the 
refinement that the Sonship possessed, which through itself hurried upwards, (and so the more gross 
portion) was left behind. Therefore the more gross Sonship equipped itself with some such wing as Plato, 
the Preceptor of Aristotle, fastens on the soul in (his) Phoedrus.(l) And Basilides styles such, not a wing, but 
Holy Spirit; and Sonship invested in this (Spirit) confers benefits, and receives them in turn. He confers 
benefits, because, as a wing of a bird, when removed from the bird, would not of itself soar high up and aloft; 
nor, again, would a bird, when disengaged from its pinion, at any time soar high up and aloft; (so, in like 
manner,) the Sonship involved some such relation in reference to the Holy Spirit, and the Spirit in reference 
to the Sonship. For the Sonship, carried upwards by the Spirit as by a wing, bears aloft (in turn) its pinion, that 
is, the Spirit. And it approaches the refined Sonship, and the non-existent God, (2) even Him who fabricated 
the world out of nonentities. He was not, (however,) able to have this (spirit) with (the Sonship) itself; for it was 
not of the same substance (with God), nor has it (any) nature (in common) with the Sonship. But as pure and 
dry air is contrary to (their) nature, and destructive to fishes; so, in contrariety to the nature of the Holy Spirit, 
was that place simultaneously of non-existent Deity and Sonship, -(a place) more ineffable than ineffable 
(entities), and higher up than all names. 

Sonship, therefore, left this (spirit) near that Blessed Place, which cannot be conceived or represented by 
any expression. (He left the spirit) not altogether deserted or separated from the Sonship; nay, (far from it,) 
for it is just as when a most fragrant ointment is put into a vessel, that, even though (the vessel) be emptied 
(of it) with ever so much care, nevertheless some odour of the ointment still remains, and is left behind, even 
after (the ointment) is separated from the vessel; and the vessel retains an odour of ointment, though (it 
contain) not the ointment (itself). So the Holy Spirit has continued without any share in the Sonship, and 
separated (from it), and has in itself, similarly with ointment, its own power, a savour of Sonship. And this is 
what has been declared: "As the ointment upon the head which descended to the beard of Aaron. "(3) This 
is the savour from the Holy Spirit borne down from above, as far as formlessness, and the interval (of 
space) in the vicinity of our world. And from this the Son began to ascend, sustained as it were, says 
(Basilides), upon eagles' wings, and upon the back. For, he says, all (entities) hasten upwards from below, 
from things inferior to those that are superior. For not one of those things that are among things superior, is 
so silly as to descend beneath. The third Sonship, however, that which requires purification, has continued, 
he says, in the vast conglomeration of all germs conferring benefits and receiving them. But in what manner 
it is that (the third Sonship) receives benefits and confers them, we shall afterwards declare when we come 
to the proper place for discussing this question. 

CHAP. XI. -THE "GREAT ARCHON" OF BASILIDES. 

When, therefore, a first and second ascension of the Sonship took place, and the Holy Spirit itself also 
remained after the mode mentioned, the firmament was placed between the super-mundane (spaces) and 
the world. For existing things were distributed by Basilides into two continuous and primary divisions, and 

are, according to him, denominated partly in a certain (respect) world, and partly in a certain (respect) 
super-mundane (spaces). But the spirit, a line of demarcation between the world and super-mundane 
(spaces), is that which is both holy, and has abiding in itself the savour of Sonship. While, therefore, the 
firmament which is above the heaven is coining into existence, there burst forth, and was begotten from the 
cosmical Seed, and the conglomeration of all germs, the Great Archon (and) Head of the world, (who 
constitutes) a certain (species of) beauty, and magnitude, and indissoluble power.(4) For, says he, he is 
more ineffable than ineffable entities, and more potent than potent ones, and more wise than wise ones, and 
superior to all the beautiful ones whatever you could mention. This (Archon), when begotten, raised Himself 
up and soared aloft, and was carried up entire as far as the firmament. And there He paused, supposing the 
firmament to be the termination of His ascension and elevation, and considering that there existed nothing at 
all beyond these. And than all the subjacent (entities) whatsoever there were among them which remained 
mundane. He became more wise, more powerful, more comely, more lustrous, (in fact,) pre-eminent for 
beauty above any entities yon could mention with the exception of the Sonship alone, which is still left in the 
(conglomeration of) all germs. For he was not aware that there is (a Sonship) wiser and more powerful, and 
better than Himself. Therefore imagining Himself to be Lord, and Governor, and a wise Master Builder, He 
turns Himself to (the work of) the creation of every object in the cosmical system. And first, he deemed it 
proper not to be alone, but made unto Himself, and generated from adjacent (entities), a Son far superior to 
Him self, and wiser. For all these things had the non-existent Deity previously determined upon, when He 
cast down the (conglomeration of) all germs. Beholding, therefore, the Son, He was seized with 
astonishment, and loved (Him), and was struck with amazement. For some beauty of this description 
appeared(1) to the Great Archon to belong to the Son, and the Archon caused Him to sit on his right (hand). 
This is, according to these (heretics), what is denominated the Ogdoad, where the Great Archon has his 
throne. The entire celestial creation, then, that is, the AEther, He Himself, the Great Wise Demiurge formed. 
The Son, however, begotten of this (Archon), operates in Him, and offered Him suggestions, being endued 
with far greater wisdom than the Demiurge Himself. 

CHAP. XII.-BASILIDES ADOPTS THE "ENTELECHEIA" OF ARISTOTLE. 

This, then, constitutes the entelecheia of the natural organic body, according to Aristotle, (viz.,) a soul 
operating in the body, without which the body is able to accomplish nothing; (I mean nothing) that is greater, 
and more illustrious, and more powerful, and more wise than the body. (2) The account, therefore, which 
Aristotle has previously rendered concerning the soul and the body, Basilides elucidates as applied to the 
Great Archon and his Son. For the Archon has generated, according to Basilides, a son; and the soul as an 
operation and completion, Aristotle asserts to be an entelecheia of a natural organic hotly. As, therefore, the 
entelecheia controls the body, so the Son, according to Basilides, controls the God that is more ineffable 
than ineffable (entities). All things, therefore, have been provided for, and managed by the majesty(3) of the 
Great Archon; (I mean) whatever objects exist in the aethereal region of space as far as the moon, for from 
that quarter onwards air is separated from aether. When all objects in the aethereal regions, then, were 
arranged, again from (the conglomeration of) all germs another Archon ascended, greater, of course, than 
all subjacent (entities) with the exception, however, of the Sonship that had been left behind, but far inferior to 
the First Archon. And this (second Archon) is called by them Rhetus.(4) And this Topos is styled Hebdomad, 
and this (Archon) is the manager and fabricator of all subjacent (entities). And He has likewise made unto 
Himself out (of the conglomeration of) all germs, a son who is more prudent and wise than Himself, similarly 
to what has been stated to have taken place in the case of the First Archon. That which exists in this quarter 
(of the universe) constitutes, he says, the actual conglomeration and collection of all seeds; and the things 
which are generated are produced according to nature, as has been declared already by Him who 
calculates on things future, when they ought(5) (to be), and what sort they ought (to be), and how they ought 
(to be). And of these no one is Chief, or Guardian, or Creator. For (a) sufficient (cause of existence) for them 
is that calculation which the Non-Existent One formed when He exercised the function of creation. 

CHAP. XIII. -FURTHER EXPLANATION OF THE "SONSHIP." 

When, therefore, according to these (heretics), the entire world and super-mundane entities were finished, 
and (when) nothing exists labouring under deficiency, there still remains in the (conglomeration of) all germs 
the third Sonship, which had been left behind in the Seed to confer benefits and receive them. And it must 
needs be that the Sonship which had been left behind ought likewise to be revealed and reinstated above. 
And His place should be above the Conterminous Spirit, near the refined and imitative Sonship and the 
Non-Existent One. But this would be in accordance with what has been written, he says: "And the creation 
itself groaneth together, and travaileth in pain together, waiting for the manifestation of the sons of God. "(6) 
Now, we who are spiritual are sons, he says, who have been left here to arrange, and mould, and rectify. 

and complete the souls which, according to nature, are so constituted as to continue in this quarter of the 
universe. "Sin, then, reigned from Adam unto Moses, "(7) as it has been written. For the Great Archon 
exercised dominion and possesses an empire with limits extending as far as the firmament. And He 
imagines Himself alone to be God, and that there exists nothing above Him, for (the reason that) all things 
have been guarded by unrevealed Slope. This, he says, is the mystery which has not been made known to 
former generations; but in those days the Great Archon, the Ogdoad, was King and Lord, as it seemed, of 
the universe. But (in reality) the Hebdomad was king and lord of this quarter of the universe, and the Ogdoad 
is Arrhetus, whereas the Hebdomad is Rhetus. This, he says, is the Archon of the Hebdomad, who has 
spoken to Moses, and says: "I am the God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and I have not manifested 
unto them the name of God"(8) (for so they wish that it had been written)-that is, the God, Arrhetus, Archon of 
the Ogdoad. All the prophets, therefore, who were before the Saviour uttered their predictions, he says, from 
this source (of inspiration). Since, therefore, it was requisite, he says, that we should be revealed as the 
children of God, in expectation of whose manifestation, he says, the creation habitually groans and travails 
in pain, the Gospel came into the world, and passed through every Principality, and Power, and Dominion, 
and every Name that is named. (1) And (the Gospel) came in reality, though nothing descended from above; 
nor did the blessed Sonship retire from that Inconceivable, and Blessed, (and) Non-Existent God. Nay, (far 
from it;) for as Indian naphtha, when lighted merely(2) from a considerably long distance, nevertheless 
attracts fire (towards it), so from below, from the formlessness of the conglomeration (of all germs), the 
powers pass upwards as far as the Sonship. For, according to the illustration of the Indian naphtha, the Son 
of the Great Archon of the Ogdoad, as if he were some (sort of) naphtha, apprehends and seizes 
conceptions from the Blessed Sonship, whose place of habitation is situated after that of the Conterminous 
(Spirit). For the power of the Sonship which is in the midst of the Holy Spirit, (that is,) in, the midst of the 
(Conterminous) Spirit, shares the flowing and rushing thoughts of the Sonship with the Son of the Great 
Archon. 

CHAP. XIV.-WHENCE CAME THE GOSPEL; THE NUMBER OF HEAVENS ACCORDING TO 
BASILIDES; EXPLANATION OF CHRIST'S MIRACULOUS CONCEPTION. 

The Gospel then came, says (Basilides), first from the Sonship through the Son, that was seated beside the 
Archon, to the Archon, and the Archon learned that He was not God of the universe, but was begotten. But 
(ascertaining that) He has above Himself the deposited treasure of that Ineffable and Unnameable (and) 
Non-existent One, and of the Sonship, He was both converted and filled with terror, when He was brought to 
understand in what ignorance He was (involved). This, he says, is what has been declared: "The fear of the 
Lord is the beginning of wisdom. "(3) For, being orally instructed by Christ, who was seated near, he began to 
acquire wisdom, (inasmuch as he thereby) learns who is the Non-Existent One, what the Sonship (is), what 
the Holy Spirit (is), what the apparatus of the universe (is), and what is likely to be the consummation of 
things. This is the wisdom spoken in a mystery, concerning which, says (Basilides), Scripture uses the 
following expressions: "Not in words taught of human wisdom, but in (those) taught of the Spirit."(4) The 
Archon, then, being orally instructed, and taught, and being (thereby) filled with fear, proceeded to make 
confession concerning the sin which He had committed in magnifying Himself. This, he says, is what is 
declared: "I have recognised my sin, and I know my transgression, (and) about this I shall confess for 
ever."(5) When, then, the Great Archon had been orally instructed, and every creature of the Ogdoad had 
been orally instructed and taught, and (after) the mystery became known to the celestial (powers), it was 
also necessary that afterwards the Gospel should come to the Hebdomad, in order likewise that the Archon 
of the Hebdomad might be similarly instructed and indoctrinated into the Gospel. The Son of the Great 
Archon (therefore) kindled in the Son of the Archon of the Hebdomad the light which Himself possessed and 
had kindled from above from the Sonship. And the Son of the Archon of the Hebdomad had radiance 
imparted to Him, and He proclaimed the Gospel to the Archon of the Hebdomad. And in like manner, 
according to the previous account. He Himself was both terrified and induced to make confession. When, 
therefore, all (beings) in the Hebdomad had been likewise enlightened, and had the Gospel announced to 
them (for in these regions of the universe there exist, according to these heretics, creatures infinite (in 
number), viz.. Principalities and Powers and Rulers, in regard of which there is extant among the 
(Basilidians)(6) a very prolix and verbose treatise, where they allege that there are three hundred and 
sixty-five heavens, and that the great Archon of these is Abrasax,(7) from the fact that his name comprises 
the computed number 365, so that, of course, the calculation of the title includes all (existing) things, and that 
for these reasons the year consists of so many days);-but when, he says, these (two events, viz., the 
illumination of the Hebdomad and the manifestation of the Gospel) had thus taken place, it was necessary, 
likewise, that afterwards the Formlessness existent in our quarter of creation should have radiance imparted 
to it, and that the mystery should be revealed to the Sonship, which had been left behind in Formlessness, 
just like an abortion. 

Now this (mystery) was not made known to previous generations, as lie says, it lias been written, "By 
revelation was made l<nown unto me tiie mystery;"(8) and, "I iiave iieard inexpressible words which it is not 
possible for man to declare. "(1) The light, (therefore,) which came down from the Ogdoad above to the Son 
of the Hebdomad, descended from the Hebdomad upon Jesus the son of Mary, and he had radiance 
imparted to him by being illuminated with the light that shone upon him. This, he says, is that which has been 
declared: "The Holy Spirit will come upon thee, "(2) (meaning) that which proceeded from the Sonship 
through the conterminous spirit upon the Ogdoad and Hebdomad, as far as Mary; "and the power of the 
Highest will overshadow thee," (meaning) the power of the anointing, (3) (which streamed) from the (celestial) 
height above (through) the Demiurge, as far as the creation, which is (as far as) the Son. And as far as that 
(Son) he says the world consisted thus. And as far as this, the entire Sonship, which is left behind for 
benefiting the souls in Formlessness, and for being the recipient in turn of benefits,-(this Sonship, I say,) 
when it is transformed, followed Jesus, and hastened upwards, and came forth purified. And it becomes 
most refined, so that it could, as the first (Sonship), hasten upwards through its own instrumentality. For it 
possesses all the power that, according to nature, is firmly connected with the light which from above shone 
down (upon earth). 

CHAP. XV.--GOD'S DEALINGS WITH THE CREATURE; BASILIDES' NOTION OF (1) THE 
INNER MAN, (2) THE GOSPEL; HIS INTERPRETATION OF THE LIFE AND SUFFERINGS 
OF OUR LORD. 

When, therefore, he says, the entire Sonship shall have come, and shall be above the conterminous spirit, 
then the creature will become the object of mercy. For (the creature) groans until now, (4) and is tormented, 
and waits for the manifestation of the sons of God, in order that all who are men of the Sonship may ascend 
from thence. When this takes place, God, he says, will bring upon the whole world enormous ignorance, that 
all things may continue according to nature, and that nothing may inordinately desire anything of the things 
that are contrary to nature. But (far from it); for all the souls of this quarter of creation, as many as possess the 
nature of remaining immortal in this (region) only, continue (in it), aware of nothing superior or better (than 
their present state). And there will not prevail any rumour or knowledge in regions below, concerning beings 
whose dwelling is placed above, lest subjacent souls should be wrung with torture from longing after 
impossibilities. (It would be) just as if a fish were to crave to feed on the mountains along with sheep. (For) a 
wish of this description would, he says, be their destruction. All things, therefore, that abide in (this) quarter(5) 
are incorruptible, but corruptible if they are disposed to wander and cross over from the things that are 
according to nature. In this way the Archon of the Hebdomad will know nothing of superjacent entities. For 
enormous ignorance will lay hold on this one likewise, in order that sorrow, and grief, and groaning may 
depart from him; for he will not desire aught of impossible things, nor will he be visited with anguish. In like 
manner, however, the same ignorance will lay hold also on the Great Archon of the Ogdoad, and similarly 
on all the creatures that are subject unto him, in order that in no respect anything may desire aught of those 
things that are contrary to nature, and may not (thus) be overwhelmed with sorrow. And so there will be the 
restitution of all things which, in conformity with nature, have from the beginning a foundation in the seed of 
the universe, but will be restored at (their own) proper periods. And that each thing, says (Basilides), has its 
own particular times, the Saviour is a sufficient (witness(6)) when He observes, "Mine hour is not yet 
come. "(7) And the Magi (afford similar testimony) when they gaze wistfully upon the (Saviour's) star.(8) For 
(Jesus) Himself was, he says, mentally preconceived at the time of the generation of the stars, and of the 
complete return to their starting-point of the seasons in the vast conglomeration (of all germs). This is, 
according to these (Basilidians), he who has been conceived as the inner spiritual man in what is natural 
(now this is the Sonship which left there the soul, not (that it might be) mortal, but that it might abide here 
according to nature, just as the first Sonship left above in its proper locality the Holy Spirit, (that is, the spirit) 
which is conterminous),-(this, I say, is he who has been conceived as the inner spiritual man, and) has then 
been arrayed in his own peculiar soul. 

In order, however, that we may not omit any of the doctrines of this (Basilides), I shall likewise explain 
whatever statements they put forward respecting a gospel. For gospel with them, as has been elucidated, is 
of super-mundane entities the knowledge which the Great Archon did not understand. As, then, it was 
manifested unto him that there are likewise the Holy Spirit-that is, the conterminous (spirit)-and the Sonship, 
and the Non-Existent God, the cause of all these, he rejoiced at the communications made to him, and was 
filled with exultation. According to them, this constitutes the gospel. Jesus, however, was born, according to 
these (heretics), as we have already declared. And when the generation which has been previously 
explained took place, all the events in our Lord's life occurred, according to them, in the same manner as 
they have been described in the Gospels. And these things happened, he says, in order that Jesus might 
become the first-fruits of a distinction of the different orders (of created objects) that had been confused 
together.(l) For when the world had been divided into an Ogdoad, which is the head of the entire world,-now 

the great Archon is head of the entire world,-and into a Hebdomad, -which is the head of the Hebdomad, 
the Demiurge of subjacent entities, -and into this order of creatures (that prevails) amongst us, where exists 
Formlessness, it was requisite that the various orders of created objects that had been confounded 
together should be distinguished by a separating process performed by Jesus. (Now this separation) that 
which was his corporeal part suffered, and this was (the part) of Formlessness and reverted into 
Formlessness. And that was resuscitated which was his psychical part, and this was (part) of the 
Hebdomad, and reverted into the Hebdomad. And he revived that (element in his nature) which was the 
peculiar property of the elevated region where dwells the Great Archon, and (that element) remained 
beside the Great Archon. And he carried upwards as far as (that which is) above that which was (the peculiar 
property) of the conterminous spirit, and he remained in the conterminous spirit. And through him there was 
purified the third Sonship, which had been left for conferring benefits, and receiving them. And (through 
Jesus) it ascended towards the blessed Sonship, and passed through all these. For the entire purpose of 
these was the blending together of, as it were, the conglomeration of all germs, and the distinction of the 
various orders of created objects, and the restoration into their proper component parts of things that had 
been blended together. Jesus, therefore, became the first-fruits of the distinction of the various orders of 
created objects, and his Passion took place for not any other reason than the distinction which was thereby 
brought about in the various orders of created objects that had been confounded together. For in this 
manner (Basilides) says that the entire Sonship, which had been left in Formlessness for the purpose of 
conferring benefits and receiving them, was divided into its component elements, according to the manner 
in which also the distinction of natures had taken place in Jesus. These, then, are the legends which 
likewise Basilides details after his sojourn in Egypt;(2) and being instructed by the (sages of this country) in 
so great a system of wisdom, (the heretic) produced fruits of this description. 

CHAP. XVI. -THE SYSTEM OF SATURNILUS. 

But one Saturnilus,(3) who flourished about the same period with Basilides, (4) but spent his time in Antioch, 
(a city) of Syria, propounded opinions akin to whatever (tenets) Menander (advanced). He asserts that there 
is one Father, unknown to all-He who had made angels, archangels, principalities, (and) powers; and that 
by certain angels, seven (in number), the world was made, and all things that are in it. And (Saturnilus 
affirms) that man was a work of angels. There had appeared above from (the Being of) absolute sway, a 
brilliant(5) image; and when (the angels) were not able to detain this, on account of its immediately, he says, 
returning with rapidity upwards, they exhorted one another, saying, "Let us make man in our likeness and 
image. "(6) And when the figure was formed, and was not, he says, able, owing to the impotence of the 
angels, to lift up itself, but continued writhing as a worm, the Power above, compassionating him on account 
of his having been born in its own image, sent forth a scintillation of life, which raised man up, and caused 
him to have vitality. (Saturnilus) asserts that this scintillation of life rapidly returns after death to those things 
that are of the same order of existence; and that the rest, from which they have been generated, are 
resolved into those. And the Saviour(7) he supposed to be unbegotten and incorporeal, and devoid of 
figure. (Saturnilus,) however, (maintained that Jesus) was manifested as man in appearance only. And he 
says that the God of the Jews is one of the angels, and, on account of the Father's wishing to deprive of 
sovereignty all the Archons, that Christ came for the overthrow of the God of the Jews, and for the salvation 
of those that believe upon Him; and that these have in them the scintillation of life. For he asserted that two 
kinds of men had been formed by the angels,-one wicked, but the other good. And, since demons from 
time to time assisted wicked (men, Saturnilus affirms) that the Saviour came for the overthrow of worthless 
men and demons, but for the salvation of good men. And he affirms that marriage and procreation are from 
Satan. The majority, however, of those who belong to this (heretic's school) abstain from animal food 
likewise, (and) by this affectation of asceticism (make many their dupes). And (they maintain) that the 
prophecies have been uttered, partly by the world-making angels, and partly by Satan, who is also the very 
angel whom they suppose to act in antagonism to the cosmical(1) (angels), and especially to the God of the 
Jews. These, then, are in truth the tenets of Saturnilus. 

CHAP. XVII, -MARCION; HIS DUALISM; DERIVES HIS SYSTEM FROM EMPEDOCLES; 
SKETCH OF THE DOCTRINE OF EMPEDOCLES. 

But Marcion,(2) a native of Pontus, far more frantic than these (heretics), omitting the majority of the tenets of 
the greater number (of speculators), (and) advancing into a doctrine still more unabashed, supposed (the 
existence of) two originating causes of the universe, alleging one of them to be a certain good (principle), 
but the other an evil one. And himself imagining that he was introducing some novel (opinion), founded a 
school full of folly, and attended by men of a sensual mode of life, inasmuch as he himself was one of lustful 
propensities. (3) This (heretic) having thought that the multitude would forget that he did not happen to be a 

disciple of Ciirist, but of Empedocles,(4) wiio was far anterior to iiimself, framed and formed tiie same 

opinions,-namely , tiiat tiiere are two causes of tiie universe, discord and friendsiiip. For wiiat does 

Empedocles say respecting tiie plan of the world? Even though we have previously spoken (on this 

subject), yet even now also, for the purpose, at all events, of comparing the heresy of this plagiarist (with its 

source), we shall not be silent. 

This (philosopher) affirms that all the elements out of which the world consists and derives its being, are six: 

two of them material, (viz.,) earth and water; and two of them instruments by which material objects are 

arranged and altered, (viz.,) fire and air; and two of them, by means of the instruments, operating upon matter 

and fashioning it, viz., discord and friendship. (Empedocles) expresses himself somehow thus:- 

"The four roots of all things hear thou first: 

Brilliant Jove, and life-giving Juno and Aidoneus, 

And Nestis, who with tears bedews the mortal font."(5) 

Jupiter is fire, and life-giving Juno earth, which produces fruits for the support of existence; and Aidoneus air, 

because although through him we behold all things, yet himself alone we do not see. But Nestis is water, for 

this is a sole vehicle of (food), and thus becomes a cause of sustenance to all those that are being 

nourished; (but) this of itself is not able to afford nutriment to those that are being nourished. For if it did 

possess the power of affording nutriment, animal life, he says, could never be destroyed by famine, 

inasmuch as water is always superabundant in the world. For this reason he denominates Nestis water, 

because, (though indirectly) being a cause of nutriment, it is not (of itself) competent to afford nutriment to 

those things that are being nourished. These, therefore-to delineate them as by way of outline-are the 

principles that comprise (Empedocles') entire theory of the world: (viz.,) water and earth, out of which 

(proceed) generated entities; fire and spirit, (which are) instruments and efficient (causes), but discord and 

friendship, which are (principles) artistically fabricating (the universe). And friendship is a certain peace, and 

unanimity, and love, whose entire effort is, that there should be one finished and complete world. Discord, 

however, invariably separates that one (world), and subdivides it, or makes many things out of one. 

Therefore discord is of the entire creation a cause which he styles "oulomenon," that is, destructive. For it is 

the concern of this (discord), that throughout every age the creation itself should continue to preserve its 

existing condition. And ruinous discord has been (thus) a fabricator and an efficient cause of the production 

of all generated entities; whereas friendship (is the cause) of the eduction, and alteration, and restoration of 

existing things into one system. And in regard of these (causes), Empedocles asserts that they are two 

immortal and unbegotten principles, and such as have not as yet received an originating cause of 

existence. (Empedocles) somewhere or other (expresses himself) in the following manner:- 

"For if both once it was, and will be; never, I think. 

Will be the age eternal void of both of these. "(6) 

(But) what are these (two)? Discord and Friendship; for they did not begin to come into being, but pre-existed 

and always will exist, because, from the fact of their being unbegotten, they are not able to undergo 

corruption. But fire, (and water,) and earth, and air, are (entities) that perish and revive. For when these 

generated (bodies), by reason of Discord, cease to exist. Friendship, laying hold on them, brings them 

forward, and attaches and associates them herself with the universe. (And this takes place) in order that the 

Universe may continue one, being always ordered by Friendship in a manner one and the same, and with 

(uninterrupted) uniformity. 

When, however. Friendship makes unity out of plurality, and associates with unity separated entities. 

Discord, again, forcibly severs them from unity, and makes them many, that is, fire, water, earth, air, (as well 

as) the animals and plants produced from these, and whatever portions of the world we observe. And in 

regard of the form of the world, what sort it is, (as) arranged by Friendship, (Empedocles) expresses himself 

in the following terms:- 

"For not from back two arms arise. 

Not feet, not nimble knees, not genital groin. 

But a globe it was, and equal to itself it is."(1) 

An operation of this description Friendship maintains, and makes (one) most beautiful form of the world out 

of plurality. Discord, however, the cause of the arrangement of each of the parts (of the universe), forcibly 

severs and makes many things out of that one (form). And this is what Empedocles affirms respecting his 

own generation :- 

"Of these I also am from God a wandering exile. "(2) 

That is, (Empedocles) denominates as God the unity and unification of that (one form) in which (the world) 

existed antecedent to the separation and production (introduced) by Discord among the majority of those 

things (that subsisted) in accordance with the disposition (effected) by Discord. For Empedocles affirms 

Discord to be a furious, and perturbed, and unstable Demiurge, (thus) denominating Discord the creator of 

the world. For this constitutes the condemnation and necessity of souls which Discord forcibly severs from 

unity, and (which it) fashions and operates upon, (according to Empedocles,) who expresses himself after 

some such mode as, the following:- 

"Who perjury piles on sin, 

While demons gain a life prolonged;"(3) 

meaning by demons long-lived souls, because they are immortal, and live for lengthened ages:- 

"For thrice ten thousand years banished from bliss;"(4) 

denominating as blissful, those that have been collected by Friendship from the majority of entities into the 

process of unification (arising out) of the intelligible world. He asserts that those are exiles, and that 

"In lapse of time all sorts of mortal men are born. 

Changing the irksome ways of life"(5) 

He asserts the irksome ways to be the alterations and transfigurations of souls into (successive) bodies. 

This is what he says:- 

"Changing the irksome ways of life." 

For souls "change," body after body being altered, and punished by Discord, and not permitted to continue 

in the one (frame), but that the souls are involved in all descriptions of punishment by Discord being 

changed from body to body. He says:- 

"AEthereal force to ocean drives the souls. 

And ocean spurts them forth on earth's expanse. 

And earth on beams of blazing sun, who flings 

(The souls) on aether's depths, and each from each 

(A spirit) takes, and all with hatred burn. "(6) 

This is the punishment which the Demiurge inflicts, just as some brazier moulding (a piece of) iron, and 

dipping it successively from fire into water. For fire is the aether whence the Demiurge transfers the souls 

into the sea; and land is the earth: whence he uses the words, from water into earth, and from earth into air. 

This is what (Empedocles) says:- 

"And earth on beams 

Of blazing sun, who flings (the souls) 

On aether's depths, and each from each 

A (spirit) takes, and all with hatred burn." 

The souls, then, thus detested, and tormented, and punished in this world, are, according to Empedocles, 

collected by Friendship as being a certain good (power), and (one) that pities the groaning of these, and the 

disorderly and wicked device of furious Discord. And (likewise Friendship is) eager, and toils to lead forth 

little by little the souls from the world, and to domesticate them with unity, in order that all things, being 

conducted by herself, may attain unto unification. Therefore on account of such an arrangement on the part 

of destructive Discord of this divided world, Empedocles admonishes his disciples to abstain from all sorts 

of animal food. For he asserts that the bodies of animals are such as feed on the habitations of punished 

souls. And he teaches those who are hearers of such doctrines (as his), to refrain from intercourse with 

women. (And he issues this precept) in order that (his disciples) may not co-operate with and assist those 

works which Discord fabricates, always dissolving and forcibly severing the work of Friendship. 

Empedocles asserts that this is the greatest law of the management of the universe, expressing himself 

somehow thus:- 

"There's something swayed by Fate, the ancient. 

Endless law of gods, and sealed by potent oaths. "(7) 

He thus calls Fate the alteration from unity into plurality, according to Discord, and from plurality into unity, 

according to Friendship. And, as I stated, (Empedocles asserts) that there are four perishable gods, (viz.,) 

fire, water, earth, (and) air. (He maintains,) however, that there are two (gods) which are immortal, 

unbegotten, (and) continually hostile one to the other, (namely) Discord and Friendship. And (he asserts) 

that Discord always is guilty of injustice and covetousness, and forcible abduction of the things of 

Friendship, and of appropriation of them to itself. (He alleges,) however, that Friendship, inasmuch as it is 

always and invariably a certain good (power), and intent on union, recalls and brings towards (itself), and 

reduces to unity, the parts of the universe that have been forcibly severed, and tormented, and punished in 

the creation by the Demiurge. Some such system of philosophy as the foregoing is advanced for us by 

Empedocles concerning the generation of the world, and its destruction, and its constitution, as one 

consisting of what is good and bad. And he says that there is likewise a certain third power which is 

cognised by intellect, and that this can be understood from these, (viz.. Discord and Friendship,) expressing 

himself somehow thus:- 

"For if, 'neath hearts of oak, these truths you fix. 

And view them kindly in meditations pure. 

Each one of these, in lapse of time, will haunt you. 

And many others, sprung of these, descend. 

For into every habit these will grow, as Nature prompts; 

But if for other things you sigh, which, countless, linger 

Undisguised 'mid men, and blunt the edge of care. 

As years roll on they'll leave you fleetly. 

Since they yearn to reach their own beloved race; 

For know that all possess perception and a share of mind."(1) 

CHAP. XVIII. -SOURCE OF MARCIONISM; EMPEDOCLES REASSERTED AS THE 
SUGGESTER OF THE HERESY. 

When, therefore, Marcion or some one of his hounds barks against the Demiurge, and adduces reasons 
from a comparison of what is good and bad, we ought to say to them, that neither Paul the apostle nor Mark, 
he of the maimed finger,(2) announced such (tenets). For none of these (doctrines) has been written in the 
Gospel according to Mark. But (the real author of the system) is Empedocles, son of Meto, a native of 
Agrigentum. And (Marcion) despoiled this (philosopher), and imagined that up to the present would pass 
undetected his transference, under the same expressions, of the arrangement of his entire heresy from 
Sicily into the evangelical narratives. For bear with me, O Marcion: as you have instituted a comparison of 
what is good and evil, I also to-day will institute a comparison following up your own tenets, as you suppose 
them to be. You affirm that the Demiurge of the world is evil-why not hide your countenance in shame, (as 
thus) teaching to the Church the doctrines of Empedocles? You say that there is a good Deity who destroys 
the works of the Demiurge: then do not you plainly preach to your pupils, as the good Deity, the Friendship 
of Empedocles. You forbid marriage, the procreation of children, (and) the abstaining from meats which God 
has created for participation by the faithful, and those that know the truth. (3) (Thinkest thou, then,) that thou 
canst escape detection, (while thus) enjoining the purificatory rites of Empedocles? For in point of fact you 
follow in every respect this (philosopher of paganism), while you instruct your own disciples to refuse meats, 
in order not to eat any body (that might be) a remnant of a soul which has been punished by the Demiurge. 
You dissolve marriages that have been cemented by the Deity. And here again you conform to the tenets of 
Empedocles, in order that for you the work of Friendship may be perpetuated as one (and) indivisible. For, 
according to Empedocles, matrimony separates unity, and makes (out of it) plurality, as we have proved. 

CHAP. XIX. -THE HERESY OF PREPON; FOLLOWS EMPEDOCLES; MARCION REJECTS 
THE GENERATION OF THE SAVIOUR. 

The principal heresy of Marcion, and (the one of his) which is most free from admixture (with other heresies), 
is that which has its system formed out of the theory concerning the good and bad (God). Now this, it has 
been manifested by us, belongs to Empedocles. But since at present, in our times, a certain follower of 
Marcion, (namely) Prepon, an Assyrian, (4) has endeavoured to introduce something more novel, and has 
given an account of his heresy in a work inscribed to Bardesanes, an Armenian, neither of this will I be silent. 
In alleging that what is just constitutes a third principle, and that it is placed intermediate between what is 
good and bad, Prepon of course is not able to avoid (the imputation of inculcating) the opinion of 
Empedocles. For Empedocles asserts that the world is managed by wicked Discord, and that the other 
(world) which (is managed) by Friendship, is cognisable by intellect. And (he asserts) that these are the two 
different principles of good and evil, and that intermediate between these diverse principles is impartial 
reason, in accordance with which are united the things that have been separated by Discord, (and which,) in 
accordance with the influence of Friendship, are accommodated to unity. The impartial reason itself, that 
which is an auxiliary to Friendship, Empedocles denominates "Musa." And he himself likewise entreats her 
to assist him, and expresses himself somehow thus:- 
"For if on fleeting mortals, deathless Muse, 
Thy care it be that thoughts our mind engross. 
Calliope, again befriend my present prayer. 
As I disclose a pure account of happy gods."(1) 

Marcion, adopting these sentiments, rejected altogether the generation of our Saviour. He considered it to 
be absurd that tinder the (category of a) creature fashioned by destructive Discord should have been the 
Logos that was an auxiliary to Friendship-that is, the Good Deity. (His doctrine,) however, was that, 
independent of birth, (the Logos) Himself descended from above in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius 
Caesar, and that, as being intermediate between the good and bad Deity, He proceeded to give instruction 
in the synagogues. For if He(2) is a Mediator, He has been, he says, liberated from the entire nature of the 
Evil Deity. Now, as he affirms, the Demiurge is evil, and his works. For this reason, he affirms, Jesus came 
down unbegotten, in order that He might be liberated from all (admixture of) evil. And He has, he says, been 
liberated from the nature of the Good One likewise, in order that He may be a Mediator, as Paul states, (3) 
and as Himself acknowledges: "Why call ye me good? there is one good, "(4) These, then, are the opinions 

of Marcion, by means of which he made many his dupes, employing the conclusions of Empedocles. And 
he transferred the philosophy invented by that (ancient speculator) into his own system of thought, and (out 
of Empedocles) constructed his (own) impious heresy. But I consider that this has been sufficiently refuted 
by us, and that I have not omitted any opinion of those who purloin their opinions from the Greeks, and act 
despitefully towards the disciples of Christ, as if they had become teachers to them of these (tenets). But 
since it seems that we have sufficiently explained the doctrines of this (heretic), let us see what Carpocrates 
says. 

CHAP. XX.--THE HERESY OF CARPOCRATES; WICKED DOCTRINES CONCERNING 
JESUS CHRIST; PRACTISE MAGICAL ARTS; ADOPT A METEMPSYCHOSIS. 

Carpocrates(5) affirms that the world and the things in it were made by angels, far inferior to the unbegotten 
Father; and that Jesus was generated of Joseph, and that, having been born similar to (other) men. He was 
more just than the rest (of the human race). And (Carpocrates asserts) that the soul (of Jesus), inasmuch as it 
was made vigorous and undefiled, remembered the things seen by it in its converse with the unbegotten 
God. And (Carpocrates maintains) that on this account there was sent down upon (Jesus) by that (God) a 
power, in order that through it He might be enabled to escape the world-making (angels). And (he says) that 
this power, having passed through all, and having obtained liberty in all, again ascended(6) to God 
(Himself). And (he alleges) that in the same condition with (the soul of Jesus are all the souls) that embrace 
similar objects of desire with the (power just alluded to). And they assert that the soul of Jesus, (though,) 
according to law, it was disciplined in Jewish customs, (in reality) despised them. And (he says) that on this 
account (Jesus) received powers whereby. He rendered null and void the passions incidental to men for 
their punishment. And (he argues), therefore, that the (soul), which, similarly with that soul of Christ, is able to 
despise the world-making Archons, receives in like man-her power for the performance of similar acts. 
Wherefore, also, (according to Carpocrates, there are persons who) have attained unto such a degree of 
pride as to affirm some of themselves to be equal to Jesus Himself, whereas others among them to be 
even still more powerful. But (they also contend) that some enjoy an excellence above the disciples of that 
(Redeemer), for instance Peter and Paul, and the rest of the Apostles, and that these are in no respect 
inferior to Jesus. And (Carpocrates asserts) that the souls of these have originated from that supernal 
power, and that consequently they, as equally despising the world-making (angels), have been deemed 
worthy of the same power, and (of the privilege) to ascend to the same (place). If, however, any one would 
despise earthly concerns more than did that (Saviour, Carpocrates says) that such a one world he able to 
become superior to (Jesus, The followers of this heretic) practise their magical arts and incantations, and 
spells and voluptuous feasts. And (they are in the habit of invoking the aid of) subordinate demons and 
dream-senders, and (of resorting to) the rest of the tricks (of sorcery), alleging that they possess power for 
now acquiring sway over the Archons and makers of this world, nay, even over all the works that are in it. 
(Now these heretics) have themselves been sent forth by Satan, for the purpose of slandering before the 
Gentiles the divine name of the Church. (And the devil's object is,) that men hearing, now after one fashion 
and now after another, the doctrines of those (heretics), and thinking that all of us are people of the same 
stamp, may turn away their ears from the preaching of the truth, or that they also, looking, (without abjuring,) 
upon all the tenets of those (heretics), may speak hurtfully of us. (The followers of Carpocrates) allege that 
the souls are transferred from body to body, so far as that they may fill up (the measure of) all their sins. 
When, however, not one (of these sins) is left, (the Carpocratians affirm that the soul) is then emancipated, 
and departs unto that God above of the world-making angels, and that in this way all souls will be saved. If, 
however, some (souls), during the presence of the soul in the body for one life, may by anticipation become 
involved in the full measure of transgressions, they, (according to these heretics,) no longer undergo 
metempsychosis. (Souls of this sort,) however, on paying off at once all trespasses, will, (the Carpocratians 
say,) be emancipated from dwelling any more in a body. Certain, likewise, of these (heretics) brand(1) their 
own disciples in the back parts of the lobe of the right ear. And they make counterfeit images of Christ, 
alleging that these were in existence at the time (during which our Lord was on earth, and that they were 
fashioned) by Pilate. (2) 

CHAP. XXI. -THE SYSTEM OF CERINTHUS CONCERNING CHRIST. 

But a certain Cerinthus,(3) himself being disciplined in the teaching of the Egyptians, asserted that the world 
was not made by the primal Deity, but by some virtue which was an offshoot from that Power which is above 
all things, and which (yet) is ignorant of the God that is above all. And he supposed that Jesus was not 
generated from a virgin, but that he was born son of Joseph and Mary, just in a manner similar with the rest of 
men, and that (Jesus) was more just and more wise (than all the human race). And (Cerinthus alleges) that, 
after the baptism (of our Lord), Christ in form of a dove came down upon him, from that absolute sovereignty 

which is above all things. And then, (according to this heretic,) Jesus proceeded to preach the unknown 
Father,(4) and in attestation (of his mission) to work miracles. It was, however, (the opinion of Cerinthus,) that 
ultimately Christ departed from Jesus, and that Jesus suffered and rose again; whereas that Christ, being 
spiritual, (5) remained beyond the possibility of suffering. 

CHAP. XXII. -DOCTRINE OF THE EBIONAEANS. 

The Ebionaeans,(6) however, acknowledge that the world was made by Him Who is in reality God, but they 
propound legends concerning the Christ similarly with Cerinthus and Carpocrates. They live conformably to 
the customs of the Jews, alleging that they are justified, according to the law, and saying that Jesus was 
justified by fulfilling the law. And therefore it was, (according to the Ebionaeans,) that (the Saviour) was 
named (the) Christ of God and Jesus, (7) since not one of the rest (of mankind) had observed completely the 
law. For if even any other had fulfilled the commandments (contained) in the law, he would have been that 
Christ. And the (Ebionaeans allege) that they themselves also, when in like manner they fulfil (the law), are 
able to become Christs; for they assert that our Lord Himself was a man in a like sense with all (the rest of 
the human family). 

CHAP. XXIII. -THE HERESY OF THEODOTUS. 

But there was a certain Theodotus,(8) a native of Byzantium, who introduced a novel heresy. He announces 
tenets concerning the originating cause of the universe, which are partly in keeping with the doctrines of the 
true Church, in so far as he acknowledges that all things were created by God. Forcibly appropriating, 
however, (his notions of) Christ from the school of the Gnostics, and of Cerinthus and Ebion, he alleges that 
(our Lord) appeared in some such manner as I shall now describe. (According to this, Theodotus maintains) 
that Jesus was a (mere) man, born of a virgin, according to the counsel of the Father, and that after he had 
lived promiscuously with all men, and had become pre-eminently religious, he subsequently at his baptism 
in Jordan received Christ, who came from above and descended (upon him) in form of a dove. And this was 
the reason, (according to Theodotus,) why (miraculous) powers did not operate within him prior to the 
manifestation in him of that Spirit which descended, (and) which proclaims him to be the Christ. But (among 
the followers of Theodotus) some are disposed (to think) that never was this man made God, (even) at the 
descent of the Spirit; whereas others (maintain that he was made God) after the resurrection from the dead. 

CHAP. XXIV.-THE MELCHISEDECIANS; THE NICOLAITANS. 

While, however, different questions have arisen among them, a certain (heretic), who himself also was 
styled Theodotus, and who was by trade a banker,(1) attempted to establish (the doctrine), that a certain 
Melchisedec constitutes the greatest power, and that this one is greater than Christ. And they allege that 
Christ happens to be according to the likeness (of this Melchisedec). And they themselves, similarly with 
those who have been previously spoken of as adherents of Theodotus, assert that Jesus is a (mere) man, 
and that, in conformity with the same account (already given), Christ descended upon him. 
There are, however, among the Gnostics diversities of opinion; but we have decided that it would not be 
worth while to enumerate the silly doctrines of these (heretics), inasmuch as they are (too) numerous and 
devoid of reason, and full of blasphemy. Now, even those (of the heretics) who are of a more serious turn in 
regard of(2) the Divinity, and have derived their systems of speculation from the Greeks, must stand 
convicted(3) (of these charges). But Nicolaus(4) has been a cause of the wide-spread combination of these 
wicked men. He, as one of the seven (that were chosen) for the diaconate,(5) was appointed by the 
Apostles. (But Nicolaus) departed from correct doctrine, and was in the habit of inculcating indifferency of 
both life and food. (6) And when the disciples (of Nicolaus) continued to offer insult to the Holy Spirit, John 
reproved them in the Apocalypse as fornicators and eaters of things offered unto idols. (7) 

CHAP. XXV.-THE HERESY OF CERDON. 

But one Cerdon(8) himself also, taking occasion in like manner from these (heretics) and Simon, affirms that 
the God preached by Moses and the prophets was not Father of Jesus Christ. For (he contends) that this 
(Father) had been known, whereas that the Father of Christ(9) was unknown, and that the former was just, but 
the latter good. And Marcion corroborated the tenet of this (heretic) in the work which he attempted to write, 
and which he styled Antitheses. (10) And he was in the habit, (in this book,) of uttering whatever slanders 
suggested themselves to his mind against the Creator of the universe. In a similar manner likewise (acted) 
Lucian,(11) the disciple of this (heretic). 

CHAP. XXVI. -THE DOCTRINES OF APELLES; PHILUMENE, HIS PROPHETESS. 

But Apelles,(12) sprung from these, thus expresses himself, (saying) that there is a certain good Deity, as 
also Marcion supposed, and that he who created all things is just. Now he, (according to Apelles,) was the 
Demiurge of generated entities. And (this heretic also main-rains) that there is a third (Deity), the one who 
was in the habit of speaking to Moses, and that this (god) was of a fiery nature, and that there was another 
fourth god, a cause of evils. But these he denominates angels. He utters, however, slanders against law 
and prophets, by alleging that the things that have been written are (of) human (origin), and are false. And 
(Apelles) selects from the Gospels or (from the writings of) the Apostle (Paul) whatever pleases himself. But 
he devotes himself to the discourses of a certain Philumene as to the revelations(1 3) of a prophetess. He 
affirms, however, that Christ descended from the power above; that is, from the good (Deity), and that he is 
the son of that good (Deity). And (he asserts that Jesus) was not born of a virgin, and that when he did 
appear he was not devoid of flesh. (He maintains,) however, that (Christ) formed his booty by taking portions 
of it from the substance of the universe: that is, hot and cold, and moist and dry. And (he says that Christ), on 
receiving in this body cosmical powers, lived for the time he did in (this) world. But (he held that Jesus) was 
subsequently crucified by the Jews, and expired, and that, being raised Up after three days, he appeared to 
his disciples. And (the Saviour) showed them, (so Apelles taught,) the prints of the nails and (the wound) in 
his side, desirous of persuading them that he was in truth no phantom, but was present in the flesh. After, 
says (Apelles), he had shown them his flesh, (the Saviour) restored it to earth, from which substance it was 
(derived. And this he did because) he coveted nothing that belonged to another. (Though indeed Jesus) 
might use for the time being (what belonged to another), he yet in due course rendered to each (of the 
elements) what peculiarly belonged to them. And so it was, that after he had once more loosed the chains of 
his body, he gave back heat to what is hot, cold to what is cold, moisture to what is moist, (and) dryness to 
what is dry. And in this condition (our Lord) departed to the good Father, leaving the seed of life in the world 
for those who through his disciples should believe in him. 

It appears to us that these (tenets) have been sufficiently explained. Since, however, we have determined to 
leave unrefuted not one of those opinions that have been advanced by any (of the heretics), let us see what 
(system) also has been invented by the Docetae. 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

BOOK VIM. (1) 

CONTENTS. 

THE following are the contents of the eighth book of the Refutation of all Heresies:- 

What are the opinions of the Docetae, and that they have formed the doctrines which they assert from 

natural philosophy. 

How Monoimus(2) trifles, devoting his attention to poets, and geometricians, and arithmeticians. 

How (the system of) Tatian has arisen from the opinions of Valentinus and Marcion, and how this heretic 

(from this source) has formed his own doctrines. Hermogenes, however, availed himself of the tenets of 

Socrates, not those of Christ. 

How those err who contend for keeping Easter on the fourteenth day. 

What the error is of the Phrygians, who suppose that Montanus, and Priscilla, and Maximilla, are prophets. 

What the conceit is of the Encratites, and that their opinions have been formed not from the Holy 

Scriptures, (3) but from themselves, and the Gymnosophists among the Indians. 

CHAP. I. --HERESIES HITHERTO REFUTED; OPINIONS OF THE DOCETAE. 

Since the great body of (the heretics) do not employ the counsel of the Lord, by having the beam in the 
eye, (4) and announce that they see when in reality labouring under blindness, it seems to us expedient in no 
wise to be silent concerning the tenets of these. Our object is, that by the refutation accomplished by us, the 
(heretics), being of themselves ashamed, may be brought to know how the Saviour has advised (men) first 
to take away the beam, then to behold clearly the mote that is in thy brother's eye. Having therefore 
adequately and sufficiently explained the doctrines of the majority (of the heretics) in the seven books 
before this, we shall not now be silent as regards the (heterodox) opinions that follow (from these). We shall 
by this means exhibit the abundance of the grace of the Holy Spirit; and we shall refute those (who suppose) 
that they have acquired stedfastness of doctrine, when it is only in appearance. Now these have styled 
themselves Docetae, (5) and propound the following opinions:- 

(The Docetae maintain) that God is the primal (Being), as it were a seed of a fig-tree, which is altogether 
very diminutive in size, but infinite in power. (This seed constitutes, according to the Docetae,) a lowly 
magnitude, incalculable in multitude, (6) (and) labouring under no deficiency as regards generation. (This 
seed is) a refuge for the terror-stricken, a shelter of the naked, a veil for modesty, (and) the sought-for 
produce, to which He came in search (for fruit), he says, three times, (7) and did not discover (any). 
Wherefore, he says. He cursed the fig-tree, (8) because He did not find upon it that sweet fruit-the sought-for 
produce. And inasmuch as the Deity is, according to them to express myself briefly-of this description and 
so great, that is, small and minute, the world, as it seems to them, was made in some such manner as the 
following: When the branches of the fig-tree became tender, leaves budded (first), as one may (generally) 
see, and next in succession the fruit. Now, in this (fruit) is preserved treasured the infinite and incalculable 
seed of the fig-tree. We think, therefore, (say the Docetae,) that there are three (parts) which are primarily 
produced by the seed of the fig-tree, (viz.,) stem, which constitutes the fig-tree, leaves, and fruit-the fig itself, 
as we have previously declared. In this manner, the (Docetic) affirms, have been produced three AEons, 
which are principles from the primal originating cause of the universe. And Moses has not been silent on this 
point, when he says, that there are three words of God, "darkness, gloom, tempest, and added no more."(1) 
For the (Docetic) says, God has made no addition to the three AEons; but these, in every respect, have 
been sufficient for (the exigencies of) those who have been begotten and are sufficient. God Himself, 
however, remains with Himself, far separated froth the three AEons. When each of these AEons had 
obtained an originating cause of generation, he grew, as has been declared, by little and little, and (by 
degrees) was magnified, and (ultimately) became perfect. But they think that that is perfect which is 
reckoned at ten. When, therefore, the AEons had become equal in number and in perfection, they were, as 
(the Docetae) are of opinion, constituted thirty AEons in all, while each of them attains full perfection in a 
decade. And the three are mutually distinct, and hold one (degree of) honour relatively to one another, 
differing in position merely, because one of them is first, and the other second, and the other of these third. 

Position, iiowever, afforded them diversity of power. For lie wiio lias obtained a position nearest to tiie 
primal Deity-wiio is, as it were, a seed-possessed a more productive power tiian tiie rest, inasmucii as lie 
iiimself wiio is tiie immeasurable one, measured himself tenfold in bulk. He, however, who in position is 
second to the primal Deity, has, inasmuch as he is the incomprehensible one, comprehended himself 
sixfold. But he who is now third in position is conveyed to an infinite distance, in consequence of the 
dilatation of his brethren. (And when this third AEon) had thrice realized himself in thought, he encircled 
himself with, as it were, some eternal chain of union. 

CHAP. II.-DOCETIC NOTION OF THE INCARNATION; THEIR DOCTRINES OF AEONS; 
THEIR ACCOUNT OF CREATION; THEIR NOTION OF A FIERY GOD. 

And these (heretics) suppose that this is what is spoken by the Saviour: "A sower went forth to sow; and that 
which fell on the fair and good ground produced, some a hundred-fold, and some sixty-fold, and some 
thirty-fold. "(2) And for this reason, the (Docetic) says, (that the Saviour) has spoken the words, "He that hath 
ears to hear, let him hear," because these (truths)are not altogether rumours. All these AEons, both the three 
and all those infinite (AEons which proceed) from these indefinitely, are hermaphrodite AEons. All these, 
then, after they had been increased and magnified, and had sprung from that one primary seed, (were 
actuated by a spirit) of concord and union, and they all coalesced into one AEon. And in this manner they 
begot of a single virgin, Mary, (3) a joint offspring, who is a Mediator, (that is,) the Saviour of all who are in the 
(covenant of) mediation. (And this Saviour is,) in every respect, coequal in power with the seed of the 
fig-tree, with the exception that he was generated. Whereas that primary seed, from whence the fig-tree 
sprung, is unbegotten. When, therefore, those three AEons were adorned with all virtue and with all sanctity, 
so these teachers suppose, as well as that only begotten child-for he alone was begotten by those infinite 
AEons from three immediately concerned in his birth, for three immeasurable AEons being unanimous 
procreated him;-(after, I say, the AEons and only Son were thus adorned,) the entire nature, which is 
cognised by intellect, was fashioned free from deficiency. Now, all those intelligible and eternal (entities) 
constituted light. Light, however, was not devoid of form, nor inoperative, nor in want, as it were, of the 
assistance of any (other power). But (light) proportionately with the multitude of those infinite (AEons) 
indefinitely (generated) in conformity with the exemplar of the fig-tree, possesses in itself infinite species of 
various animals indigenous to that quarter of creation, and it shone down upon the underlying chaos. And 
when this (chaos) was simultaneously illuminated, and had form imparted to it by those diversified species 
from above, it derived (thereby) solidity, and acquired all those supernal species from the third AEon, who 
had made himself threefold. 

This third AEon, however, beholding all his own distinctive attributes laid hold on collectively by the 
underlying darkness (which was) beneath, and not being ignorant of the power of darkness, and at the same 
time of the security(4) and profusion of light, did not allow his brilliant attributes (which he derived) from 
above for any length of time to be snatched away by the darkness beneath. But (he acted in quite a contrary 
manner), for he subjected (darkness) to the AEons. After, then, he had formed the firmament over the nether 
world, "he both divided the darkness from the light, and called the light which was above the firmament day, 
and the darkness he called night."(1) When all the infinite species, then, as I have said, of the third AEon 
were intercepted in this the lowest darkness, the figure also of the AEon himself, such as he has been 
described, was impressed (upon them) along with the rest (of his attributes). (Now this figure is) a life-giving 
fire, which is generated from light, from whence the Great Archon originated. And respecting this (Archon) 
Moses observes: "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. "(2) Moses mentions(3) this fiery 
God as having spoken from the bush, (4) (bates,) that is, from the darkish air. For the whole of the 
atmosphere that underlies the darkness is (bates, i.e.,) a medium for the transmission of light. Now Moses 
has employed, says (the Docetic), the expression bates, because all the species of light pass down from 
above by means of their having the atmosphere as a medium (bates) of transmission. And in no less 
degree is capable of being recognised the Word of Jehovah addressed to us from the bush (bates, i.e., an 
atmospheric medium); for voice, as significant (in language) of a meaning, is a reverberation of air, and 
without this (atmosphere) human speech is incapable of being recognised. And not only the Word (of 
Jehovah addressed) to us from the bush (bates), that is, the air, legislates and is a fellow-citizen with (us); but 
(it does more than this), for both odours and colours manifest to us, through the medium of air, their own 
(peculiar) qualities. 

CHAP. III. --CHRIST UNDOES THE WORK OF THE DEMIURGE; DOCETIC ACCOUNT OF 
THE BAPTISM AND DEATH OF JESUS; WHY HE LIVED FOR THIRTY YEARS ON EARTH. 

This fiery deity, then, after he became fire from light, proceeded to create the world in the manner which 
Moses describes. He himself, however, as devoid of subsistence, employs the darkness as (his) 

substance, and perpetually insults those eternal attributes of light which, (being) from above, had been laid 
hold on by (the darkness) beneath. Up to the time, therefore, of the appearance of the Saviour, there 
prevailed, by reason of the Deity of fiery light, (that is,) the Demiurge, a certain extensive delusion of souls. 
For the species are styled souls, because they are refrigerations(5) from the (AEons) above, and continue 
in darkness. But when (the souls) are altered from bodies to bodies, they remain under the guardianship of 
the Demiurge. And that these things are so, says (the Docetic), it is possible also to perceive from Job, 
when he uses the following words: "And I am a wanderer, changing both place after place, and house after 
house. "(6) And (we may learn, according to the Docetae, the same) from the expressions of the Saviour, 
"And if ye will receive it, this is Ellas that was for to come. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear."(7) But by 
the instrumentality of the Saviour this transference of souls from body to body was made to cease, and faith 
is preached for remission of sins. After some such manner, that only begotten Son, when He gazes upon the 
forms of the supernal AEons, which were transferred from above into darkish bodies, coming down, wished 
to descend and deliver them. When (the Son), however, became aware that the AEons, those (that subsist) 
collectively, are unable to behold the Pleroma of all the AEons, but that in a state of consternation they fear 
lest they may undergo corruption as being themselves perishable, and that they are overwhelmed by the 
magnitude and splendour of power;-(when the Son, I say, perceived this,) He contracted Himself-as it were 
a very great flash in a very small body, nay, rather as a ray of vision condensed beneath the eyelids, and 
(in this condition) He advances forth as far as heaven and the effulgent stars. And in this quarter of creation 
He again collects himself beneath the lids of vision according as He wishes it. Now the light of vision 
accomplishes the same effect; for though it is everywhere, and (renders visible) all things, it is yet 
imperceptible to us. We, however, merely see lids of vision, while corners (of the eye), a tissue which is 
broad, tortuous, (8) (and) exceedingly fibrous, a membrane of the cornea; and underneath this, the pupil, 
which is shaped as a berry, is net-like and round. (And we observe) whatever other membranes there are 
that belong to the light of the eye, and enveloped in which it lies concealed. 

Thus, says (the Docetic), the only-begotten (and) eternal Child from above arrayed Himself in a form to 
correspond with each individual AEon of the three AEons;(9) and while he was within the triacontad of 
AEons, He entered into this world(10) just as we have described Him, unnoticed, unknown, obscure, and 
disbelieved. In order, therefore, say the Docetae, that He may be clad in the darkness that is prevalent in 
more distant quarters of creation-(now by darkness he means) flesh-an angel journeyed with Him from 
above, and announced the glad tidings to Mary, says (the Docetic), as it has been written. And the (child) 
from her was born, as it has been written. And He who came from above put on that which was born; and so 
did He all things, as it has been written (of Him) in the Gospels. He washed in Jordan, and when He was 
baptized He received a figure and a seal in the water of (another spiritual booty beside) the body born of 
the Virgin. (And the object of this was,) when the Archon condemned his own peculiar figment (of flesh) to 
death, (that is,) to the cross, that that soul which had been nourished in the body (born of the Virgin) might 
strip off that body and nail it to the (accursed) tree. (In this way the soul) would triumph by means of this 
(body) over principalities and powers, (1) and would not be found naked, but would, instead of that flesh, 
assume the (other) body, which had been represented in the water when he was being baptized. This is, 
says (the Docetic), what the Saviour affirms: "Except a man be born of water and spirit, be will not enter into 
the kingdom of heaven, because that which is born of the flesh is flesh. "(2) From the thirty AEons, therefore, 
(the Son) assumed thirty forms. And for this reason that eternal One existed for thirty years on the earth, 
because each AEon was in a peculiar manner manifested during (his own) year. And the souls are all those 
forms that have been laid hold on by each of the thirty AEons; and each of these is so constituted as to 
discern Jesus, who is of a nature (similar to their own). (And it was the nature of this Jesus) which that 
only-begotten and eternal One assumed from everlasting places. These (places), however, are diverse. 
Consequently, a proportionate number of heresies, with the utmost emulation, seek Jesus. Now all these 
heresies have their own peculiar Jesus; but he is seen differently according as the place(3) is different 
towards which, he says, each soul is borne and hastens. (Now each soul) supposes that (the Jesus seen 
from its particular place) is alone that (Jesus) who is its own peculiar kinsman and fellow-citizen. And on first 
beholding (this Jesus, that soul) recognises Him as its own peculiar brother, but the rest as bastards. Those, 
then, that derive their nature from the places below, are not able to see the forms of the Saviour which are 
above them. Those, however, he says, who are from above, from the intermediate decade and the most 
excellent ogdoad-whence, say (the Docetae), we are-have themselves known not in part, but entirely, 
Jesus the Saviour. And those, who are from above, are alone perfect, but all the rest are only partially so. 

CHAP. IV. --DOCETIC DOCTRINE DERIVED FROM THE GREEK SOPHISTS. 

These (statements), therefore, I consider sufficient to properly-constituted minds for the purpose of attaining 
unto a knowledge of the complicated and unstable heresy of the Docetae. (But) those who have 
propounded attempted arguments about inaccessible and incomprehensible Matter, have styled 

themselves Docetae. Now, we consider that some of these are acting foolishly, we will not say in 
appearance, but in reality. At all events, we have proved that a beam from such matter is carried in the eye, 
if by any means they may be enabled to perceive it. If, however, they do not (discern it, our object is) that 
they should not make others blind. But the fact is, that the sophists of the Greeks in ancient times have 
previously devised, in many particulars, the doctrines of these (Docetae), as it is possible for my readers 
(who take the trouble) to ascertain. These, then, are the opinions propounded by the Docetae. As to what 
likewise, however, are the tenets of Monoimus, we shall not be silent. 

CHAP. V.--MONOIMUS; MAN THE UNIVERSE, ACCORDING TO MONOIMUS; HIS SYSTEM 
OF THE MONAD. 

Monoimus(4) the Arabian was far removed from the glory of the high-sounding poet. (For Monoimus) 
supposes that there is some such man as the poet (calls) Oceanus, expressing himself somehow thus:- 

"Oceans, source of gods and source of men. "(5) 

Changing these (sentiments) into other words, Monoimus says that man is the universe. Now the universe is 
the originating cause of all things, unbegotten, incorruptible, (and) eternal. And (he says) that the son of (the) 
man previously spoken of is begotten, and subject to passion, (and) that he is generated independently of 
time, (as well as) undesignedly, (6) (and) without being predestinated. For such, he says, is the power of that 
man. And he being thus constituted in power, (Monoimus alleges) that the son was born quicker than thought 
and volition. 

And this, he says, is what has been spoken in the Scriptures, "He was, and was generated. "(1) And the 
meaning of this is: Man was, and his son was generated; just as one may say. Fire was, and, independently 
of time, and undesignedly, and without being predestinated, light was generated simultaneously with the 
existence of the fire. And this man constitutes a single monad, which is uncompounded and indivisible, (and 
yet at the same time) compounded (and) divisible. (And this monad is) in all respects friendly (and) in all 
respects peaceful, in all respects quarrelsome (and) in all respects contentious with itself, dissimilar (and) 
similar. (This monad is likewise,) as it were, a certain musical harmony, which comprises all things in itself, 
as many as one may express and may omit when not considering; and it manifests all things, and 
generates all things. This (is) Mother, this (is) Father-two immortal names. As an illustration, however, 
consider, he says, as a greatest image of the perfect man, the one jot-that one tittle. And this one tittle is an 
uncompounded, simple, and pure monad, which derives its composition from nothing at all. (And yet this 
tittle is likewise) compounded, multiform, branching into many sections, and consisting of many parts. That 
one indivisible tittle is, he says, one tittle of the (letter) iota, with many faces, and innumerable eyes, and 
countless names, and this (tittle) is an image of that perfect invisible man. 

CHAP, VI. --MONOIMUS' "IOTA;" HIS NOTION OF THE "SON OF MAN." 

The monad, (that is,) the one tittle, is(2) therefore, he says, also a decade. For by the actual power of this 
one tittle, are produced duad, and triad, and tetrad, and pentad, and hexad, and heptad, and ogdoad, and 
ennead, up to ten. For these numbers, he says, are capable of many divisions, and they reside in that 
simple and uncompounded single tittle of the iota. And this is what has been declared: "It pleased (God) that 
all fulness should dwell in the Son of man bodily. "(3) For such compositions of numbers out of the simple 
and uncompounded one tittle of the iota become, he says, corporeal realities. The Son of man, therefore, 
he says, has been generated from the perfect man, whom no one knew; every creature who is ignorant of 
the Son, however, forms an idea of Him as the offspring of a woman. And certain very obscure rays of this 
Son which approach this world, check and control alteration (and) generation. And the beauty of that Son of 
man is up to the present incomprehensible to all men, as many as are deceived in reference to the offspring 
of the woman. Therefore nothing, he says, of the things that are in our quarter of creation has been produced 
by that man, nor will aught (of these) ever be (generated from him). All things, however, have been 
produced, not from the entirety, but from some part of that Son of man. For he says the Son of man is a jot in 
one tittle, which proceeds from above, is full, and completely replenishes all (rays flowing down from 
above). And it comprises in itself whatever things the man also possesses (who is) the Father of the Son of 
man. 

CHAP. VII. -MONOIMUS ON THE SABBATH; ALLEGORIZES THE ROD OF MOSES; NOTION 
CONCERNING THE DECALOGUE. 

The world, then, as Moses says, was made in six days, that is, by six powers, which (are inherent) in the one 

tittle of the iota. (But) tiie seventii (day, wiiicii is) a rest and Sabbatii, lias been produced from tiie 
Hebdomad, wiiicii is over eartli, and water, and fire, and air. And from tliese (elements) tiie worid lias been 
formed by the one tittle. For cubes, and octahedrons, and pyramids, and all figures similar to these, out of 
which consist fire, air, water, (and) earth, have arisen from numbers which are comprehended in that simple 
tittle of the iota. And this (tittle) constitutes a perfect son of a perfect man. When, therefore, he says, IVIoses 
mentions that the rod was changeably brandished for the (introduction of the) plagues throughout 
Egypt(4)-now these plagues, he says, are allegorically expressed symbols of the creation(5)-he did not 
(as a symbol) for more plagues than ten shape the rod. Now this (rod) constitutes one tittle of the iota, and is 
(both) twofold (and) various. This succession often plagues is, he says, the mundane creation. For all 
things, by being stricken, bring forth and bear fruit, just like vines. IVIan, he says, bursts forth, and is forcibly 
separated from man by being severed by a certain stroke. (And this takes place) in order that (man) may be 
generated, and may declare the law which IVIoses ordained, who received (it) from God. Conformably(6) 
with that one tittle, the law constitutes the series of the ten commandments which expresses allegorically the 
divine mysteries of (those) precepts. For, he says, all knowledge of the universe is contained in what relates 
to the succession of the ten plagues and the series of the ten commandments. And no one is acquainted 
with this (knowledge) who is (of the number) of those that are deceived concerning the offspring of the 
woman. If, however, you say that the Pentateuch constitutes the entire law, it is from the Pentad which is 
comprehended in the one tittle. But the entire is for those who have not been altogether perfected in 
understanding a mystery, a new and not antiquated feast, legal, (and) everlasting, a passover of the Lord 
God kept unto our generations, by those who are able to discern (this mystery), at the commencement of the 
fourteenth day, which is the beginning of a decade from which, he says, they reckon. For the monad, as far 
as fourteen, is the summary of that one (tittle) of the perfect number. For one, two, three, four, become ten; 
and this is the one tittle. But from fourteen until one-and-twenty, he asserts that there is an Hebdomad which 
inheres in the one tittle of the world, and constitutes an unleavened creature in all these. For in what respect, 
he says, would the one tittle require any substance such as leaven (derived) from without for the Lord's 
Passover, the eternal feast, which is given for generation upon generation?(1) For the entire world and all 
causes of creation constitute a passover, (i.e.,) a feast of the Lord. For God rejoices in the conversion of the 
creation, and this is accomplished by ten strokes of the one tittle. And this (tittle) is IVIoses' rod, which was 
given by God into the hand of IVIoses. And with this (rod IVIoses) smites the Egyptians, for the purpose of 
altering bodies, -as, for instance, water into blood; and the rest of (material) things similarly with these,-(as, 
for example,) the locusts, which is a symbol of grass. And by this he means the alteration of the elements 
into flesh; "for all flesh," he says, "is grass. "(2) These men, nevertheless receive even the entire law after 
some such manner; adopting very probably, as I think, the opinions of those of the Greeks who affirm that 
there are Substance, and Quality, and Quantity, and Relation, and Place, and Time, and Position, and 
Action, and Possession, and Passion. 

CHAP. VIII.-MONOIMUS EXPLAINS HIS OPINIONS IN A LETTER TO THEOPHRASTUS; 
WHERE TO FIND GOD; HIS SYSTEM DERIVED FROM PYTHAGORAS. 

IVIonoimus himself, accordingly, in his letter to Theophrastus, expressly makes the following statement: 
"Omitting to seek after God, and creation, and things similar to these, seek for Him from (out of) thyself, and 
learn who it is that absolutely appropriates (unto Himself) all things in thee, and says, 'IVIy God (is) my mind, 
my understanding, my soul, my body.' And learn from whence are sorrow, and joy, and love, and hatred, 
and involuntary wakefulness, and involuntary drowsiness, and involuntary anger, and involuntary affection; 
and if," he says, "you accurately investigate these (points), you will discover (God) Himself, unity and 
plurality, in thyself, according to that tittle, and that He finds the outlet (for Deity) to be from thyself." Those 
(heretics), then, (have made) these (statements). But we are under no necessity of comparing such 
(doctrines) with what have previously been subjects of meditation on the part of the Greeks, inasmuch as the 
assertions advanced by these (heretics) evidently derive their origin from geometrical and arithmetical art. 
The disciples, however, of Pythagoras, expounded this (art) after a more excellent method, (3) as our 
readers may ascertain by consulting those passages (of our work) in which we have previously furnished 
expositions of the entire wisdom of the Greeks. But since the heresy of IVIonoimus has been sufficiently 
refuted, let us see what are the fictitious doctrines which the rest also (of these heretics) devise, in their 
desire to set up for themselves an empty name. 

CHAP. IX.-TATIAN. 

Tatian,(4) however, although being himself a disciple of Justinusthe IVIartyr, did not entertain similar 
opinions with his master. But he attempted (to establish) certain novel (tenets), and affirmed that there 
existed certain invisible AEons. And he framed a legendary account (of them), similarly to those (spoken of) 

by Valentinus. And similarly with Marcion, he asserts that marriage is destruction. But he alleges that Adam 
is not saved on account of his having been the author of disobedience. And so far for the doctrines of 
Tatian. 

CHAP. X.-HERMOGENES; ADOPTS THE SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHY; HIS NOTION 
CONCERNING THE BIRTH AND BODY OF OUR LORD. 

But a certain Hermogenes,(5) himself also imagining that he propounded some novel opinion, said that 
God made all things out of coeval and ungenerated matter. For that it was impossible that God could make 
generated things out of things that are not. And that God is always Lord, and always Creator, and matter 
always a subservient (substance), and that which is assuming phases of being-not, however, the whole of it. 
For when it was being continually moved in a rude and disorderly manner. He reduced (matter) into order by 
the following expedient. As He gazed (upon matter) in a seething condition, like (the contents of) a pot when 
a fire is burning underneath. He effected a partial separation. And taking one portion from the whole. He 
subdued it, but another He allowed to be whirled in a disorderly manner. And he asserts that what was (thus) 
subdued is the world, but that another portion remains wild, and is denominated chaotic(1) matter. He 
asserts that this constitutes the substance of all things, as if introducing a novel tenet for his disciples. He 
does not, however, reflect that this happens to be the Socratic discourse, which (indeed) is worked out more 
elaborately by Plato than by Hermogenes. He acknowledges, however, that Christ is the Son of the God 
who created all things; and along with (this admission), he confesses that he was born of a virgin and of (the) 
Spirit, according to the voice of the Gospels. And (Hermogenes maintains that Christ), after His passion, 
was raised up in a body, and that He appeared to His disciples, and that as He went up into heaven He left 
His body in the sun, but that He Himself proceeded on to the Father. Now (Hermogenes) resorts to 
testimony, thinking to support himself by what is spoken, (viz.) what the Psalmist David says: "In the sun he 
hath placed his tabernacle, and himself (is) as a bridegroom coming forth from his nuptial chamber, (and) he 
will rejoice as a giant to run his course. "(2) These, then, are the opinions which also Hermogenes attempted 
to establish. 

CHAP. XI. -THE QUARTODECIMANS. 

And certain other (heretics), contentious by nature, (and) wholly uniformed as regards knowledge, as well as 
in their manner more (than usually) quarrelsome, combine (in maintaining) that Easter should be kept on the 
fourteenth day(3) of the first month, according to the commandment of the law, on whatever day (of the week) 
it should occur. (But in this) they only regard what has been written in the law, that he will be accursed who 
does not so keep (the commandment) as it is enjoined. They do not, however, attend to this (fact), that the 
legal enactment was made for Jews, who in times to come should kill the real Passover.(4) And this 
(paschal sacrifice, in its efficacy,) has spread unto the Gentiles, and is discerned by faith, and not now 
observed in letter (merely). They attend to this one commandment, and do not look unto what has been 
spoken by the apostle: "For I testify to every man that is circumcised, that he is a debtor to keep the whole 
law. "(5) In other respects, however, these consent to all the traditions delivered to the Church by the 
Apostles. (6) 

CHAP. XII. -THE MONTANISTS; PRISCILLA AND MAXIMILLA THEIR PROPHETESSES; 
SOME OF THEM NOETIANS. 

But there are others who themselves are even more heretical in nature (than the foregoing), and are 
Phrygians(7) by birth. These have been rendered victims of error from being previously captivated by (two) 
wretched women, called a certain Priscilla and Maximilla, whom they supposed (to be) prophetesses. And 
they assert that into these the Paraclete Spirit had departed; and antecedently to them, they in like manner 
consider Montanus as a prophet. And being in possession of an infinite number of their books, (the 
Phrygians) are overrun with delusion; and they do not judge whatever statements are made by them, 
according to (the criterion of) reason; nor do they give heed unto those who are competent to decide; but 
they are heedlessly swept onwards, by the reliance which they place on these (impostors). And they allege 
that they have learned something more through these, than from law, and prophets, and the Gospels. But 
they magnify these wretched women above the Apostles and every gift of Grace, so that some of them 
presume to assert that there is in them a something superior to Christ. These acknowledge God to be the 
Father of the universe, and Creator of all things, similarly with the Church, and (receive) as many things as 
the Gospel testifies concerning Christ. They introduce, however, the novelties of fasts, (8) and feasts, and 
meals of parched food, and repasts of radishes, alleging that they have been instructed by women. And 
some of these assent to the heresy of the Noetians, and affirm that the Father himself is the Son, and that this 

(one) came under generation, and suffering, and death. Concerning these I shall again offer an explanation, 
after a more minute manner; for the heresy of these has been an occasion of evils to many. We therefore 
are of opinion, that the statements made concerning these (heretics) are sufficient when we shall have 
briefly proved to all that the majority of their books are silly, and their attempts (at reasoning) weak, and 
worthy of no consideration. But it is not necessary for those who possess a sound mind to pay attention 
(either to their volumes or their arguments). 

CHAP. XIII. -THE DOCTRINES OF THE ENCRATITES.(I) 

Others, however, styling themselves Encratites, acknowledge some things concerning God and Christ in 
like manner with the Church. In respect, however, of their mode of life, they pass their days inflated with pride. 
They suppose, that by meats they magnify themselves, while abstaining from animal food, (and) being 
water-drinkers, and forbidding to marry, and devoting themselves during the remainder of life to habits of 
asceticism. But persons of this description are estimated Cynics rather than Christians, inasmuch as they do 
not attend unto the words spoken against them through the Apostle Paul. Now he, predicting the novelties 
that were to be hereafter introduced ineffectually by certain (heretics), made a statement thus: "The Spirit 
speaketh expressly. In the latter times certain will depart from sound doctrine, giving heed to seducing 
spirits and doctrines of devils, uttering falsehoods in hypocrisy, having their own conscience seared with a 
hot iron, forbidding to marry, to abstain from meats, which God has created to be partaken of with 
thanksgiving by the faithful, and those who know the truth; because every creature of God is good, and 
nothing to be rejected which is received with thanksgiving; for it is sanctified by the word of God and 
prayer."(2) This voice, then, of the blessed Paul, is sufficient for the refutation of those who live in this 
manner, and plume themselves on being just;(3) (and) for the purpose of proving that also, this (tenet of the 
Encratites) constitutes a heresy. But even though there have been denominated certain other heresies-l 
mean those of the Cainites,(4) Ophites, (5) or Noachites,(6) and of others of this description-l have not 
deemed it requisite to explain the things said or done by these, test on this account they may consider 
themselves somebody, or deserving of consideration. Since, however, the statements concerning these 
appear to be sufficient, let us pass on to the cause of evils to all, (viz.,) the heresy of the Noetians. Now, after 
we have laid bare the root of this (heresy), and stigmatized openly the venom, as it were, lurking within it, let 
us seek to deter from an error of this description those who have been impelled into it by a violent spirit, as it 
were by a swollen torrent. 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

BOOK IX. 

The following are the contents of the ninth book of the Refutation of all Heresies:- 

What the blasphemous folly is of Noetus, and that he devoted himself to the tenets of Heraclitus the 

Obscure, not to those of Christ. 

And how Callistus, intermingling the heresy of Cleomenes, the disciple of Noetus, with that of Theodotus, 

constructed another more novel heresy, and what sort the life of this (heretic) was. 

What was the recent(1) arrival (at Rome) of the strange spirit Elchasai, and that there served as a 

concealment of his peculiar errors his apparent adhesion to the law, when in point of fact he devotes himself 

to the tenets of the Gnostics, or even of the astrologists, and to the arts of sorcery. 

What the customs of the Jews are, and how many diversities of opinion there are (amongst them). 

CHAP. I. -AN ACCOUNT OF CONTEMPORANEOUS HERESY. (2) 

A lengthened conflict, then, having been maintained concerning all heresies by us who, at all events, have 
not left any unrefuted, the greatest struggle now remains behind, viz., to furnish an account and refutation of 
those heresies that have sprung up in our own day, by which certain ignorant and presumptuous men have 
attempted to scatter abroad the Church, and have introduced the greatest confusion(3) among all the faithful 
throughout the entire world. For it seems expedient that we, making an onslaught upon the opinion which 
constitutes the prime source of (contemporaneous) evils, should prove what are the originating principles(4) 
of this (opinion), in order that its offshoots, becoming a matter of general notoriety, may be made the object 
of universal scorn. 

CHAP, II. -SOURCE OF THE HERESY OF NOETUS; CLEOMENES HIS DISCIPLE; ITS 
APPEARANCE AT ROME DURING THE EPISCOPATES OF ZEPHYRINUS AND CALLISTUS; 
NOETIANISM OPPOSED AT ROME BY HIPPOLYTUS. 

There has appeared one, Noetus(5) by name, and by birth a native of Smyrna. This person introduced a 
heresy from the tenets of Heraclitus. (6) Now a certain man called Epigonus becomes his minister and pupil, 
and this person during his sojourn at Rome disseminated his godless opinion. But Cleomenes, who had 
become his disciple, an alien both in way of life and habits from the Church, was wont to corroborate the 
(Noetian) doctrine. At that time, Zephyrinus imagines that he administers the affairs of the Church(7)-an 
uninformed and shamefully corrupt man. And he, being persuaded by proffered gain, was accustomed to 
connive at those who were present for the purpose of becoming disciples of Cleomenes. But (Zephyrinus) 
himself, being in process of time enticed away, hurried headlong(8) into the same opinions; and he had 
Callistus as his adviser, and a fellow-champion of these wicked tenets. (8) But the life of this (Callistus), and 
the heresy invented by him, I shall after a little explain. The school of these heretics during the succession of 
such bishops, continued to acquire strength and augmentation, from the fact that Zephyrinus and Callistus 
helped them to prevail. (9) Never at any time, however, have we been guilty of collusion with them; but we 
have frequently offered them opposition, (10) and have refuted them, and have forced them reluctantly to 
acknowledge the truth. And they, abashed and constrained by the truth, have confessed their errors for a 
short period, but after a little, wallow once again in the same mire. (1 1) 

CHAP. III. -NOETIANISM AN OFFSHOOT FROM THE HERACLITIC PHILOSOPHY. 

But since we have exhibited the succession of their genealogy, it seems expedient next that we should also 
explain the depraved teaching involved in their doctrines. For this purpose we shall first adduce the 
opinions advanced by Heraclitus "the Obscure, "(1) and we shall next make manifest what are the portions 
of these opinions that are of Heraclitean origin. Such parts of their system its present champions are not 
aware belong to the "Obscure" philosopher, but they imagine(2) them to belong to Christ. But if they might 
happen to fall in with the following observations, perhaps they thus might be put out of countenance, and 
induced to desist from this godless blasphemy of theirs. Now, even though the opinion of Heraclitus has 

been expounded by us previously in tiie Piiilosopiiumena, it nevertiieless seems expedient now also to set 
down side by side in contrast the two systems, in order that by this closer refutation they may be evidently 
instructed. I mean the followers of this (heretic), who imagine(2) themselves to be disciples of Christ, when in 
reality they are not so, but of the Obscure." 

CHAP. IV. -AN ACCOUNT OF THE SYSTEM OF HERACLITUS. 

Heraclitus then says that the universe is one, (3) divisible and indivisible; generated and ungenerated; 
mortal and immortal; reason, eternity; Father, Son, and justice, God. (4) "For those who hearken not to me, 
but the doctrine, it is wise that they acknowledge all things to be one," says Heraclitus; and because all do 
not know or confess this, he utters a reproof somewhat in the following terms: "People do not understand 
how what is diverse (nevertheless) coincides with itself, just like the inverse harmony of a bow and lyre. "(5) 
But that Reason always exists, inasmuch as it constitutes the universe, and as it pervades all things, he 
affirms in this manner. "But in regard of this Reason, which always exists, men are continually devoid of 
understanding, (6) both before they have heard of it and in first gearing of it. For though all things take place 
according to this Reason, they seem like persons devoid of any experience regarding it. Still they attempt 
both words and works of such a description as I am giving an account of, by making a division according to 
nature, and declaring how things are." And that a Son is the universe and throughout endless ages an 
eternal king of all things, he thus asserts: "A sporting child, playing at his dice, is eternity; the kingdom is that 
of a child. "(7) And that the Father of all things that have been generated is an unbegotten creature who is 
creator, let us hear Heraclitus affirming in these words: "Contrariety is a progenitor of all things, and king of 
all; and it exhibited some as gods, but others as men, and made some slaves, whereas others free." And 
(he likewise affirms) that there is" a harmony, as in a bow and lyre." That obscure harmony (is better), (8) 
though unknown and invisible to men, he asserts in these words: "An obscure harmony is preferable to an 
obvious one." He commends and admires before what is known, that which is unknown and invisible in 
regard of its power. And that harmony visible to men, and not incapable of being discovered, is better, he 
asserts in these words: "Whatever things are objects of vision, hearing, and intelligence, these I 
pre-eminently honour," he says; that is, he prefers things visible to those that are invisible. From such 
expressions of his it is easy to understand the spirit of his philosophy. "Men," he says, "are deceived in 
reference to the knowledge of manifest things similarly with Homer, who was wiser than all the Greeks. For 
even children(9) killing vermin deceived him, when they said, 'What we have seen and seized, these we 
leave behind; whereas what we neither have seen nor seized, these we carry away."' 

CHAP. V. --HERACLITUS' ESTIMATE OF HESIOD; PARADOXES OF HERACLITUS; HIS 
ESCHATOLOGY; THE HERESY OF NOETUS OF HERACLITEAN ORIGIN; NOETUS' VIEW 
OF THE BIRTH AND PASSION OF OUR LORD. 

In this manner Heraclitus assigns to the visible an equality of position and honour with the invisible, as if what 
was visible and what was invisible were confessedly some one thing. For he says, "An obscure harmony is 
preferable to an obvious one;" and, "Whatsoever things are objects of vision, hearing, and intelligence," 
that is, of the (corporeal) organs, -"these," he says, "I pre-eminently honour," not (on this occasion, though 
previously), having pre-eminently honoured invisible things. Therefore neither darkness, nor light, nor evil, 
nor good, Heraclitus affirms, is different, but one and the same thing. At all events, he censures Hesiod(1) 
because he knew not day and night. For day, he says, and night are one, expressing himself somehow thus: 
"The teacher, however, of a vast amount of information is Hesiod, and people suppose this poet to be 
possessed of an exceedingly large store of knowledge, and yet he did not know (the nature of) day and 
night, for they are one." As regards both what is good and what is bad, (they are, according to Heraclitus, 
likewise) one. "Physicians, undoubtedly," says Heraclitus, "when they make incisions and cauterize, though 
in every respect they wickedly torture the sick, complain that they do not receive fitting remuneration from 
their patients, notwithstanding that they perform these salutary operations upon diseases." And both straight 
and twisted are, he says, the same. "The way is straight and curved of the carders of wool;"(2) and the 
circular movement of an instrument in the fuller's shop called "a screw" is straight and curved, for it revolves 
up and circularly at the same time. "One and the same," he says, "are, therefore, straight and curved." And 
upward and downward, (3) he says, are one and the same. "The way up and the way down are the same." 
And he says that what is filthy and what is pure are one and the same, and what is drinkable and unfit for 
drink are one and the same. "Sea," he says, "is water very pure and very foul, drinkable to fishes no doubt, 
and salutary for them, but not fit to be used as drink by men, and (for them) pernicious." And, confessedly, he 
asserts that what is immortal is mortal, (4) and that what is mortal is immortal, in the following expressions: 
"Immortals are mortal, and mortals are immortal, that is, when the one derive life from death, and the other 
death from life." And he affirms also that there is a resurrection of this palpable flesh in which we have been 

born; and he knows God to be the cause of this resurrection, expressing himself in this manner: "Those that 
are here(5) will God enable to arise and become guardians of quick and dead." And he likewise affirms that 
a judgment of the world and all things in it takes place by fire, expressing himself thus: "Now, thunder pilots 
all things," that is, directs them, meaning by the thunder everlasting fire. But he also asserts that this fire is 
endued with intelligence, and a cause of the management of the Universe, and he denominates it craving 
and satiety. Now craving is, according to him, the arrangement of the world, whereas satiety its destruction. 
"For," says he, "the fire, coming upon the earth, will judge and seize all things." 

But in this chapter Heraclitus simultaneously explains the entire peculiarity of his mode of thinking, but at the 
same time the (characteristic quality) of the heresy of Noetus. And I have briefly demonstrated Noetus to be 
not a disciple of Christ, but of Heraclitus. For this philosopher asserts that the primal world is itself the 
Demiurge and creatorof itself in the following passage: "God is day, night; winter, summer; war, peace; 
surfeit, famine." All things are contraries-this appears his meaning-"but an alteration takes place, just as(6) 
if incense were mixed with oilier sorts of incense, but denominated(7) according to the pleasurable 
sensation produced by each sort. Now it is evident to all that the silly successors of Noetus, and the 
champions of his heresy, even though they have not been hearers of the discourses of Heraclitus, 
nevertheless, at any rate when they adopt the opinions of Noetus, undisguisedly acknowledge these 
(Heraclitean) tenets. For they advance statements after this manner-that one and the same God is the 
Creator and Father of all things; and that when it pleased Him, He nevertheless appeared, (though 
invisible,) to just men of old. For when He is not seen He is invisible; and He is incomprehensible when He 
does not wish to be comprehended, but comprehensible when he is comprehended. Wherefore it is that, 
according to the same account. He is invincible and vincible, unbegotten and begotten, immortal and 
mortal. How shall not persons holding this description of opinions be proved to be disciples of Heraclitus? 
Did not (Heraclitus) the Obscure anticipate Noetus in framing a system of philosophy, according to identical 
modes of expression? 

Now, that Noetus affirms that the Son and Father are the same, no one is ignorant. But he makes his 
statement thus: "When indeed, then, the Father had not been born. He yet was justly styled Father; and when 
it pleased Him to undergo generation, having been begotten. He Himself became His own Son, not 
another's." For in this manner he thinks to establish the sovereignty of God, alleging that Father and Son, so 
called, are one and the same (substance), not one individual produced from a different one, but Himself 
from Himself; and that He is styled by name Father and Son, according to vicissitude of times. (1) But that He 
is one who has appeared (amongst us), both having submitted to generation from a virgin, and as a man 
having held converse among men. And, on account of the birth that had taken place. He confessed Himself 
to those beholding Him a Son, no doubt; yet He made no secret to those who could comprehend Him of His 
being a Father. That this person suffered by being fastened to the tree, and that He commended His spirit 
unto Himself, having died to appearance, and not being (in reality) dead. And He raised Himself up the third 
day, after having been interred in a sepulchre, and wounded with a spear, and perforated with nails. 
Cleomenes asserts, in common with his hand of followers, that this person is God and Father of the universe, 
and thus introduces among many an obscurity (of thought) such as we find in the philosophy of Heraclitus. 

CHAP. VI. -CONDUCT OF CALLISTUS AND ZEPHYRINUS IN THE MATTER OF 
NOETIANISM; AVOWED OPINION OF ZEPHYRINUS CONCERNING JESUS CHRIST; 
DISAPPROVAL OF HIPPOLYTUS; AS A CONTEMPORANEOUS EVENT, HIPPOLYTUS 
COMPETENT TO EXPLAIN IT. 

Callistus attempted to confirm this heresy ,-a man cunning in wickedness, and subtle where deceit was 
concerned, (and) who was impelled by restless ambition to mount the episcopal throne. (2) Now this man 
moulded to his purpose Zephyrinus, an ignorant and illiterate individual, and one unskilled in ecclesiastical 
definitions. (3) And inasmuch as Zephyrinus was accessible to bribes, and covetous, Callistus, by luring him 
through presents, and by illicit demands, was enabled to seduce him into whatever course of action he 
pleased. And so it was that Callistus succeeded in inducing Zephyrinus to create continually disturbances 
among the brethren, while he himself took care subsequently, by knavish words, to attach both factions in 
good-will to himself. And, at one time, to those who entertained true opinions, he would in private(4) allege 
that they held similar doctrines (with himself), and thus make them his dupes; while at another time he would 
act similarly towards those (who embraced) the tenets of Sabellius. But Callistus perverted Sabellius 
himself, and this, too, though he had the ability of rectifying this heretic's error. For (at any time) during our 
admonition Sabellius did not evince obduracy; but as long as he continued alone with Callistus, he was 
wrought upon to relapse into the system of Cleomenes by this very Callistus, who alleges that he entertains 
similar opinions to Cleomenes. Sabellius, however, did not then perceive the knavery of Callistus; but he 
afterwards came to be aware of it, as I shall narrate presently. 
Now Callistus brought forward Zephyrinus himself, and induced him publicly to avow the following 

sentiments: "I know that there is one God, Jesus Christ; nor except Him do I l<now any other that is begotten 
and amenable to suffering." And on another occasion, when he would make the following statement: "The 
Father did not die, but the Son." Zephyrinus would in this way continue to keep up ceaseless disturbance 
among the people. And we, (5) becoming aware of his sentiments, did not give place to him, but reproved 
and withstood him for the truth's sake. And he hurried headlong into folly, from the fact that all consented to 
his hypocrisy-we,(5) however, did not do so-and called us worshippers of two gods, disgorging, 
independent of compulsion, (6) the venom lurking within him. It would seem to us desirable to explain the life 
of this heretic, inasmuch as he was born about the same time with ourselves, in order that, by the exposure 
of the habits of a person of this description, the heresy attempted to be established by him may be easily 
known, and may perchance be regarded as silly, by those endued with intelligence. This Callistus became 
a "martyr" at the period when Fuscianus was prefect of Rome, and the mode of his "martyrdom" was as 
follows. (7) 

CHAP. VII. -THE PERSONAL HISTORY OF CALLISTUS; HIS OCCUPATION AS A BANKER; 
FRAUD ON CARPOPHORUS; CALLISTUS ABSCONDS; ATTEMPTED SUICIDE; 
CONDEMNED TO THE TREADMILL; RE-CONDEMNATION BY ORDER OF THE PREFECT 
FUSCIANUS; BANISHED TO SARDINIA; RELEASE OF CALLISTUS BY THE 
INTERFERENCE OF MARCION; CALLISTUS ARRIVES AT ROME; POPE VICTOR 
REMOVES CALLISTUS TO ANTIUM; RETURN OF CALLISTUS ON VICTOR'S DEATH; 
ZEPHYRINUS FRIENDLY TO HIM; CALLISTUS ACCUSED BY SABELLIUS; HIPPOLYTUS' 
ACCOUNT OF THE OPINIONS OF CALLISTUS; THE CALLISTIAN SCHOOL AT ROME, AND 
ITS PRACTICES; THIS SECT IN EXISTENCE IN HIPPOLYTUS' TIME. 

Callistus happened to be a domestic of one Carpophorus, a man of the faith belonging to the household of 
Caesar. To this Callistus, as being of the faith, Carpophorus committed no inconsiderable amount of money, 
and directed him to bring in profitable returns from the banking business. And he, receiving the money, tried 
(the experiment of) a bank in what is called the Piscina Publica.(1) And in process of time were entrusted to 
him not a few deposits by widows and brethren, under the ostensive cause of lodging their money with 
Carpophorus. Callistus, however, made away with all (the moneys committed to him), and became involved 
in pecuniary difficulties. And after having practised such conduct as this, there was not wanting one to tell 
Carpophorus, and the latter stated that he would require an account from him. Callistus, perceiving these 
things, and suspecting danger from his master, escaped away by stealth, directing his flight towards the 
sea. And finding a vessel in Portus ready for a voyage, he went on board, intending to sail wherever she 
happened to be bound for. But not even in this way could he avoid detection, for there was not wanting one 
who conveyed to Carpophorus intelligence of what had taken place. But Carpophorus, in accordance with 
the information he had received, at once repaired to the harbour (Portus), and made an effort to hurry into the 
vessel after Callistus. The boat, however, was anchored in the middle of the harbour; and as the ferryman 
was slow in his movements, Callistus, who was in the ship, had time to descry his master at a distance. And 
knowing that himself would be inevitably captured, he became reckless of life; and, considering his affairs to 
be in a desperate condition, he proceeded to cast himself into the sea. But the sailors leaped into boats 
and drew him out, unwilling to come, while those on shore were raising a loud cry. And thus Callistus was 
handed over to his master, and brought to Rome, and his master lodged him in the Pistrinum.(2) 
But as time wore on, as happens to take place in such cases, brethren repaired to Carpophorus, and 
entreated him that he would release the fugitive serf from punishment, on the plea of their alleging that 
Callistus acknowledged himself to have money lying to his credit with certain persons. But Carpophorus, as 
a devout man, said he was indifferent regarding his own property, but that he felt a concern for the deposits; 
for many shed tears as they remarked to him, that they had committed what they had entrusted to Callistus, 
under the ostensive cause of lodging the money with himself.(3) And Carpophorus yielded to their 
persuasions, and gave directions for the liberation of Callistus. The latter, however, having nothing to pay, 
and not being able again to abscond, from the fact of his being watched, planned an artifice by which he 
hoped to meet death. Now, pretending that he was repairing as it were to his creditors, he hurried on their 
Sabbath-day to the synagogue of the Jews, who were congregated, and took his stand, and created a 
disturbance among them. They, however, being disturbed by him, offered him insult, and inflicted blows 
upon him, and dragged him before Fuscianus, who was prefect of the city. And (on being asked the cause 
of such treatment), they replied in the following terms: "Romans have conceded to us(4) the privilege of 
publicly reading those laws of ours that have been handed down from our fathers. This person, however, by 
coming into (our place of worship), prevented (us so doing), by creating a disturbance among us, alleging 
that he is a Christian." And Fuscianus happens at the time to be on the judgment-seat; and on intimating his 
indignation against Callistus, on account of the statements made by the Jews, there was not wanting one to 
go and acquaint Carpophorus concerning these transactions. And he, hastening to the judgment-seat of the 

prefect, exclaimed, "I implore of you, my lord Fuscianus, believe not thou this fellow; for he is not a Christian, 
but seeks occasion of death, having made away with a quantity of my money, as I shall prove." The Jews, 
however, supposing that this was a stratagem, as if Carpophorus were seeking under this pretext to liberate 
Callistus, with the greater enmity clamoured against him in presence of the prefect. Fuscianus, however, was 
swayed by these Jews, and having scourged Callistus, he gave him to be sent to a mine in Sardinia. (5) 
But after a time, there being in that place other martyrs, Marcia, a concubine of Commodus, who was a 
God-loving female, and desirous of performing some good work, invited into her presence(1) the blessed 
Victor, who was at that time a bishop of the Church, (2) and inquired of him what martyrs were in Sardinia. And 
he delivered to her the names of all, but did not give the name of Callistus, knowing the villanous acts he 
had ventured upon. Marcia, (3) obtaining her request from Commodus, hands the letter of emancipation to 
Hyacinthus, a certain eunuch, (4) rather advanced in life. And he, on receiving it, sailed away into Sardinia, 
and having delivered the letter to the person who at that time was governor of the territory, he succeeded in 
having the martyrs released, with the exception of Callistus. gut Callistus himself, dropping on his knees, and 
weeping, entreated that he likewise might obtain a release. Hyacinthus, therefore, overcome by the 
captive's importunity, requests the governor to grant a release, alleging that permission had been given to 
himself from Marcia s (to liberate Callistus), and that he would make arrangements that there should be no 
risk in this to him. Now (the governor) was persuaded, and liberated Callistus also. And when the latter 
arrived at Rome, Victor was very much grieved at what had taken place; but since he was a compassionate 
man, he took no action in the matter. Guarding, however, against the reproach (uttered) by many,-forthe 
attempts made by this Callistus were not distant occurrences,-and because Carpophorus also still 
continued adverse, Victor sends Callistus to take up his abode in Antium, having settled on him a certain 
monthly allowance for food. And after Victor's death, Zephyrinus, having had Callistus as a fellow-worker in 
the management of his clergy, paid him respect to his own damage; and transferring this person from 
Antium, appointed him over the cemetery. (6) 

And Callistus, who was in the habit of always associating with Zephyrinus, and, as I have previously stated, 
of paying him hypocritical service, disclosed, by force contrast, Zephyrinus to be a person able neither to 
form a judgment of things said, nor discerning the design of Callistus, who was accustomed to converse with 
Zephyrinus on topics which yielded satisfaction to the latter. Thus, after the death of Zephyrinus, supposing 
that he had obtained (the position) after which he so eagerly pursued, he excommunicated Sabellius, as not 
entertaining orthodox opinions. He acted thus from apprehension of me, and imagining that he could in this 
manner obliterate the charge against him among the churches, as if he did not entertain strange opinions. (7) 
He was then an impostor and knave, and in process of time hurried away many with him. And having even 
venom imbedded in his heart, and forming no correct opinion on any subject, (8) and yet withal being 
ashamed to speak the truth, this Callistus, not only on account of his publicly saying in the way of reproach to 
us, "Ye are Ditheists," but also on account of his being frequently accused by Sabellius, as one that had 
transgressed his first faith, devised some such heresy as the following. Callistus alleges that the Logos 
Himself is Son, and that Himself is Father; and that though denominated by a different title, yet that in reality 
He is one indivisible spirit. And he maintains that the Father is not one person and the Son another, but that 
they are one and the same; and that all things are full of the Divine Spirit, both those above and those below. 
And he affirms that the Spirit, which became incarnate in the virgin, is not different from the Father, but one 
and the same. And he adds, that this is what has been declared by the Saviour: "Believest thou not that I am 
in the Father, and the Father in me?"(9) For that which is seen, which is man, he considers to be the Son; 
whereas the Spirit, which was contained in the Son, to be the Father. "For," says (Callistus), "I will not profess 
belief in two Gods, Father and Son, but in one. For the Father, who subsisted in the Son Himself, after He 
had taken unto Himself our flesh, raised it to the nature of Deity, by bringing it into union with Himself, and 
made it one; so that Father and Son must be styled one God, and that this Person being one, cannot be 
two." And in this way Callistus contends that the Father suffered along with the Son; for he does not wish to 
assert that the Father suffered, and is one Person, being careful to avoid blasphemy against the Father. 
(How careful he is!) senseless and knavish fellow, who improvises blasphemies in every direction, only that 
he may not seem to speak in violation of the truth, and is not abashed at being at one time betrayed into the 
tenet of Sabellius, whereas at another into the doctrine of Theodotus. 

The impostor Callistus, having ventured on such opinions, established a school of theology in antagonism 
to the Church, adopting the foregoing system of instruction. And he first invented the device of conniving with 
men in regard of their indulgence in sensual pleasures, saying that all had their sins forgiven by himself.(1) 
For he who is in the habit of attending the congregation of any one else, and is called a Christian, should he 
commit any transgression; the sin, they say, is not reckoned unto him, provided only he hurries off and 
attaches himself to the school of Callistus. And many persons were gratified with his regulation, as being 
stricken in conscience, and at the same time having been rejected by numerous sects; while also some of 
them, in accordance with our condemnatory sentence, had been by us forcibly ejected from the Church. (2) 
Now such disciples as these passed over to these followers of Callistus, and served to crowd his school. 

This one propounded the opinion, that, if a bishop was guilty of any sin, if even a sin unto death, (3) he ought 
not to be deposed. About the time of this man, bishops, priests, and deacons, who had been twice married, 
and thrice married, began to be allowed to retain their place among the clergy. If also, however, any one 
who is in holy orders should become married, Callistus permitted such a one to continue in holy orders as if 
he had not sinned. (4) And in justification, he alleges that what has been spoken by the Apostle has been 
declared in reference to this person: "Who art thou that judgest another man's servant?"(5) But he asserted 
that likewise the parable of the tares is uttered in reference to this one: "Let the tares grow along with the 
wheat;"(6) or, in other words, let those who in the Church are guilty of sin remain in it. But also he affirmed that 
the ark of Noe was made for a symbol of the Church, in which were both dogs, and wolves, and ravens, and 
all things clean and unclean; and so he alleges that the case should stand in like manner with the Church. 
And as many parts of Scripture bearing on this view of the subject as he could collect, be so interpreted. 
And the hearers of Callistus being delighted with his tenets, continue with him, thus mocking both themselves 
as well as many others, and crowds of these dupes stream together into his school. Wherefore also his 
pupils are multiplied, and they plume themselves upon the crowds (attending the school) for the sake of 
pleasures which Christ did not permit. But in contempt of Him, they place restraint on the commission of no 
sin, alleging that they pardon those who acquiesce (in Callistus' opinions). For even also he permitted 
females, if they were unwedded,(7) and burned with passion at an age at all events unbecoming, or if they 
were not disposed to overturn their own dignity through a legal marriage, that they might have whomsoever 
they would choose as a bedfellow, whether a slave or free, and that a woman, though not legally married, 
might consider such a companion as a husband. Whence women, reputed believers, began to resort to 
drugs(8) for producing sterility, and to gird themselves round, so to expel what was being conceived on 
account of their not wishing to have a child either by a slave or by any paltry fellow, for the sake of their 
family and excessive wealth. (9) Behold, into how great impiety that lawless one has proceeded, by 
inculcating adultery and murder at the same time! And withal, after such audacious acts, they, lost to all 
shame, attempt to call themselves a Catholic Church !(10) And some, under the supposition that they will 
attain prosperity, concur with them. During the episcopate of this one, second baptism was for the first time 
presumptuously attempted by them. These, then, (are the practices and opinions which) that most 
astonishing Callistus established, whose school continues, preserving its customs and tradition, not 
discerning with whom they ought to communicate, but indiscriminately offering communion to all. And from 
him they have derived the denomination of their men; so that, on account of Callistus being a foremost 
champion of such practices, they should be called Callistians.(11) 

CHAP. VIII. -SECT OF THE ELCHASAITES; HIPPOLYTUS' OPPOSITION TO IT. 

The doctrine of this Callistus having been noised abroad throughout the entire world, a cunning man, and full 
of desperation, one called Alcibiades, dwelling in Apamea, a city of Syria, examined carefully into this 
business. And considering himself a more formidable character, and more ingenious in such tricks, than 
Callistus, he repaired to Rome; and he brought some book, alleging that a certain just man, Elchasai,(12) 
had received this from Serae, a town of Parthia, and that he gave it to one called Sobiai. And the contents of 
this volume, he alleged, had been revealed by an angel whose height was 24 schoenoi, which make 96 
miles, and whose breadth is 4 schoenoi, and from shoulder to shoulder 6 schoenoi; and the tracks of his feet 
extend to the length of three and a half schoenoi, which are equal to fourteen miles, while the breadth is one 
schoenos and a half, and the height half a schoenos. And he alleges that also there is a female with him, 
whose measurement, he says, is according to the standards already mentioned. And he asserts that the 
male (angel) is Son of God, but that the female is called Holy Spirit. By detailing these prodigies he 
imagines that he confounds fools, while at the same time he utters the following sentence: "that there was 
preached unto men a new remission of sins in the third year of Trajan's reign." And Elchasai determines the 
nature of baptism, and even this I shall explain. He alleges, as to those who have been involved in every 
description of lasciviousness, and filthiness, and in acts of wickedness, if only any of them be a believer, 
that he determines that such a one, on being converted, and obeying the book, and believing its contents, 
should by baptism receive remission of sins. 

Elchasai, however, ventured to continue these knaveries, taking occasion from the aforesaid tenet of which 
Callistus stood forward as a champion. For, perceiving that many were delighted at this sort of promise, he 
considered that he could opportunely make the attempt just alluded to. And notwithstanding we offered 
resistance to this, and did not permit many for any length of time to become victims of the delusion. (1) For 
we carried conviction to the people, when we affirmed that this was the operation of a spurious spirit, and the 
invention of a heart inflated with pride, and that this one like a wolf had risen up against many wandering 
sheep, which Callistus, by his arts of deception, had scattered abroad. But since we have commenced, we 
shall not be silent as regards the opinions of this man. And, in the first place, we shall expose his life, and we 
shall prove that his supposed discipline is a mere pretence. And next, I shall adduce the principal heads of 

his assertions, in order tiiat tiie reader, lool<ing fixedly on tiie treatises oftiiis (Elciiasai), may be made 
aware wiiat and wiiat sort is tiie iieresy wiiicii lias been audaciously attempted by this man. 

CHAP. IX.-ELCHASAI DERIVED HIS SYSTEM FROM PYTHAGORAS; PRACTISED 
INCANTATIONS. 

This Elchasai puts forward as a decoy a polity (authorized in the) Law, alleging that believers ought to be 
circumcised and live according to the Law, (while at the same time) he forcibly rends certain fragments from 
the aforesaid heresies. And he asserts that Christ was born a man in the same way as common to all, and 
that Christ was not for the first time an earth when born of a virgin, but that both previously and that frequently 
again He had been born and would be born. Christ would thus appear and exist among us from time to time, 
undergoing alterations of birth, and having his soul transferred from body to body. Now Elchasai adopted 
that tenet of pythagoras to which I have already alluded. But the Elchasaites have reached such an altitude 
of pride, that even they affirm themselves to be endued with a power of foretelling futurity, using as a 
starting-point, obviously, the measures and numbers of the aforesaid Pythagorean art. These also devote 
themselves to the tenets of mathematicians, and astrologers, and magicians, as if they were true. And they 
resort to these, so as to confuse silly people, thus led to suppose that the heretics participate in a doctrine of 
power. And they teach certain incantations and formularies for those who have been bitten by dogs, and 
possessed of demons, and seized with other diseases; and we shall not be silent respecting even such 
practices of these heretics. Having then sufficiently explained their principles, and the causes of their 
presumptuous attempts, I shall pass on to give an account of their writings, through which my readers will 
become acquainted with both the trifling and godless efforts of these Elchasaites. 

CHAP. X.-ELCHASAI'S MODE OF ADMINISTERING BAPTISM; FORMULARIES. 

To those, then, that have been orally instructed by him, he dispenses baptism in this manner, addressing to 
his dupes some such words as the following: "If, therefore, (my) children, (2) one shall have intercourse with 
any sort of animal whatsoever, or a male, or a sister, or a daughter, or hath committed adultery, or been 
guilty of fornication, and is desirous of obtaining remission of sins, from the moment that he hearkens to this 
book let him be baptized a second time in the name of the Great and Most High God, and in the name of His 
Son, the Mighty King. And by baptism let him be purified and cleansed, and let him adjure for himself those 
seven witnesses that have been described in this book-the heaven, and the water, and the holy spirits, and 
the angels of prayer,(3) and the oil, and the salt, and the earth." These constitute the astonishing mysteries 
of Elchasai, those ineffable and potent secrets which he delivers to deserving disciples. And with these that 
lawless one is not satisfied, but in the presence of two and three witnesses he puts the seal to his own 
wicked practices. Again expressing himself thus: "Again I say, O adulterers and adulteresses, and false 
prophets, if you are desirous of being converted, that your sins may be forgiven you, as soon as ever you 
hearken unto this book, and be baptized a second time along with your garments, shall peace be yours, 
and your portion with the just." But since we have stated that these resort to incantations for those bitten by 
dogs and for other mishaps, we shall explain these. Now Elchasai uses the following formulary: "If a dog 
rabid and furious, in which inheres a spirit of destruction, bite any man, or woman, or youth, or girt, or may 
worry or touch them, in the same hour let such a one run with all their wearing apparel, and go down to a river 
or to a fountain wherever there is a deep spot. Let (him or her) be dipped with all their wearing apparel, and 
offer supplication to the Great and Most High God in faith of heart, and then let him thus adjure the seven 
witnesses described in this book: 'Behold, I call to witness the heaven and the water, and the holy spirits, 
and the angels of prayer, and the oil, and the salt, and the earth. I testify by these seven witnesses that no 
more shall I sin, nor commit adultery, nor steal, nor be guilty of injustice, nor be covetous, nor be actuated by 
hatred, nor be scornful, nor shall I take pleasure in any wicked deeds.' Having uttered, therefore, these 
words, let such a one be baptized with the entire of his wearing apparel in the name of the Mighty and Most 
High God." 

CHAP. XI. --PRECEPTS OF ELCHASAI. 

But in very many other respects he talks folly, inculcating the use of these sentences also for those afflicted 
with consumption, and that they should be dipped in cold water forty times during seven days i and he 
prescribes similar treatment for those possessed of devils. Oh inimitable wisdom and incantations gorged 
with powers!(1) Who will not be astonished at such and such force of words? But since we have stated that 
they also bring into requisition astrological deceit, we shall prove this from their own formularies; for 
Elchasai speaks thus: "There exist wicked stars of impiety. This declaration has been now made by us, O 
ye pious ones and disciples: beware of the power of the days of the sovereignty of these stars, and engage 

not in the commencement of any undertaking during tiie ruling days oftiiese. And baptize not man or woman 
during tiie days of tiie power oftiiese stars, wlien tlie moon, (emerging) from among tliem, courses tlie sl<y, 
and travels along with them. Beware of the very day up to that on which the moan passes out from these 
stars, and then baptize and enter on every beginning of your works. But, moreover, honour the day of the 
Sabbath, since that day is one of those during which prevails (the power) of these stars. Take care, 
however, not to commence your works the third day from a Sabbath, since when three years of the reign of 
the emperor Trojan are again completed from the time that he subjected the Parthians to his own 
sway,-when, I say, three years have been completed, war rages between the impious angels of the 
northern constellations; and on this account all kingdoms of impiety are in a state of confusion." 

CHAP. XII. -THE HERESY OF THE ELCHASAITES A DERIVATIVE ONE. 

Inasmuch as (Elchasai) considers, then, that it would be an insult to reason that these mighty and ineffable 
mysteries should be trampled under foot, or that they should be committed to many, he advises that as 
valuable pearls(2) they should be preserved, expressing himself thus: "Do not recite this account to all men, 
and guard carefully these precepts, because all men are not faithful, nor are all women straightforward." 
Books containing these (tenets), however, neither the wise men of the Egyptians secreted in shrines, nor did 
Pythagoras, a sage of the Greeks, conceal them there. For if at that time Elchasai had happened to live, 
what necessity would there be that Pythagoras, orThales, or Solon, or the wise Plato, or even the rest of the 
sages of the Greeks, should become disciples of the Egyptian priests, when they could obtain possession 
of such and such wisdom from Alcibiades, as the most astonishing interpreter of that wretched Elchasai? 
The statements, therefore, that have been made for the purpose of attaining a knowledge of the madness of 
these, would seem sufficient for those endued with sound mind. And so it is, that it has not appeared 
expedient to quote more of their formularies, seeing that these are very numerous and ridiculous. Since, 
however, we have not omitted those practices that have risen up in our own day, and have not been silent 
as regards those prevalent before our time, it seems proper, in order that we may pass through all their 
systems, and leave nothing untold, to state what also are the (customs) of the Jews, and what are the 
diversities of opinion among them, for I imagine that these as yet remain behind for our consideration. Now, 
when I have broken silence on these points, I shall pass on to the demonstration of the Doctrine of the Truth, 
in order that, after the lengthened argumentative straggle against all heresies, we, devoutly pressing 
forward towards the kingdom's crown, and believing the truth, may not be unsettled. 

CHAP. XIII. -THE JEWISH SECTS. 

Originally there prevailed but one usage(1) among the Jews; for one teacher was given unto them by God, 
namely Moses, and one law by this same Moses. And there was one desert region and one Mount Sinai, for 
one God it was who legislated for these Jews. But, again, after they had crossed the river Jordan, and had 
inherited by lot the conquered country, they in various ways rent in sunder the law of God, each devising a 
different interpretation of the declarations made by God. And in this way they raised up for themselves 
teachers, (and) invented doctrines of an heretical nature, and they continued to advance into (sectarian) 
divisions. Now it is the diversity of these Jews that I at present propose to explain. But though for even a 
considerable time they have been rent into very numerous sects, yet I intend to elucidate the more principal 
of them, while those who are of a studious turn will easily become acquainted with the rest. For there is a 
division amongst them into three sorts;(2) and the adherents of the first are the Pharisees, but of the second 
the Sadducees, while the rest are Essenes. These practise a more devotional life, being filled with mutual 
love, and being temperate. And they turn away from every act of inordinate desire, being averse even to 
hearing of things of the sort. And they renounce matrimony, but they take the boys of others, and thus have 
an offspring begotten for them. And they lead these adopted children into an observance of their own 
peculiar customs, and in this way bring them up and impel them to learn the sciences. They do not, 
however, forbid them to marry, though themselves refraining from matrimony. Women, however, even 
though they may be disposed to adhere to the same course of life, (3) they do not admit, inasmuch as in no 
way whatsoever have they confidence in women. 

CHAP. XIV.-THE TENETS OF THE ESSENI. 

And they despise wealth, and do not turn away from sharing their goods with those that are destitute. No one 
amongst them, however, enjoys a greater amount of riches than another. For a regulation with them is, that 
an individual coming forward to join the sect must sell his possessions, and present the price of them to the 
community. And on receiving the money, the head of the order distributes it to all according to their 
necessities. Thus there is no one among them in distress. And they do not use oil, regarding it as a 

defilement to be anointed. And tiiere are appointed overseers, wiio tal<e care of all things that belong to 
them in common, and they all appear always in white clothing. 

CHAP. XV. -THE TENETS OF THE ESSEN! CONTINUED. 

But there is not one city of them, but many of them settle in every city. And if any of the adherents of the sect 
may be present from a strange place, they consider that all things are in common for him, and those whom 
they had not previously known they receive as if they belonged to their own household and kindred. And 
they traverse their native land, and on each occasion that they go on a journey they carry nothing except 
arms. And they have also in their cities a president, who expends the moneys collected for this purpose in 
procuring clothing and food for them. And their robe and its shape are modest. And they do not own two 
cloaks, or a double set of shoes; and when those that are in present use become antiquated, then they 
adopt others. And they neither buy nor sell anything at all; but whatever any one has he gives to him that has 
not, and that which one has not he receives. 

CHAP. XVI. -THE TENETS OF THE ESSENI CONTINUED. 

And they continue in an orderly manner, and with perseverance pray from early dawn, and they do not 
speak a word unless they have praised God in a hymn. And in this way they each go forth and engage in 
whatever employment they please; and after having worked up to the fifth hour they leave off. Then again 
they come together into one place, and encircle themselves with linen girdles, for the purpose of concealing 
their private parts. And in this manner they perform ablutions in cold water; and after being thus cleansed, 
they repair together into one apartment,-now no one who entertains a different opinion from themselves 
assembles in the house, -and they proceed to partake of breakfast. And when they have taken their seats in 
silence, they set down loaves in order, and next some one sort of food to eat along with the bread, and each 
receives from these a sufficient portion. No one, however, tastes these before the priest utters a blessing, (1) 
and prays over the food. And after breakfast, when he has a second time offered up supplication, as at the 
beginning, so at the conclusion of their meal they praise God in hymns. Next, after they have laid aside as 
sacred the garments in which they have been clothed while together taking their repast within the 
house-(now these garments are linen)-and having resumed the clothes which they had left in the vestibule, 
they hasten to agreeable occupations until evening. And they partake of supper, doing oil things in like 
manner to those already mentioned. And no one will at any time cry aloud, nor will any other tumultuous 
voice be heard. But they each converse quietly, and with decorum one concedes the conversation to the 
other, so that the stillness of those within the house appears a sort of mystery to those outside. And they are 
invariably sober, eating and drinking all things by measure. 

CHAP. XVII. -THE TENETS OF THE ESSENI CONTINUED. 

All then pay attention to the president; and whatever injunctions he will issue, they obey as law. For they are 
anxious that mercy and assistance be extended to those that are burdened with toil. And especially they 
abstain from wrath and anger, and all such passions, inasmuch as they consider these to be treacherous to 
man. And no one amongst them is in the habit of swearing; but whatever any one says, this is regarded 
more binding than an oath. If, however, one will swear, he is condemned as one unworthy of credence. They 
are likewise solicitous about the readings of the law and prophets; and moreover also, if there is any 
treatise of the faithful, about that likewise. And they evince the utmost curiosity concerning plants and stones, 
rather busying themselves as regards the operative powers of these, saying that these things were not 
created in vain. 

CHAP. XVIII. -THE TENETS OF THE ESSENI CONTINUED. 

But to those who wish to become disciples of the sect, they do not immediately deliver their rules, unless 
they have previously tried them. Now for the space of a year they set before (the candidates) the same 
food, while the latter continue to live in a different house outside the Essenes' own place of meeting. And 
they give (to the probationists) a hatchet and the linen girdle, and a white robe. When, at the expiration of this 
period, one affords proof of self-control, he approaches nearer to the sect's method of living, and he is 
washed more purely than before. Not as yet, however, does he partake of food along with the Essenes. For, 
after having furnished evidence as to whether he is able to acquire self-control,-but for two years the habit of 
a person of this description is on trial, -and when he has appeared deserving, he is thus reckoned amongst 
the members of the sect. Previous, however, to his being allowed to partake of a repast along with them, he 
is bound under fearful oaths. First, that he will worship the Divinity; next, that he will observe just dealings with 

men, and that he will in no way injure any one, and that he will not hate a person who injures him, or is hostile 
to him, but pray for them. He likewise swears that he will always aid the just, and keep faith with all, 
especially those who are rulers. For, they argue, a position of authority does not happen to any one without 
God. And if the Essene himself be a ruler, he swears that he will not conduct himself at any time arrogantly in 
the exercise of power, nor be prodigal, nor resort to any adornment, or a greater state of magnificence than 
the usage permits. He likewise swears, however, to be a lover of truth, and to reprove him that is guilty of 
falsehood, neither to steal, nor pollute his conscience for the sake of iniquitous gain, nor conceal aught from 
those that are members of his sect, and to divulge nothing to others, though one should be tortured even 
unto death. And in addition to the foregoing promises, he swears to impart to no one a knowledge of the 
doctrines in a different manner from that in which he has received them himself. 

CHAP. XIX. -THE TENETS OF THE ESSENI CONTINUED. 

With oaths, then, of this description, they bind those who come forward. If, however, any one may be 
condemned for any sin, he is expelled from the order; but one that has been thus excommunicated 
sometimes perishes by an awful death. For, inasmuch as he is bound by the oaths and rites of the sect, he 
is not able to partake of the food in use among other people. Those that are excommunicated, 
occasionally, therefore, utterly destroy the body through starvation. And so it is, that when it comes to the last 
the Essenes sometimes pity many of them who are at the point of dissolution, inasmuch as they deem a 
punishment even unto death, thus inflicted upon these culprits, a sufficient penalty. 

CHAP. XX.--THE TENETS OF THE ESSENI CONCLUDED. 

But as regards judicial decisions, the Essenes are most accurate and impartial. And they deliver their 
judgments when they have assembled together, numbering at the very least one hundred; and the sentence 
delivered by them is irreversible. And they honour the legislator next after God; and if any one is guilty of 
blasphemy against this framer of laws, he is punished. And they are taught to yield obedience to rulers and 
elders; and if ten occupy seats in the same room, one of them will not speak unless it will appear expedient 
to the nine. And they are careful not to spit out into the midst of persons present, and to the right hand. They 
are more solicitous, however, about abstaining from work on the Sabbath-day than all other Jews. For not 
only do they prepare their victuals for themselves one day previously, so as not (on the Sabbath) to kindle a 
fire, but not even would they move a utensil from one place to another (on that day), nor ease nature; nay, 
some would not even rise from a couch. On other days, however, when they wish to relieve nature, they dig 
a hole a foot long with the mattock,-for of this description is the hatchet, which the president in the first 
instance gives those who come forward to gain admission as disciples, -and cover (this cavity) on all sides 
with their garment, alleging that they do not necessarily(l) insult the sunbeams. They then replace the 
upturned soil into the pit; and this is their practice, (2) choosing the more lonely spots. But after they have 
performed this operation, immediately they undergo ablution, as if the excrement pollutes them. 

CHAP. XXI. -DIFFERENT SECTS OF THE ESSENI. 

The Essenes have, however, in the lapse of time, undergone divisions, and they do not preserve their 
system of training after a similar manner, inasmuch as they have been split up into four parties. For some of 
them discipline themselves above the requisite rules of the order, so that even they would not handle a 
current coin of the country, saying that they ought not either to carry, or behold, or fashion an image:(3) 
wherefore no one of those goes into a city, lest (by so doing) he should enter through a gate at which statues 
are erected, regarding it a violation of law to pass beneath images. But the adherents of another party, if 
they happen to hear any one maintaining a discussion concerning God and His laws-supposing such to be 
an uncircumcised person, they will closely watch him and when they meet a person of this description in any 
place alone, they will threaten to slay him if he refuses to undergo the rite of circumcision. Now, if the latter 
does not wish to comply with this request, an Essene spares not, but even slaughters. And it is from this 
occurrence that they have received their appellation, being denominated (by some) Zelotae, but by others 
Sicarii. And the adherents of another party call no one Lord except the Deity, even though one should put 
them to the torture, or even kill them. But there are others of a later period, who have to such an extent 
declined from the discipline (of the order), that, as far as those are concerned who continue in the primitive 
customs, they would not even touch these. And if they happen to come in contact with them, they 
immediately resort to ablution, as if they had touched one belonging to an alien tribe. But here also there are 
very many of them of so great longevity, as even to live longer than a hundred years. They assert, therefore, 
that a cause of this arises from their extreme devotion to religion, and their condemnation of all excess in 
regard of what is served up (as food), and from their being temperate and incapable of anger. And so it is 

that they despise death, rejoicing when they can finish their course with a good conscience. If, however, any 
one would even put to the torture persons of this description, in order to induce any amongst them either to 
speak evil of the law, or eat what is offered in sacrifice to an idol, he will not effect his purpose; for one of this 
party submits to death and endures torment rather than violate his conscience. 

CHAP. XXII. -BELIEF OF THE ESSENI IN THE RESURRECTION"; THEIR SYSTEM A 
SUGGESTIVE ONE. 

Now the doctrine of the resurrection has also derived support among these; for they acknowledge both that 
the flesh will rise again, and that it will be immortal, in the same manner as the soul is already imperishable. 
And they maintain that the soul, when separated in the present life, (departs) into one place, which is well 
ventilated and lightsome, where, they say, it rests until judgment. And this locality the Greeks were 
acquainted with by hearsay, and called it "Isles of the Blessed." And there are other tenets of these which 
many of the Greeks have appropriated, and thus have from time to time formed their own opinions. (4) For 
the disciplinary system in regard of the Divinity, according to these (Jewish sects), is of greater antiquity than 
that of all nations. And so it is that the proof is at hand, that all those (Greeks) who ventured to make 
assertions concerning God, or concerning the creation of existing things, derived their principles from no 
other source than from Jewish legislation. And among these may be particularized Pythagoras especially, 
and the Stoics, who derived (their systems) while resident among the Egyptians, by having become 
disciples of these Jews.(1) Now they affirm that there will be both a judgment and a conflagration of the 
universe, and that the wicked will be eternally punished. And among them is cultivated the practice of 
prophecy, and the prediction of future events. 

CHAP. XXIII. -ANOTHER SECT OF THE ESSENI: THE PHARISEES. 

There is then another order of the Essenes who use the same customs and prescribed method of living with 
the foregoing sects, but make an alteration from these in one respect, viz., marriage. Now they maintain that 
those who have abrogated matrimony commit some terrible offence, which is for the destruction of life, and 
that they ought not to cut off the succession of children; far, that if all entertained this opinion, the entire race of 
men would easily be exterminated. However, they make a trial of their betrothed women for a period of three 
years; and when they have been three times purified, with a view of proving their ability of bringing forth 
children, so then they wed. They do not, however, cohabit with pregnant women, evincing that they marry not 
from sensual motives, but from the advantage of children. And the women likewise undergo ablution in a 
similar manner (with their husbands), and are themselves also arrayed in a linen garment, after the mode in 
which the men are with their girdles. These things, then, are the statements which I have to make respecting 
the Esseni. 

But there are also others who themselves practise the Jewish customs; and these, both in respect of caste 
and in respect of the laws, are called Pharisees. Now the greatest part of these is to be found in every 
locality, inasmuch as, though all are styled Jews, yet, on account of the peculiarity of the opinions advanced 
by them, they have been denominated by titles proper to each. These, then, firmly hold the ancient tradition, 
and continue to pursue in a disputative spirit a close investigation into the things regarded according to the 
Law as clean and not clean. And they interpret the regulations of the Law, and put forward teachers, whom 
they qualify for giving instruction in such things. These Pharisees affirm the existence of fate, and that some 
things are in our power, whereas others are under the control of destiny. In this way they maintain that some 
actions depend upon ourselves, whereas others upon fate. But (they assert) that God is a cause of all 
things, and that nothing is managed or happens without His will. These likewise acknowledge that there is a 
resurrection of flesh, and that soul is immortal, and that there will be a judgment and conflagration, and that 
the righteous will be imperishable, but that the wicked will endure everlasting punishment in unqenchable 
fire. 

CHAP. XXIV.-THE SADDUCEES. 

These, then, are the opinions even of the Pharisees. The Sadducees, however, are for abolishing fate, and 
they acknowledge that God does nothing that is wicked, nor exercises providence over (earthly concerns); 
but they contend that the choice between good and evil lies within the power of men. And they deny that 
there is a resurrection not only of flesh, but also they suppose that the soul does not continue after death. 
The soul they consider nothing but mere vitality, and that it is on account of this that man has been created. 
However, (they maintain) that the notion of the resurrection has been fully realized by the single 
circumstance, that we close our days after having left children upon earth. But (they still insist) that after death 
one expects to suffer nothing, either bad or good; for that there will be a dissolution both of soul and body. 

and that man passes into non-existence, similarly also with the material of the animal creation. But as 
regards whatever wickedness a man may have committed in life, provided he may have been reconciled 
to the injured party, he has been a gainer (by transgression), inasmuch as he has escaped the punishment 
(that otherwise would have been inflicted) by men. And whatever acquisitions a man may have made, and 
(in whatever respect), by becoming wealthy, he may have acquired distinction, he has so far been a gainer. 
But (they abide by their assertion), that God has no solicitude about the concerns of an individual here. And 
while the Pharisees are full of mutual affection, the Sadducees, on the other hand, are actuated by self-love. 
This sect had its stronghold especially in the region around Samaria. And these also adhere to the customs 
of the law, saying that one ought so to live, that he may conduct himself virtuously, and leave children behind 
him on earth. They do not, however, devote attention to prophets, but neither do they to any other sages, 
except to the law of Moses only, in regard of which, however, they frame no interpretations. These, then, are 
the opinions which also the Sadducees choose to teach. 

CHAP. XXV.--THE JEWISH RELIGION. 

Since, therefore, we have explained even the diversities among the Jews, it seems expedient likewise not 
to pass over in silence the system of their religion. The doctrine, therefore, among all Jews on the subject of 
religion is fourfold-theological, natural, moral, and ceremonial. And they affirm that there is one God, and that 
He is Creator and Lord of the universe: that He has formed all these glorious works which had no previous 
existence; and this, too, not out of any coeval substance that lay ready at hand, but His Will-the efficient 
cause-was to create, and He did create. And (they maintain) that there are angels, and that these have 
been brought into being for ministering unto the creation; but also that there is a sovereign Spirit that always 
continues beside God, for glory and praise. And that all things in the creation are endued with sensation, 
and that there is nothing inanimate. And they earnestly aim at serious habits and a temperate life, as one 
may ascertain from their laws. Now these matters have long ago been strictly defined by those who in 
ancient times have received the divinely-appointed law;(1) so that the reader will find himself astonished at 
the amount of temperance, and of diligence, lavished on customs legally enacted in reference to man. The 
ceremonial service, however, which has been adapted to divine worship in a manner befitting the dignity of 
religion, has been practised amongst them with the highest degree of elaboration. The superiority of their 
ritualism it is easy for those who wish it to ascertain, provided they read the book which furnishes information 
on these points. They will thus perceive how that with solemnity and sanctity the Jewish priests offer unto 
God the first-fruits of the gifts bestowed by Him for the rise and enjoyment of men; how they fulfil their 
ministrations with regularity and stedfastness, in obedience to His commandments. There are, however, 
some (liturgical usages adopted) by these, which the Sadducees refuse to recognise, for they are not 
disposed to acquiesce in the existence of angels or spirits. 

Still all parties alike expect Messiah, inasmuch as the Law certainly, and the prophets, preached 
beforehand that He was about to be present on earth. Inasmuch, however, as the Jews were not cognizant 
of the period of His advent, there remains the supposition that the declarations (of Scripture) concerning His 
coming have not been fulfilled. And so it is, that up to this day they continue in anticipation of the future 
coming of the Christ,-from the fact of their not discerning Him when He was present in the world. And (yet 
there can be little doubt but) that, on beholding the signs of the times of His having been already amongst 
us, the Jews are troubled; and that they are ashamed to confess that He has come, since they have with 
their own hands put Him to death, because they were stung with indignation in being convicted by Himself of 
not having obeyed the laws. And they affirm that He who was thus sent forth by God is not this Christ (whom 
they are looking for); but they confess that another Messiah will come, who as yet has no existence; and that 
he will usher in some of the signs which the law and the prophets have shown beforehand, whereas, 
regarding the rest (of these indications), they suppose that they have fallen into error. For they say that his 
generation will be from the stock of David, but not from a virgin and the Holy Spirit, but from a woman and a 
man, according as it is a rule for all to be procreated from seed. And they allege that this Messiah will be 
King overthem,-a warlike and powerful individual, who, after having gathered together the entire people of 
the Jews, and having done battle with all the nations, will restore for them Jerusalem the royal city. And into 
this city He will collect together the entire Hebrew race, and bring it back once more into the ancient 
customs, that it may fulfil the regal and sacerdotal functions, and dwell in confidence for periods of time of 
sufficient duration. After this repose, it is their opinion that war would next be waged against them after being 
thus congregated; that in this conflict Christ would fall by the edge of the sword; and that, after no long flme, 
would next succeed the terminaflon and conflagraflon of the universe; and that in this way their opinions 
concerning the resurrection would receive completion, and a recompense be rendered to each man 
according to his works. 

CHAP. XXVI. -CONCLUSION TO THE WORK EXPLAINED. 

It now seems to us that the tenets of both all the Greeks and barbarians have been sufficiently explained by 
us, and that nothing has remained unrefuted either of the points about which philosophy has been busied, or 
of the allegations advanced by the heretics. And from these very explanations the condemnation of the 
heretics is obvious, for having either purloined their doctrines, or derived contributions to them from some of 
those tenets elaborately worked out by the Greeks, and for having advanced (these opinions) as if they 
originated from God. Since, therefore, we have hurriedly passed through all the systems of these, and with 
much labour have, in the nine books, proclaimed all their opinions, and have left behind us for all men a 
small viaticum in life, and to those who are our contemporaries have afforded a desire of learning (with) 
great joy and delight, we have considered it reasonable, as a crowning stroke to the entire work, to 
introduce the discourse (already mentioned) concerning the truth, and to furnish our delineation of this in one 
book, namely the tenth. Our object is, that the reader, not only when made acquainted with the overthrow of 
those who have presumed to establish heresies, may regard with scorn their idle fancies, but also, when 
brought to know the power of the truth, may be placed in the way of salvation, by reposing that faith in God 
which He so worthily deserves. 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 
BOOKX. 

CONTENTS 

THE following are the contents of the tenth book of the Refutation of all Heresies:- 

An Epitome of all Philosophers. 

An Epitome of all Heresies. 

And, in conclusion to all, what the Doctrine of the Truth is. 

CHAP. I. --RECAPITULATION. 

After we have, not with violence, burst through the labyrinth(l) of heresies, but have unravelled (their 
intricacies) through a refutation merely, or, in other words, by the force of truth, we approach the 
demonstration of the truth itself. For then the artificial sophisms of error will be exposed in all their 
inconsistency, when we shall succeed in establishing whence it is that the definition of the truth has been 
derived. The truth has not taken its principles from the wisdom of the Greeks, nor borrowed its doctrines, as 
secret mysteries, from the tenets of the Egyptians, which, albeit silly, are regarded amongst them with 
religious veneration as worthy of reliance. Nor has it been formed out of the fallacies which enunciate the 
incoherent (conclusions arrived at through the) curiosity of the Chaldeans. Nor does the truth owe its 
existence to astonishment, through the operations of demons, for the irrational frenzy of the Babylonians. But 
its definition is constituted after the manner in which every true definition is, viz., as simple and unadorned. A 
definition such as this, provided it is made manifest, will of itself refute error. And although we have very 
frequently propounded demonstrations, and with sufficient fulness elucidated for those willing (to learn) the 
rule of the truth; yet even now, after having discussed all the opinions put forward by the Greeks and 
heretics, we have decided it not to be, at all events, unreasonable to introduce, as a sort of finishing stroke 
to the (nine) books preceding, this demonstration throughout the tenth book. 

CHAP. II. -SUMMARY OF THE OPINIONS OF PHILOSOPHERS. 

Having, therefore, embraced (a consideration of) the tenets of all the wise men among the Greeks in four 
books, and the doctrines propounded by the heresiarchs in five, we shall now exhibit the doctrine 
concerning the truth in one, having first presented in a summary the suppositions entertained severally by 
all. For the dogmatists of the Greeks, dividing philosophy into three parts, in this manner devised from time 
to time their speculative systems;(2) some denominating their system Natural, and others Moral, but others 
Dialectical Philosophy. And the ancient thinkers who called their science Natural Philosophy, were those 
mentioned in book i. And the account which they furnished was after this mode: Some of them derived all 
things from one, whereas others from more things than one. And of those who derived all things from one, 
some derived them from what was devoid of quality, whereas others from what was endued with quality. And 
among those who derived all things from quality, some derived them from fire, and some from air, and some 
from water, and some from earth. And among those who derived the universe from more things than one, 
some derived it from numerable, but others from infinite quantities. And among those who derived all things 
from numerable quantities, some derived them from two, and others from four, and others from five, and 
others from six. And among those who derived the universe from infinite quantities, some derived entities 
from things similar to those generated, whereas others from things dissimilar. And among these some 
derived entities from things incapable of, whereas others from things capable of, passion. From a body 
devoid of quality and endued with unity, the Stoics, then, accounted for the generation of the universe. For, 
according to them, matter devoid of quality, and in all its parts susceptible of change, constitutes an 
originating principle of the universe. For, when an alteration of this ensues, there is generated fire, air, water, 
earth. The followers, however, of Hippasus, and Anaximander, and Thales the Milesian, are disposed to 
think that all things have been generated from one (an entity), endued with quality. Hippasus of Metapontum 
and Heraclitus the Ephesian declared the origin of things to be from fire, whereas Anaximander from air, but 
Thales from water, and Xenophanes from earth. "For from earth," says he, "are all things, and all things 
terminate in the earth."(1) 

CHAP. III. -SUMMARY OF THE OPINIONS OF PHILOSOPHERS CONTINUED. 

But among those who derive all entities from more things than one, and from numerable quantities, the poet 

Homer asserts that the universe consists of two substances, namely earth and water; at one time 

expressing himself thus:- 

"The source of gods was Sea and Mother Earth. "(2) 

And on another occasion thus:- 

"But indeed ye all might become water and earth. "(3) 

And Xenophanes of Colophon seems to coincide with him, for he says:- 

"We all are sprung from water and from earth. "(4) 

Euripides, however, (derives the universe) from earth and air, as one may ascertain from the following 

assertion of his:- 

"Mother of all, air and earth, I sing. "(5) 

But Empedocles derives the universe from four principles, expressing himself thus:- 

"Four roots of all things hear thou first: 

Brilliant Jove, and life-giving Juno and Aidoneus, 

And Nestis, that with tears bedews the Mortal Font. "(6) 

Ocellus, however, the Lucanian, and Aristotle, derive the universe from five principles; for, along with the four 

elements, they have assumed the existence of a fifth, and (that this is) a body with a circular motion; and they 

say that from this, things celestial have their being. But the disciples of Empedocles supposed the 

generation of the universe to have proceeded from six principles. For in the passage where he says, "Four 

roots of all things hear thou first," he produces generation out of four principles. When, however, he 

subjoins,- 

"Ruinous Strife apart from these, equal in every point. 

And with them Friendship equal in length and breadth, "(7)- 

he also delivers six principles of the universe, four of them material-earth, water, fire, and air; but two of them 

formative-Friendship and Discord. The followers, however, of Anaxagoras of Clazomenae, and of 

Democritus, and of Epicurus, and multitudes of others, have given it as their opinion that the generation of 

the universe proceeds from infinite numbers of atoms; and we have previously made partial mention of 

these philosophers. But Anaxagoras derives the universe from things similar to those that are being 

produced; whereas the followers of Democritus and Epicurus derived the universe from things both 

dissimilar (to the entities produced), and devoid of passion, that is, from atoms. But the followers of 

Heraclides of Pontus, and of Asclepiades, derived the universe from things dissimilar (to the entities 

produced), and capable of passion, as if from incongruous corpuscles. But the disciples of Plato affirm that 

these entities are from three principles-God, and Matter, and Exemplar. He divides matter, however, into 

four principles-fire, water, earth, and air. And (he says) that God is the Creator of this (matter), and that Mind 

is its exemplar.(8) 

CHAP. IV. --SUMMARY OF THE OPINIONS OF PHILOSOPHERS CONTINUED. 

Persuaded, then, that the principle of physiology is confessedly discovered to be encumbered with 
difficulties for all these philosophers, we ourselves also shall fearlessly declare concerning the examples of 
the truth, as to how they are, and as we have felt confident that they are. But we shall previously furnish an 
explanation, in the way of epitome, of the tenets of the heresiarchs, in order that, by our having set before our 
readers the tenets of all made well known by this (plan of treatment), we may exhibit the truth in a plain and 
familiar (form). 

CHAP. V. -THE NAASSENI. 

But since it so appears expedient, let us begin first from the public worshippers of the serpent. The 
Naasseni call the first principle of the universe a Man, and that the same also is a Son of Man; and they 
divide this man into three portions. For they say one part of him is rational, and another psychical, but a third 
earthly. And they style him Adamas, and suppose that the knowledge appertaining to him is the originating 
cause of the capacity of knowing God. And the Naassene asserts that all these rational, and psychical, and 
earthly qualities have retired into Jesus, and that through Him these three substances simultaneously have 
spoken unto the three genera of the universe. These allege that there are three kinds of existence-angelic, 
psychical, and earthly; and that there are three churches-angelic, psychical, and earthly; and that the 
names for these are-chosen, called, and captive. These are the heads of doctrine advanced by them, as 
far as one may briefly comprehend them. They affirm that James, the brother of the Lord, delivered these 

tenets to Mariamne, by such a statement belying both. 

CHAP. VI. --THE PERATAE. 

The Peratae, however, viz., Ademes the Carystian, and Euphrates the Peratic, say that there is some one 
world,-this is the denomination they use,-and affirming that it is divided into three parts. But of the threefold 
division, according to them, there is one principle, just like an immense fountain, capable of being by 
reason divided into infinite segments. And the first segment, and the one of more proximity, according to 
them, is the triad, and is called a perfect good, and a paternal magnitude. But the second portion of the triad 
is a certain multitude of, as it were, infinite powers. The third part, however, is formal. And the first is 
unbegotten;(1) whence they expressly affirm that there are three Gods, three Logoi, three minds, (and) three 
men. For when the division has been accomplished, to each part of the world they assign both Gods, and 
Logoi, and men, and the rest. But from above, from uncreatedness and the first segment of the world, when 
afterwards the world had attained to its consummation, the Peratic affirms that there came down, in the times 
of Herod, a certain man with a threefold nature, and a threefold body, and a threefold power, named Christ, 
and that He possesses from the three parts of the world in Himself all the concretions and capacities of the 
world. And they are disposed to think that this is what has been declared, "in whom dwelleth all the fulness of 
the Godhead bodily. "(2) And they assert that from the two worlds situated above-namely, both the 
unbegotten one and self-begotten one-there were borne down into this world in which we are, germs of all 
sorts of powers. And (they say) that Christ came down from above from uncreatedness, in order that, by His 
descent, all things that have been divided into three parts may be saved. For, says the Peratic, the things 
that have been borne down from above will ascend through Him; and the things that have plotted against 
those that have been borne down are heedlessly rejected, (3) and sent away to be punished. And the 
Peratic states that there are two parts which are saved-that is, those that are situated above-by having 
been separated from corruption, and that the third is destroyed, which he calls a formal world. These also 
are the tenets of the Peratae. 

CHAP. VII. -THE SETHIANS. 

But to the Sethians it seems that there exist three principles, which have been precisely defined. And each 
of the principles is fitted by nature for being able to be generated, as in a human soul every art whatsoever 
is developed which is capable of being learned. The result is the same as when a child, by being long 
conversant with a musical instrument, becomes a musician; or with geometry a geometrician, or with any 
other art, with a similar result. And the essences of the principles, the Sethians say, are light and darkness. 
And in the midst of these is pure spirit; and the spirit, they say, is that which is placed intermediate between 
darkness, which is below, and light, which is above. It is not spirit, as a current of wind or a certain gentle 
breeze which may be felt, but just as if some fragrance of ointment or incense made out of a refined 
mixture,-a power diffusing itself by some impulse of fragrance which is inconceivable and superior to what 
one can express. Since, therefore, the light is above and the darkness below, and the spirit is intermediate 
between these, the light, also, as a ray of sun, shines from above on the underlying darkness. And the 
fragrance of the spirit is wafted onwards, occupying an intermediate position, and proceeds forth, just as is 
diffused the odour of incense-offerings (laid) upon the fire. Now the power of the things divided threefold 
being of this description, the power simultaneously of the spirit and of the light is below, in the darkness that 
is situated beneath. The darkness, however, they say, is a horrible water, into which the light along with the 
spirit is absorbed, and thus translated into a nature of this description. The darkness being then endued with 
intelligence, and knowing that when the light has been removed from it the darkness continues desolate, 
devoid of radiance and splendour, power and efficiency, as well as impotent, (therefore,) by every effort of 
reflection and of reason, this makes an exertion to comprise in itself brilliancy, and a scintillation of light, 
along with the fragrance of the spirit. And of this they introduce the following image, expressing themselves 
thus: Just as the pupil of the eye appears dark beneath the underlying humours, but is illuminated by the 
spirit, so the darkness earnestly strives after the spirit, and has with itself all the powers which wish to retire 
and return. Now these are indefinitely infinite, from which, when commingled, all things are figured and 
generated like seals. For just as a seal, when brought into contact with wax, produces a figure, (and yet the 
seal) itself remains of itself what it was, so also the powers, by coming into communion (one with the other), 
form all the infinite kinds of animals. The Sethians assert that, therefore, from the primary concourse of the 
three principles was generated an image of the great seal, namely heaven and earth, having a form like a 
womb, possessing a navel in the midst. And so that the rest of the figures of all things were, like heaven and 
earth, fashioned similar to a womb. 

And the Sethians say that from the water was produced a first-begotten principle, namely a vehement and 
boisterous wind, and that it is a cause of all generation, which creates a sort of heat and motion in the world 

from the motion of the waters. And they maintain that this wind is fashioned lil<e the hissing of a serpent into a 
perfect image. And on this the world gazes and hurries into generation, being inflamed as a womb; and from 
thence they are disposed to think that the generation of the universe has arisen. And they say that this wind 
constitutes a spirit, and that a perfect God has arisen from the fragrance of the waters, and that of the spirit, 
and from the brilliant light. And they affirm that mind exists after the mode of generation from a 
female-(meaning by mind) the supernal spark-and that, having been mingled beneath with the compounds 
of body, it earnestly desires to flee away, that escaping it may depart and not find dissolution on account of 
the deficiency in the waters. Wherefore it is in the habit of crying aloud from the mixture of the waters, 
according to the Psalmist, as they say, "For the entire anxiety of the light above is, that it may deliver the 
spark which is below from the Father beneath, "(1) that is, from wind. And the Father creates heat and 
disturbance, and produces for Himself a Son, namely mind, which, as they allege, is not the peculiar 
offspring of Himself. And these heretics affirm that the Son, on beholding the perfect Logos of the supernal 
light, underwent a transformation, and in the shape of a serpent entered into a womb, in order that he might 
be able to recover that Mind which is the scintillation from the light. And that this is what has been declared, 
"Who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God; but made Himself of no 
reputation, and took upon Him the form of a servant."(2) And the wretched and baneful Sethians are 
disposed to think that this constitutes the servile form alluded to by the Apostle. These, then, I are the 
assertions which likewise these Sethians advance. 

CHAP. VIII. --SIMON MAGUS. 

But that very sapient fellow Simon makes his statement thus, that there is an indefinite power, and that this is 
the root of the universe. And this indefinite power, he says, which is fire, is in itself not anything which is 
simple, as the gross bulk of speculators maintain, when they assert that there are four incomposite 
elements, and have supposed fire, as one of these, to be uncompounded. Simon, on the other hand, 
alleges that the nature of fire is twofold; and one portion of this twofold (nature) he calls a something secret, 
and another (a something) manifest. And he asserts that the secret is concealed in the manifest parts of the 
fire, and that the manifest parts of the fire have been produced from the secret. And he says that all the parts 
of the fire, visible and invisible, have been supposed to be in possession of a capacity of perception. The 
world, therefore, he says, that is begotten, has been produced from the unbegotten fire. And it commenced, 
he says, to exist thus: The Unbegotten One took six primal roots of the principle of generation from the 
principle of that fire. For he maintains that these roots have been generated in pairs from the fire; and these 
he denominates Mind and Intelligence, Voice and Name, Ratiocination and Reflection. Anti he asserts that 
in the six roots, at the same time, resides the indefinite power, which he affirms to be Him that stood, stands, 
and will stand. And when this one has been formed into a figure. He will, according to this heretic, exist in the 
six powers substantially and potentially. And He will be in magnitude and perfection one and the same with 
that unbegotten and indefinite power, possessing no attribute in any respect more deficient than that 
unbegotten, and unalterable, and indefinite power. If, however. He who stood, stands, and will stand, 
continues to exist only potentially in the six powers, and has not assumed any definite figure. He becomes, 
says Simon, utterly evanescent, and perishes. And this takes place in the same manner as the grammatical 
or geometrical capacity, which, though it has been implanted in man's soul, suffers extinction when it does 
not obtain (the assistance of) a master of either of these arts, who would indoctrinate that soul into its 
principles. Now Simon affirms that he himself is He who stood, stands, and will stand, and that He is a power 
that is above all things. So far, then, for the opinions of Simon likewise. 

CHAP. IX.~VALENTINUS. 

Valentinus,(1) however, and the adherents of this school, though they agree in asserting that the originating 
principle of the universe is the Father, still they are impelled into the adoption of a contrary opinion 
respecting Him. For some of them maintain that (the Father) is solitary and generative; whereas others hold 
the impossibility, (in His as in other cases,) of procreation without a female. They therefore add Sige as the 
spouse of this Father, and style the Father Himself Bythus. From this Father and His spouse some allege 
that there have been six projections, -viz.. Nous and Aletheia, Logos and Zoe, Anthropos and 
Ecclesia,-and that this constitutes the procreative Ogdoad. And the Valentinians maintain that those are the 
first projections which have taken place within the limit, and have been again denominated "those within the 
Pleroma;" and the second are "those without the Pleroma"; and the third, "those without the Limit." Now the 
generation of these constitutes the Hysterema Acamoth. And he asserts that what has been generated from 
an AEon, that exists in the Hysterema and has been projected (beyond the Limit), is the Creator. But 
Valentinus is not disposed to affirm what is thus generated to be primal Deity, but speaks in detractive terms 
both of Him and the things made by Him. And (he asserts) that Christ came down from within the Pleroma for 

the salvation of the spirit who had erred. This spirit, (according to the Valentinians,) resides in our inner man; 
and they say that this inner man obtains salvation on account of this indwelling spirit. Valentinus, however, 
(to uphold the doctrine,) determines that the flesh is not saved, and styles it "a leathern tunic," and the 
perishable portion of man. I have (already) declared these tenets in the way of an epitome, inasmuch as in 
their systems there exists enlarged matter for discussion, and a variety of opinions. In this manner, then, it 
seems proper also to the school of Valentinus to propound their opinions. 

CHAP. X.-BASILIDES. 

But Basilides also himself affirms that there is a non-existent God, who, being non-existent, has made the 
non-existent world, that has been formed out of things that are not, by casting down a certain seed, as it were 
a grain of mustard-seed, having in itself stem, leaves, branches, and fruit. Or this seed is as a peacock's 
egg, comprising in itself the varied multitude of colours. And this, say the Basilidians, constitutes the seed of 
the world, from which all things have been produced. For they maintain that it comprises in itself all things, as 
it were those that as yet are non-existent, and which it has been predetermined to be brought into existence 
by the non-existent Deity. There was, then, he says, in the seed itself a threefold Sonship, in all respects of 
the same substance with the nonexistent God, which has been begotten from things that are not. And of this 
Sonship, divided into three parts, one portion of it was refined, and another gross, and another requiring 
purification. The refined portion, when first the earliest putting down of the seed was accomplished by the 
non-existent God, immediately burst forth, and ascended upwards, and proceeded towards the non-existent 
Deity. For every nature yearns after that God on account of the excess of His beauty, but different (creatures 
desire Him) from different causes. The more gross portion, however, still continues in the seed; and 
inasmuch as it is a certain imitative nature, it was not able to soar upwards, for it was more gross than the 
subtle part. The mare gross portion, however, equipped itself with the Holy Spirit, as it were with wings; for 
the Sonship, thus arrayed, shows kindness to this Spirit, and in turn receives kindness. The third Sonship, 
however, requires purification, and therefore this continued in the conglomeration of all germs, and this 
displays and receives kindness. And (Basilides asserts) that there is something which is called "world," and 
something else (which is called) supra-mundane; for entities are distributed by him into two primary 
divisions. And what is intermediate between these he calls "Conterminous Holy Spirit," and (this Spirit) has 
in itself the fragrance of the Sonship. 

From the conglomeration of all germs of the cosmical seed burnt forth and was begotten the Great Archon, 
the head of the world, an AEon of inexpressible beauty and size. This (Archon) having raised Himself as far 
as the firmament, supposed that there was not another above Himself. And accordingly He became more 
brilliant and powerful than all the underlying AEons, with the exception of the Sonship that had been left 
beneath, but which He was not aware was more wise than Himself. This one having His attention turned to 
the creation of the world, first begat a son unto Himself, superior to Himself; and this son He caused to sit on 
His own right hand, and this these Basilidians allege is the Ogdoad. The Great Archon Himself, then, 
produces the entire celestial creation. And other Archon ascended from (the conglomeration of) all the 
germs, who was greater than all the underlying AEon, except the Sonship that had been left behind, yet far 
inferior to the former one. And they style this second Archon a Hebdomad. He is Maker, and Creator, and 
Controller of all things that are beneath Him, and this Archon produced for Himself a Son more prudent and 
wiser than Himself. Now they assert that all these things exist according to the predetermination of that 
non-existent God, and that there exist also worlds and intervals that are infinite. And the Basilidians affirm 
that upon Jesus, who was born of Mary, came the power of the Gospel, which descended and illuminated 
the Son both of the Ogdoad and of the Hebdomad. And this tank place for the purpose of enlightening and 
distinguishing from the different orders of beings, and purifying the Sonship that had been left behind for 
conferring benefits on souls, and the receiving benefits in turn. And they say that themselves are sons, who 
are in the world for this cause, that by teaching they may purify souls, and along with the Sonship may 
ascend to the Father above, from whom proceeded the first Sonship. And they allege that the world endures 
until the period when all souls may have repaired thither along with the Sonship. These, however, are the 
opinions which Basilides, who detailed them as prodigies, is not ashamed to advance. 

CHAP. XI.-JUSTINUS. 

But Justinus also himself attempted to establish similar opinions with these, and expresses himself thus: 
That there are three unbegotten principles of the universe, two males and one female. And of the males one 
principle is denominated "Goody Now this alone is called after this mode, and is endued with a 
foreknowledge of the universe. And the other is Father of all generated entities, and is devoid of 
foreknowledge, and unknown, and invisible, and is called Elohim. The female principle is devoid of 
foreknowledge, passionate, with two minds, and with two booties, as we have minutely detailed in the 

previous discourses concerning tiiis iieretic's system. Tiiis female principle, in her upper parts, as far as the 
groin, is, the Justinians say, a virgin, whereas from the groin downwards a snake. And such is denominated 
Edem and Israel. This heretic alleges that these are the principles of the universe, from which all things have 
been produced. And he asserts that Elohim, without foreknowledge, passed into inordinate desire for the 
half virgin, and that having had intercourse with her, he begot twelve angels; and the names of these he 
states to be those already given. And of these the paternal ones are connected with the father, and the 
maternal with the mother. And Justinus maintains that these are (the trees of Paradise), concerning which 
Moses has spoken in an allegorical sense the things written in the law. And Justinus u affirms that all things 
were made by Elohim and Edem. And (he says) that animals, with a the rest of the creatures of this kind, are 
from the a part resembling a beast, whereas man from the parts above the groin. And Edem (is supposed 
by Justinus) to have deposited in man himself the soul, which was her own power, (but Elohim the spirit.) And 
Justinus alleges that this Elohim, after having learned his origin, ascended to the Good Being, and deserted 
Edem. And this heretic asserts that Edem, enraged on account of such (treatment), concocted all this plot 
against the spirit of Elohim which he deposited in man. And (Justinus informs us) that for this reason the 
Father sent Baruch, and issued directions to the prophets, in order that the spirit of Elohim might be 
delivered, and that all might be seduced away from Edem. But (this heretic) alleges that even Hercules was 
a prophet, and that he was worsted by Omphale, that is, by Babel; and the Justinians call the latter Venus. 
And (they say) that afterwards, in the days of Herod, Jesus was born son of Mary and Joseph, to whom he 
alleges Baruch had spoken. And (Justinus asserts) that Edem plotted against this (Jesus), but could not 
deceive him; and for this reason, that she caused him to be crucified. And the spirit of Jesus, (says Justinus,) 
ascended to the Good Being. And (the Justinians maintain) that the spirits of all who thus obey those silly 
and futile discourses will be saved, and that the body and soul of Edem have been left behind. But the 
foolish Justinus calls this (Edem) Earth. 

CHAP. XII. -THE DOCETAE. 

Now the Docetae advance assertions of this description: that the primal Deity is as a seed of the fig-tree; 
and that from this proceeded three AEons as the stem, and the leaves and the fruit; and that these projected 
thirty AEons, each (of them) ten; and that they were all united in decades, but differed only in positions, as 
some were before others. And (the Docetae assert) that infinite AEons were indefinitely projected, and that 
all these were hermaphrodites. And (they say) that these AEons formed a design of simultaneously going 
together into one AEon, and that from this the intermediate AEon and from the Virgin Mary they begot a 
Saviour of all. And this Redeemer was like in every respect to the first seed of the fig-tree, but inferior in this 
respect, from the fact of His having been begotten; for the seed whence the fig-tree springs is unbegotten. 
This, then, was the great light of the AEons-it was entirely radiance-which receives no adornment, and 
comprises in itself the forms of all animals. And the Docetae maintain that this light, on proceeding into the 
underlying chaos, afforded a cause (of existence ) to the things that were produced, and those actually 
existing, and that on coming down from above it impressed on chaos beneath the forms of everlasting 
species. For the third AEon, which had tripled itself, when he perceives that all his characteristic attributes 
were forcibly drawn off into the nether darkness, and not being ignorant both of the terror of darkness and the 
simplicity of light, proceeded to create heaven; and after having rendered firm what intervened. He 
separated the darkness from the light. As all the species of the third AEon were, he says, overcome by the 
darkness, the figure even of this AEon became a living fire, having been generated by light. And from this 
(source), they allege, was generated the Great Archon, regarding whom Moses converses, saying that He 
is a fiery Deity and Demiurge, who also continually alters the forms of all (AEons) into bodies. And the 
(Docetae) allege that these are the souls for whose sake the Saviour was begotten, and that He points out 
the way through which the souls will escape that are (now) overpowered (by darkness). And (the Docetae 
maintain) that Jesus arrayed Himself in that only-begotten power, and that for this reason He could not be 
seen by any, on account of the excessive magnitude of His glory. And they say that all the occurrences took 
place with Him as it has been written in the Gospels. 

CHAP. XIII. --MONOIMUS. 

But the followers of Monoimus the Arabian assert that the originating principle of the universe is a primal 
man and son of man; and that, as Moses states, the things that have been produced were produced not by 
the primal man, but by the Son of that primal man, yet not by the entire Son, but by part of Him. And 
(Monoimus asserts) that the Son of man is iota, which stands for ten, the principal number in which is 
(inherent) the subsistence of all number (in general, and) through which every number (in particular) consists, 
as well as the generation of the universe, fire, air, water, and earth. But inasmuch as this is one iota and one 
tittle, and what is perfect (emanates) from what is perfect, or, in other words, a tittle flows down from above. 

containing all things in itself; (therefore,) whatsoever things also the man possesses, the Father of the Son of 
man possesses likewise. Moses, therefore, says that the world was made in six days, that is, by six powers, 
out of which the world was made by the one tittle. For cubes, and octahedrons, and pyramids, and all figures 
similar to these, having equal superficies, out of which consist fire, air, water, and earth, have been 
produced from numbers comprehended in that simple tittle of the iota, which is Son of man. When, therefore, 
says (Monoimus), Moses mentions the rod's being brandished for the purpose of bringing the plagues upon 
Egypt, he alludes allegorically to the (alterations of the) world of iota; nor did he frame more than ten 
plagues. If, however, says he, you wish to become acquainted with the universe, search within yourself who 
is it that says, "My soul, my flesh, and my mind," and who is it that appropriates each one thing unto himself, 
as another (would do) for himself. Understand that this is a perfect one arising from (one that is) perfect, and 
that he considers as his own all so-called nonentities and all entities. These, then, are the opinions of 
Monoimus also. 

CHAP. XIV.-TATIAN. 

Tatian, however, similarly with Valentinus and the others, says that there are certain invisible AEons, and 
that by some one of these the world below has been created, and the things existing in it. And he habituates 
himself to a very cynical(1) mode of life, and almost in nothing differs from Marcion, as appertaining both to 
his slanders, and the regulations enacted concerning marriage. 

CHAP. XV.--MARCION AND CERDO. 

But Marcion, of Pontus, and Gordon, (2) his preceptor, themselves also lay down that there are three 
principles of the universe-good, just, and matter. Some disciples, however, of these add a fourth, saying, 
good, just, evil, and matter. But they all affirm that the good (Being) has made nothing at all, though some 
denominate the just one likewise evil, whereas others that his only title is that of just. And they allege that (the 
just Being) made all things out of subjacent matter, for that he made them not well, but irrationally. For it is 
requisite that the things made should be similar to the maker; wherefore also they thus employ the 
evangelical parables, saying, "A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit,"(3) and the rest of the passage. Now 
Marcion alleges that the conceptions badly devised by the (just one) himself constituted the allusion in this 
passage. And (he says) that Christ is the Son of the good Being, and was sent for the salvation of souls by 
him whom he styles the inner than. And he asserts that he appeared as a man though not being a man, and 
as incarnate though not being incarnate. And he maintains that his manifestation was only phantastic, and 
that he underwent neither generation nor passion except in appearance. And he will not allow that flesh rises 
again; but in affirming marriage to be destruction, he leads his disciples towards a very cynical life. And by 
these means he imagines that he annoys the Creator, if he should abstain from the things that are made or 
appointed by Him. 

CHAP. XVI.--APELLES. 

But Apelles, a disciple of this heretic, was displeased at the statements advanced by his preceptor, as we 
have previously declared, and by another theory supposed that there are four gods. And the first of these 
he alleges to be the "Good Being," whom the prophets did not know, and Christ to be His Son. And the 
second God, he affirms to be the Creator of the universe, and Him he does not wish to be a God. And the 
third God, he states to be the fiery one that was manifested; and the fourth to be an evil one. And Apelles 
calls these angels; and by adding (to their number) Christ likewise, he will assert Him to be a fifth God. But 
this heretic is in the habit of devoting his attention to a book which he calls "Revelations" of a certain 
Philumene, whom he considers a prophetess. And he affirms that Christ did not receive his flesh from the 
Virgin, but from the adjacent substance of the world. In this manner he composed his treatises against the 
law and the prophets, and attempts to abolish them as if they had spoken falsehoods, and had not known 
God. And Apelles, similarly with Marcion, affirms that the different sorts of flesh are destroyed. 

CHAP. XVII.--CERINTHUS. 

Cerinthus, however, himself having been trained in Egypt, determined that the world was not made by the 
first God, but by a certain angelic power. And this power was far separated and distant from that sovereignty 
which is above the entire circle of existence, and it knows not the God (that is) above all things. And he says 
that JeSus was not born of a virgin, but that He sprang from Joseph and Mary as their son, similar to the rest 
of men; and that He excelled in justice, and prudence, and understanding above all the rest of mankind. And 
Cerinthus maintains that, after Jesus' baptism, Christ came down in the form of a dove upon Him from the 

sovereignty that is above tiie wiiole circle of existence, and tiiat tiien He proceeded to preacii tiie unl<nown 
Fattier, and to worl< miracles. And he asserts that, at the conclusion of the passion, Christ flew away from 
Jesus, (1) but that Jesus suffered, and that Christ remained incapable of suffering, being a spirit of the Lord. 

CHAP. XVIII. -THE EBIONAEANS. 

But the Ebionaeans assert that the world is made by the true God, and they speak of Christ in a similar 
manner with Cerinthus. They live, however, in all respects according to the law of Moses, alleging that they 
are thus justified. 

CHAP. XIX.-THE0D0TUS.(2) 

But Theodotus of Byzantium introduced a heresy of the following description, alleging that all things were 
created by the true God; whereas that Christ, he states, in a manner similar to that advocated by the 
Gnostics already mentioned, made His appearance according to some mode of this description. And 
Theodotus affirms that Christ is a man of a kindred nature with all men, but that He surpasses them in this 
respect, that, according to the counsel of God, He had been born of a virgin, and the Holy Ghost had 
overshadowed His mother. This heretic, however, maintained that Jesus had not assumed flesh in the 
womb of the Virgin, but that afterwards Christ descended upon Jesus at His baptism in form of a dove. And 
from this circumstance, the lowers of Theodotus affirm that at first miraculous powers did not acquire 
operating energy in Saviour Himself. Theodotus, however, determines to deny the divinity of Christ. Now, 
opinions of this description were advaned by Theodotus. 

CHAP. XX.--MELCHISEDECIANS. 

And others also make all their assertions similarly with those which have been already specified, 
introducing one only alteration, viz., in respect of regarding Melchisedec as a certain power. But they allege 
that Melchisedec himself is superior to all powers; and according to his image, they are desirous of 
maintaining that Christ likewise is generated. 

CHAP. XXI. -THE PHRYGIANS OR MONTANISTS. 

The Phrygians, however, derive the principles of their heresy from a certain Montanus, and Priscilla, and 
Maximilla, and regard these wretched women as prophetesses, and Montanus as a prophet. In respect, 
however, of what appertains to the origin and creation of the universe, the Phrygians are supposed to 
express themselves correctly; while in the tenets which they enunciate respecting Christ, they have not 
irrelevantly formed their opinions. But they are seduced into error in common with the heretics previously 
alluded to, and devote their attention to the discourses of these above the Gospels, thus laying down 
regulations concerning novel and strange fasts. (3) 

CHAP. XXII. -THE PHRYGIANS OR MONTANISTS CONTINUED. 

But others of them, being attached to the heresy of the Noetians, entertain similar opinions to those relating 
to the silly women of the Phrygians, and to Montanus. As regards, however, the truths appertaining to the 
Father of the entire of existing things, they are guilty of blasphemy, because they assert that He is Son and 
Father, visible and invisible, begotten and unbegotten, mortal and immortal. These have taken occasion 
from a certain Noetus to put forward their heresy. 

CHAP. XXIII. -NOETUS AND CALLISTUS. 

But in like manner, also, Noetus, being by birth a native of Smyrna, and a fellow addicted to reckless 
babbling, as well as crafty withal, introduced (among us) this heresy which originated from one Epigonus. It 
reached Rome, and was adopted by Cleomenes, and so has continued to this day among his successors. 
Noetus asserts that there is one Father and God of the universe, and that He made all things, and was 
imperceptible to those that exist when He might so desire. Noetus maintained that the Father then appeared 
when He wished; and He is invisible when He is not seen, but visible when He is seen. And this heretic also 
alleges that the Father is unbegotten when He is not generated, but begotten when He is born of a virgin; as 
also that He is not subject to suffering, and is immortal when He does not suffer or die. When, however. His 
passion(1) came upon Him, Noetus allows that the Father suffers and dies. And the Noetians suppose that 
this Father Himself is called Son, (and vice versa,) in reference to the events which at their own proper 

periods happen to them severally. 

Callistus corroborated the heresy of these Noetians, but we have already carefully explained the details of 
his life. And Callistus himself produced likewise a heresy, and derived its starting-points from these 
Noetians,-namely, so far as he acknowledges that there is one Father and God, viz., the Creator of the 
universe, and that this (God) is spoken of, and called by the name of Son, yet that in substance He is one 
Spirit. For Spirit, as the Deity, is, he says, not any being different from the Logos, or the Logos from the Deity; 
therefore this one person, (according to Callistus,) is divided nominally, but substantially not so. He 
supposes this one Logos to be God, and affirms that there was in the ease of the Word an incarnation. And 
he is disposed (to maintain), that He who was seen in the flesh and was crucified(2) is Son, but that the 
Father it is who dwells in Him. Callistus thus at one time branches off into the opinion of Noetus, but at 
another into that of Theodotus, and holds no sure doctrine. These, then, are the opinions of Callistus. 

CHAP. XXIV.-HERMOGENES. 

But one Hermogenes himself also being desirous of saying something, asserted that God made all things 
out of matter coeval with Himself, and subject to His design. For Hermogenes(3) held it to be an 
impossibility that God should make the things that were made, except out of existent things. 

CHAP. XXV.--THE ELCHASAITES. 

But certain others, introducing as it were some novel tenet, appropriated parts of their system from all 
heresies, and procured a strange volume, which bore on the titlepage the name of one Elchasai. These, in 
like manner, acknowledge that the principles of the universe were originated by the Deity. They do not, 
however, confess that there is but one Christ, but that there is one that is superior to the rest, and that He is 
transfused into many bodies frequently, and was now in Jesus. And, in like manner, these heretics maintain 
that at one time Christ was begotten of God, and at another time became the Spirit, and at another time was 
born of a virgin, and at another time not so. And they affirm that likewise this Jesus afterwards was 
continually being transfused into bodies, and was manifested in many (different bodies) at different times. 
And they resort to incantations and baptisms in their confession of elements. And they occupy themselves 
with bustling activity in regard of astrological and mathematical science, and of the arts of sorcery. But also 
they allege themselves to have powers of prescience. 

CHAP. XXVI. -JEWISH CHRONOLOGY. 

... From Haran, a city of Mesopotamia, (Abraham, by the com,and)(4) of God, transfers his residence into the 
country which is now called Palestine and Judea, but then the region of Canaan. Now, concerning this 
territory, we have in part, but still not negligently, rendered an account in other discourses. From the 
circumstance, then, (of this migration) is traceable the beginning of an increase (of population) in Judea, 
which obtained its name from Judah, fourth son of Jacob, whose name was also called Israel, from the fact 
that a race of kings would be descended from him.(1) Abraham removes from Mesopotamia (when 75 
years old, and) when 1 00 years old he begat Isaac. But Isaac, when 60 years of age, begat Jacob. And 
Jacob, when 86 years old, begat Levi; and Levi, at 40 years of age, begat Caath;(2) and Caath was four 
years of age when he went down with Jacob into Egypt. Therefore the entire period during which Abraham 
sojourned, and the entire family descended from him by Isaac, in the country then called Canaanitis, was 
21 5 years. But the father of this Abraham is Thare,(3) and of this Thare the father is Nachor, and of this 
Nachorthe father is Serag, and of this Serag the father is Reu, and of this Reu the father is Peleg, and of this 
Peleg(4) the father is Heber. And so it comes to pass that the Jews are denominated by the name of 
Hebrews. In the time of Phaleg,(5) however, arose the dispersion of nations. Now these nations were 72,(6) 
corresponding with the number of Abraham's children. And the names of these nations we have likewise set 
down in other books, not even omitting this point in its own proper place. And the reason of our particularity 
is our desire to manifest to those who are of a studious disposition the love which we cherish towards the 
Divinity, and the indubitable knowledge respecting the Truth, which in the course of our labours(7) we have 
acquired possession of. But of this Heber the father is Salah; and of this Salah the father is Cainan; and of 
this Cainan the father is Arphaxad, whose father is Shem; and of this Shem the father is Noah. And in Noah's 
time there occurred a flood throughout the entire world, which neither Egyptians, nor Chaldeans, nor Greeks 
recollect; for the inundations which took place in the age of Ogyges and Deucalion prevailed only in the 
localities where these dwelt.(8) There are, then, in the case of these (patriarchs-that is, from Noah to Heber 
inclusive)-5 generations, and 495 years. (9) This Noah, inasmuch as he was a most religious and 
God-loving man, alone, with wife and children, and the three wives of these, escaped the flood that ensued. 
And he owed his preservation to an ark; and both the dimensions and relics of this ark are, as we have 

explained, shown to this day in the mountains called Ararat, which are situated in the direction of the country 
of the Adiabeni.(IO) It is then possible for those who are disposed to investigate the subject industriously, to 
perceive how clearly has been demonstrated the existence of a nation of worshippers of the true God, more 
ancient than all the Chaldeans, Egyptians, and Greeks. What necessity, however, is there at present to 
specify those who, anterior to Noah, were both devout men, and permitted to hold converse with the true 
God, inasmuch as, so far as the subject taken in hand is concerned, this testimony in regard of the antiquity 
of the people of God is sufficient? 

CHAP. XXVII. --JEWISH CHRONOLOGY CONTINUED. 

But since it does not seem irrational to prove that these nations that had their attention engrossed with the 
speculations of philosophy are of more modern date than those that had habitually worshipped the true 
God,(1 1) it is reasonable that we should state both whence the family of these latter originated; and that 
when they took up their abode in these countries, they did not receive a name from the actual localities, but 
claimed for themselves names from those who were primarily born, and had inhabited these. Noah had 
three sons-Shem, Ham, and Japheth. From these the entire family of man was multiplied, and every quarter 
of the earth owes its inhabitants in the first instance to these. For the word of God to them prevailed, when the 
Lord said, "Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth." So great efficacy had that one word that from the 
three sons of Noah are begotten in the family 72 children,-(viz.,) from Shem, 25; from Japheth, 15; and from 
Ham, 32. Unto Ham, however, these 32 children are born in accordance with previous declarations. And 
among Ham's children are: Canaan, (12) from whom came the Canaanites; Mizraim, from whom the 
Egyptians; Cush, from whom the Ethiopians; and Phut, from whom the Libyans. These, according to the 
language prevalent among them, are up to the present day styled by the appellation of their ancestors; nay, 
even in the Greek tongue they are called by the names by which they have been now denominated. But 
even supposing that neither these localities had been previously inhabited, nor that it could be proved that 
a race of men from the beginning existed there, nevertheless these sons of Noah, a worshipper of God, are 
quite sufficient to prove the point at issue. For it is evident that Noah himself must have been a disciple of 
devout people, for which reason he escaped the tremendous, though transient, threat of water. 
How, then, should not the worshippers of the true God be of greater antiquity than all Chaldeans, Egyptians, 
and Greeks, for we must bear in mind that the father of these Gentiles was born from this Japheth, (1) and 
received the name Javan, and became the progenitor of Greeks and lonians? Now, if the nations that 
devoted themselves to questions concerning philosophy are shown to belong to a period altogether more 
recent than the race of the worshippers of God as well as the time of the deluge, how would not the nations of 
the barbarians, and as many tribes as in the world are known and unknown, appear to belong to a more 
modern epoch than these? Therefore ye Greeks, Egyptians, Chaldeans, and the entire race of men, 
become adepts in this doctrine, and learn from us, who are the friends of God, what the nature of God is, and 
what His well-arranged creation. And we have cultivated this system, not expressing ourselves in mere 
pompous language, but executing our treatises in terms that prove our knowledge of truth and our practice 
of good sense, our object being the demonstration of His Truth. (2) 

CHAP. XXVIII. -THE DOCTRINE OF THE TRUTH. 

The first and only (one God), (3) both Creator and Lord of all, had nothing coeval with Himself; not infinite 
chaos, nor measureless water, nor solid earth, nor dense air, not warm fire, nor refined spirit, nor the azure 
canopy(4) of the stupendous firmament. But He was One, alone in Himself. By an exercise of His will He 
created things that are, which antecedently had no existence, except that He willed to make them. For He is 
fully acquainted with whatever is about to take place, for foreknowledge also is present to Him. The different 
principles, however, of what will come into existence. He first fabricated, viz., fire and spirit, water and earth, 
from which diverse elements He proceeded to form His own creation. And some objects He formed of one 
essence, but others He compounded from two, and others from three, and others from four. And those 
formed of one substance were immortal, for in their case dissolution does not follow, for what is one will 
never be dissolved. Those, on the other hand, which are formed out of two, or three, or four substances, are 
dissoluble; wherefore also are they named mortal. For this has been denominated death; namely, the 
dissolution of substances connected. I now therefore think that I have sufficiently answered those endued 
with a sound mind, who, if they are desirous of additional instruction, and are disposed accurately to 
investigate the substances of these things, and the causes of the entire creation, will become acquainted 
with these points should they peruse a work of ours comprised (under the title). Concerning the Substance of 
the Universe. (5) I consider, however, that at present it is enough to elucidate those causes of which the 
Greeks, not being aware, glorified, in pompous phraseology, the parts of creation, while they remained 
ignorant of the Creator. And from these the heresiarchs have taken occasion, and have transformed the 

statements previously made by those Greeks into similar doctrines, and thus have framed ridiculous 
heresies. 

CHAP. XXIX.-THE DOCTRINE OF THE TRUTH CONTINUED. 

Therefore this solitary and supreme Deity, by an exercise of reflection, brought forth the Logos first; not the 
word in the sense of being articulated by voice, but as a ratiocination of the universe, conceived and 
residing in the divine mind. Him alone He produced from existing things; for the Father Himself constituted 
existence, and the being born from Him was the cause of all things that are produced. (6) The Logos was in 
the Father Himself, bearing the will of His progenitor, and not being unacquainted with the mind of the Father. 
For simultaneously(l) with His procession from His Progenitor, inasmuch as He is this Progenitors first-born. 
He has, as a voice in Himself, the ideas conceived in the Father. And so it was, that when the Father 
ordered the world to come into existence, the Logos one by one completed each object of creation, thus 
pleasing God. And some things which multiply by generation(2) He formed male and female; but 
whatsoever beings were designed for service and ministration He made either male, or not requiring 
females, or neither male nor female. For even the primary substances of these, which were formed out of 
nonentities, viz., fire and spirit, water and earth, are neither male nor female; nor could male or female 
proceed from any one of these, were it not that God, who is the source of all authority, wished that the Logos 
might render assistance(3) in accomplishing a production of this kind. I confess that angels are of fire, and I 
maintain that female spirits are not present with them. And I am of opinion that sun and moon and stars, in 
like manner, are produced from fire and spirit, and are neither male nor female. And the will of the Creator is, 
that swimming and winged animals are from water, male and female. For so God, whose will it was, ordered 
that there should exist a moist substance, endued with productive power. And in like manner God 
commanded, that from earth should arise reptiles and beasts, as well males and females of all sorts of 
animals; for so the nature of the things produced admitted. For as many things as He willed, God made from 
time to time. These things He created through the Logos, it not being possible for things to be generated 
otherwise than as they were produced. But when, according as He willed. He also formed (objects). He 
called them by names, and thus notified His creative effort. (4) And making these. He formed the ruler of all, 
and fashioned him out of all composite substances. (5) The Creator did not wish to make him a god, and 
failed in His aim; nor an angel,-be not deceived, -but a man. For if He had willed to make thee a god. He 
could have done so. Thou hast the example of the Logos. His will, however, was, that you should be a man, 
and He has made thee a man. But if thou art desirous of also becoming a god, obey Him that has created 
thee, and resist not now, in order that, being found faithful in that which is small, you may be enabled to have 
entrusted to you also that which is great.(6) 

The Logos alone of this God is from God himself; wherefore also the Logos is God, being the substance of 
God. (7) Now the world was made from nothing; wherefore it is not God; as also because this world admits of 
dissolution whenever the Creator so wishes it. But God, who created it, did not, nor does not, make evil. He 
makes what is glorious and excellent; for He who makes it is good. Now man, that was brought into 
existence, was a creature endued with a capacity of self-determination, (8) yet not possessing a sovereign 
intellect,(9) nor holding sway over all things by reflection, and authority, and power, but a slave to his 
passions, and comprising all sorts of contrarieties in himself. But man, from the fact of his possessing a 
capacity of self-determination, brings forth what is evil, (10) that is, accidentally; which evil is not 
consummated except you actually commit some piece of wickedness. For it is in regard of our desiring 
anything that is wicked, or our meditating upon it, that what is evil is so denominated. Evil had no existence 
from the beginning, but came into being subsequently. (1 1) Since man has free will, a law has been defined 
for his guidance by the Deity, not without answering a good purpose. For if man did not possess the power 
to will and not to will, why should a law be established? For a law will not be laid down for an animal devoid 
of reason, but a bridle and a whip;(12) whereas to man has been given a precept and penalty to perform, or 
for not carrying into execution what has been enjoined. For man thus constituted has a law been enacted by 
just men in primitive ages. Nearer our own day was there established a law, full of gravity and justice, by 
Moses, to whom allusion has been already made, a devout man, and one beloved of God. 
Now the Logos of God controls all these; the first begotten Child of the Father, the voice of the Dawn 
antecedent to the Morning Star.(13) Afterwards just men were born, friends of God; and these have been 
styled prophets, (1) on account of their foreshowing future events. And the word of prophecy(2) was 
committed unto them, not for one age only; but also the utterances of events predicted throughout all 
generations, were vouchsafed in perfect clearness. And this, too, not at the time merely when seers 
furnished a reply to those present;(3) but also events that would happen throughout all ages, have been 
manifested beforehand; because, in speaking of incidents gone by, the prophets brought them back to the 
recollection of humanity; whereas, in showing forth present occurrences, they endeavoured to persuade 
men not to be remiss; while, by foretelling future events, they have rendered each one of us terrified on 

beholding events that had been predicted long before, and on expecting likewise those events predicted 
as still future. Such is our faith, O all ye men,-ours, I say, who are not persuaded by empty expressions, nor 
caught away by sudden impulses of the heart, nor beguiled by the plausibility of eloquent discourses, yet 
who do not refuse to obey words that have been uttered by divine power. And these injunctions has God 
given to the Word. But the Word, by declaring them, promulgated the divine commandments, thereby 
turning man from disobedience, not bringing him into servitude by force of necessity, but summoning him to 
liberty through a choice involving spontaneity. 

This Logos the Father in the latter days sent forth, no longer to speak by a prophet, and not wishing that the 
Word, being obscurely proclaimed, should be made the subject of mere conjecture, but that He should be 
manifested, so that we could see Him with our own eyes. This Logos, I say, the Father sent forth, in order that 
the world, on beholding Him, might reverence Him who was delivering precepts not by the person of 
prophets, nor terrifying the soul by an angel, but who was Himself-He that had spoken-corporally present 
amongst us. This Logos we know to have received a body from a virgin, and to have remodelled the old 
man(4) by a new creation. And we believe the Logos to have passed through every period in this life, in 
order that He Himself might serve as a law for every age, (5) and that, by being present (amongst) us. He 
might exhibit His own manhood as an aim for all men. And that by Himself in Person He might prove that 
God made nothing evil, and that man possesses the capacity of self-determination, inasmuch as he is able 
to will and not to will, and is endued with power to do both. (6) This Man we know to have been made out of 
the compound of our humanity. For if He were not of the same nature with ourselves, in vain does He ordain 
that we should imitate the Teacher. For if that Man happened to be of a different substance from us, why 
does He lay injunctions similar to those He has received on myself, who am born weak; and how is this the 
act of one that is good and just? In order, however, that He might not be supposed to be different from us. He 
even underwent toil, and was willing to endure hunger, and did not refuse to feel thirst, and sunk into the 
quietude of slumber. He did not protest against His Passion, but became obedient unto death, and 
manifested His resurrection. Now in all these acts He offered up, as the first-fruits. His own manhood, in 
order that thou, when thou art in tribulation, mayest not be disheartened, but, confessing thyself to be a man 
(of like nature with the Redeemer), mayest dwell in expectation of also receiving what the Father has 
granted unto this Son. (7) 

CHAP. XXX. -THE AUTHOR'S CONCLUDING ADDRESS. 

Such is the true doctrine in regard of the divine nature, O ye men, Greeks and Barbarians, Chaldeans and 
Assyrians, Egyptians and Libyans, Indians and Ethiopians, Celts, and ye Latins, who lead armies, and all ye 
that inhabit Europe, and Asia, and Libya. (8) And to you I am become an adviser, inasmuch as I am a 
disciple of the benevolent Logos, and hence humane, in order that you may hasten and by us may be 
taught who the true God is, and what is His well-ordered creation. Do not devote your attention to the 
fallacies of artificial discourses, nor the vain promises of plagiarizing heretics, (9) but to the venerable 
simplicity of unassuming truth. And by means of this knowledge you shall escape the approaching threat of 
the fire of judgment, and the rayless scenery of gloomy Tartarus, (1) where never shines a beam from the 
irradiating voice of the Word! 

You shall escape the boiling flood of heirs(2) eternal lake of fire and the eye ever fixed in menacing glare of 
fallen angels chained in Tartarus as punishment for their sins; and you shall escape the worm that 
ceaselessly coils for food around the body whose scum(3) has bred it. Now such (torments) as these shall 
thou avoid by being instructed in a knowledge of the true God. And thou shalt possess an immortal body, 
even one placed beyond the possibility of corruption, just like the soul. And thou shalt receive the kingdom 
of heaven, thou who, whilst thou didst sojourn in this life, didst know the Celestial King. And thou shalt be a 
companion of the Deity, and a co-heir with Christ, no longer enslaved by lusts or passions, and never again 
wasted by disease. For thou hast become God:(4) for whatever sufferings thou didst undergo while being a 
man, these He gave to thee, because thou wast of mortal mould, but whatever it is consistent with God to 
impart, these God has promised to bestow upon thee, because thou hast been deified, and begotten unto 
immortality. (5) This constitutes the import of the proverb, "Know thyself;" i.e., discover God within thyself, for 
He has formed thee after His own image. For with the knowledge of self is conjoined the being an object of 
God's knowledge, for thou art called by the Deity Himself. Be not therefore inflamed, O ye men, with enmity 
one towards another, nor hesitate to retrace(6) with all speed your steps. For Christ is the God above all, 
and He has arranged to wash away sin from human beings, (7) rendering regenerate the old man. And God 
called man His likeness from the beginning, and has evinced in a figure His love towards thee. And 
provided thou obeyest His solemn injunctions, and becomest a faithful follower of Him who is good, thou 
shall resemble Him, inasmuch as thou shall have honour conferred upon thee by Him. For the Deity, (by 
condescension,) does not diminish aught of the divinity of His divine(8) perfection; having made thee even 
God unto His glory
