Ignatius to the Trallians
Translation: Ante-Nicene Fathers, Roberts & Donaldson (1885), public domain
Source: https://archive.org/details/EarlyChurchFathers38Volumes

THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS TO THE TRALLIANS 
SHORTER AND LONGER VERSIONS 

Ignatius, who is also called Theophorus, to the holy Church which is at Tralles, in Asia, beloved of God, the 
Father of Jesus Christ, elect, and worthy of God, possessing peace through the flesh, and blood, and 
passion of Jesus Christ, who is our hope, through our rising again to Him,[1] which also I salute in its 
fulness, [2] and in the apostalical character,[3] and wish abundance of happiness. Ignatius, who is also 
called Theaphorus, to the holy Church which is at Tralles, beloved by God the Rather, and Jesus Christ, 
elect, and worthy of God, possessing peace through the flesh and Spirit of Jesus Christ, who is our hope, in 
His passion by the cross and death, and in His resurrection, which also I salute in its fulness, [2] and in the 
apostolical character,[3] and wish abundance of happiness. 

CHAP. I. -ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF THEIR EXCELLENCE. 

I know that ye possess an unblameable and sincere mind in patience, and that not only in present 
practice, [5] but according to inherent nature, as Polybius your bishop has shown me, who has come to 
Smyrna by the will of God and Jesus Christ, and so sympathized in the joy which I, who am bound in Christ 
Jesus, possess, that I beheld your whole multitude in him. Having therefore received through him the 
testimony of your good-will, according to God, I gloried to find you, as I knew you were, the followers of God. 
I know that ye possess an unblameable and sincere mind in patience, and that not only for present use, [4] 
but as a permanent possession, as Polybius your bishop has shown me, who has come to Smyrna by the 
will of God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, His Son, with the cooperation of the Spirit, and so 
sympathized in the joy which I, who am bound in Christ Jesus, possess, that I beheld your whole multitude in 
Him. Having therefore received through him the testimony of your good-will according to God, I gloried to 
find that you were the followers of Jesus Christ the Saviour. 

CHAP. II. -BE SUBJECT TO THE BISHOP, ETC. 

For, since ye are subject to the bishop as to Jesus Christ, ye appear to me to live not after the manner of 
men, but according to Jesus Christ, who died for us, in order, by believing in His death, ye may escape from 
death. It is therefore necessary that, as ye indeed do, so without the bishop ye should do nothing, but should 
also 

Be ye subject to the bishop as to the Lord, for "he watches for your souls, as one that shall give account to 
God. "[6] Wherefore also, ye appear to me to live not after the manner of men, but according to Jesus Christ, 
who died for us, in order that, by believing in His death, ye may by baptism be made partakers of His 
resurrection. It is therefore necessary, whatsoever things ye do, to do nothing without the bishop. And be ye 
subject also to the presbytery, as to the apostles of Jesus Christ, who is 

be subject to the presbytery, as to the apostle of Jesus Christ, who is our hope, in whom, if we live, we shall 
[at last] be found. It is fitting also that the deacons, as being [the ministers] of the mysteries of Jesus Christ, 
should in every respect be pleasing to all.(1) For they are not ministers of meat and drink, but servants of the 
Church of God. They are bound, therefore, to avoid all grounds of accusation [against them], as they would 
do fire. Our hope, in whom, if we live, we shall be found in Him. It behoves you also, in every way, to please 
the deacons, who are [ministers] of the mysteries of Christ Jesus; for they are not ministers of meat and 
drink, but servants of the Church of God. They are bound, therefore, to avoid all grounds of accusation 
[against them], as they would a burning fire. Let them, then, prove themselves to be such. 

CHAP. III. -HONOUR THE DEACONS, etc. 

In like manner, let all reverence the deacons as an appointment(2) of Jesus Christ, and the bishop as Jesus 
Christ, who is the Son of the Father, and the presbyters as the sanhedrin of God, and assembly of the 
apostles. Apart from these, there is no Church. (4) Concerning all this, I am persuaded that ye are of the 
same opinion. For I have received the manifestations of your love, and still have it with me, in your bishop, 
whose very appearance is highly instructive, (6) and his meekness of itself a power; whom I imagine even 
the ungodly must reverence, seeing they are(7) also pleased that I do not spare myself. But shall I, when 
permitted to write on this point, reach such a height of self-esteem, that though being a condemned(8) man, I 

should issue commands to you as if I were an apostle? 

And do ye reverence them as Christ Jesus, of whose place they are the keepers, even as the bishop is the 
representative of the Father of all things, and the presbyters are the sanhedrim of God, and assembly(3) of 
the apostles of Christ. Apart from these there is no elect Church, no congregation of holy ones, no assembly 
of saints. I am persuaded that ye also are of this opinion. For I have received the manifestation s of your 
love, and still have it with me, in your bishop, whose very appearance is highly instructive, and his 
meekness of itself a power; whom I imagine even the ungodly must reverence. Loving you as I do, I avoid 
writing in any severer strain to you, that I may not seem harsh to any, or wanting [in tenderness]. I am indeed 
bound for the sake of Christ, but I am not yet worthy of Christ. But when I am perfected, perhaps I shall then 
become so. I do not issue orders like an apostle. 

CHAP. IV.--I HAVE NEED OF HUMILITY. 

I have great knowledge in God, (9) but I restrain myself, lest, I should perish through boasting. For now it is 
needful for me to be the more fearful; and not give heed to those that puff me up. For they that speak to me 
[in the way of commendation] scourge me. For I do indeed desire to suffer, but I know not if I be worthy to do 
so. For this longing, though it is not manifest to many, all the more vehemently assails me. (13) I therefore 
have need of meekness, by which the prince of this world is brought to nought. 

But I measure myself, that I may not perish through boasting: but it is good to glory in the Lord. (10) And even 
though I were established(1 1) in things pertaining to God, yet then would it befit me to be the more fearful, 
and not give heed to those that vainly puff me up. For those that commend me scourge me. [I do indeed 
desire to suffer(12)], but I know not if I be worthy to do so. For the envy of the wicked one is not visible to 
many, but it wars against me. I therefore have need of meekness, by which the devil, the prince of this world, 
is brought to nought. 

CHAP. V.--I WILL NOT TEACH YOU PROFOUND DOCTRINES. 

Am I not able to write to you of heavenly things? But I fear to do so, lest I should inflict injury on you who are 
but babes [in Christ]. Pardon me in this respect, lest, as not being able to receive [such doctrines], ye 
should be strangled by them. For even I, though I am bound [for Christ], yet am not on that account able to 
understand heavenly things, and the places(4) of the angels, and their gatherings under their respective 
princes, things visible and invisible. Without reference to such abstruse subjects, I am still but a learner [in 
other respects(5)] ; for many things are wanting to us, that we come not short of God. 
For might(1) not I write to you things more full of mystery? But I fear to do so, lest I should inflict injury on you 
who are but babes [in Christ]. Pardon me in this respect, lest, as not being able to receive their weighty 
import,(2) ye should be strangled by them. For even I, though I am bound [for Christ], and am able to 
understand heavenly things, the angelic orders, and the different sorts(3) of angels and hosts, the 
distinctions between powers and dominions, and the diversities between thrones and authorities, the 
mightiness of the Aeons, and the pre-eminence of the cherubim and seraphim, the sublimity of the spirit, the 
kingdom of the Lord, and above all, the incomparable majesty of Almighty God-though I am acquainted 
with these things, yet am I not therefore by any means perfect; nor am I such a disciple as Paul or Peter. For 
many things are yet wanting to me, that I may not fall short of God. 

CHAP. VI. -ABSTAIN FROM THE POISON OF HERETICS. 

I therefore, yet not I, but the love of Jesus Christ, entreat you that ye use Christian nourishment only, and 
abstain from herbage of a different kind; I mean heresy. For those(7) [that are given to this] mix(1 1) up Jesus 
Christ with their own poison, speaking things which are unworthy of credit, like those who administer a 
deadly drug in sweet wine, which he who is ignorant of does greedily(1 3) take, with a fatal pleasure(1 4) 
leading to his own death. 

I therefore, yet not I, out the love of Jesus Christ, "entreat you that ye all speak the same thing, and that there 
be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same 
judgment."(6) For there are some vain talkers(8) and deceivers, not Christians, but Christ-betrayers, (9) 
bearing about the name of Christ in deceit, and "corrupting the word"(10) of the Gospel; while they intermix 
the poison of their deceit with their persuasive talk,(12) as if they mingled aconite with sweet wine, that so he 
who drinks, being deceived in his taste by the very great sweetness of the draught, may incautiously meet 
with his death. One of the ancients gives us this advice, "Let no man be called good who mixes good with 
evil."(1 5) For they speak of Christ, not that they may preach Christ, but that they may reject Christ; and they 
speak(16) of the law, not that they may establish the law, but that they may proclaim things contrary to it. For 
they alienate Christ from the Father, and the law from Christ. They also calumniate His being born of the 

Virgin; they are ashamed of His cross; they deny His passion; and they do not believe His resurrection. 
They introduce God as a Being unknown; they suppose Christ to be unbegotten; and as to the Spirit, they do 
not admit that He exists. Some of them say that the Son is a mere man, and that the Father, Son, and Holy 
Spirit are but the same person, and that the creation is the work of God, not by Christ, but by some other 
strange power. 

CHAP. VII. -THE SAME CONTINUED. 

Be on your guard, therefore, against such persons. And this will be the case with you if you are not puffed up, 
and continue in intimate union with(17) Jesus Christ our God, and the 

Be on your guard, [therefore, against such persons, that ye admit not of a snare for your own souls. And act 
so that your life shall be without offence to all men, lest ye become as "a snare upon a watch-tower, and as 
a net which is spread out."(1 8) For" he that does not heal him- 

bishop, and the enactments of the apostles. He that is within the altar is pure, but(2) he that is without is not 
pure; that is, he who does anything apart from the bishop, and presbytery, and deacons, (4) such a man is 
not pure in his conscience. Self in his own works, is the brother of him that destroys himself."(1) If, therefore, 
ye also put away conceit, arrogance, disdain, and haughtiness, it will be your privilege to be inseparably 
united to God, for "He is nigh unto those that fear Him. "(3) And says He, "Upon whom will I look, but upon him 
that is humble and quiet, and that trembles at my words?"(5) And do ye also reverence your bishop as 
Christ Himself, according as the blessed apostles have enjoined you. He that is within the altar is pure, 
wherefore also he is obedient to the bishop and presbyters: but he that is without is one that does anything 
apart from the bishop, the presbyters, and the deacons. Such a person is defiled in his conscience, and is 
worse than an infidel. For what is the bishop but one who beyond all others possesses all power and 
authority, so far as it is possible for a man to possess it, who according to his ability has been made an 
imitator of the Christ Of God?(6) And what is the presbytery but a sacred assembly, the counsellors and 
assessors of the bishop? And what are the deacons but imitators of the angelic powers, (7) fulfilling a pure 
and blameless ministry unto him, as the holy Stephen did to the blessed James, Timothy and Linus to Paul, 
Anencletus and Clement to Peter? He, therefore, that will not yield obedience to such, must needs be one 
utterly without God, an impious man who despises Christ, and depreciates His appointments. 

CHAP. VIM. --BE ON YOUR GUARD AGAINST THE SNARES OF THE DEVIL. 

Not that I Know there is anything of this kind among you; but I put you on your guard, inasmuch as I love you 
greatly, and foresee the snares of the devil. Wherefore, clothing(1 1) yourselves with meekness, be ye 
renewed(12) in faith, that is the flesh of the Lord, and in love, that is the blood of Jesus Christ. Let no one of 
you cherish any grudge against his neighbour. Give no occasion to the Gentiles, lest by means of a few 
foolish men the whole multitude [of those that believe] in God be evil spoken of. For, "Woe to him by whose 
vanity my name is blasphemed among any. "(17) 

Now I write these things unto you, not that I know there are any such persons among you; nay, indeed I hope 
that God will never permit any such report to reach my ears, He "who spared not His Son for the sake of His 
holy Church. "(8) But foreseeing the snares of the wicked one, I arm you beforehand by my admonitions, as 
my beloved and faithful children in Christ, furnishing you with the means of protection(9) against the deadly 
disease of unruly men, by which do ye flee from the disease(10) [referred to] by the good-will of Christ our 
Lord. Do ye therefore, clothing(1 1) yourselves with meekness, become the imitators of His sufferings, and of 
His love, wherewith(13) He loved us when He gave Himself a ransom(14) for us, that He might cleanse us 
by His blood from our old ungodliness, and bestow life on us when we were almost on the point of perishing 
through the depravity that was in us. Let no one of you, therefore, cherish any grudge against his neighbour. 
For says our Lord, "Forgive, and it shall be forgiven unto you. "(15) Give no occasion to the Gentiles, lest "by 
means of a few foolish men the word and doctrine [of Christ.] be blasphemed. "(16) For says the prophet, as 
in the person of God, "Woe to him by whom my name is blasphemed among the Gentiles. "(17) 

CHAP. IX, -REFERENCE TO THE HISTORY OF CHRIST. 

Stop your ears, therefore, when any one speaks to you at variance with(1 8) Jesus Christ, the Son of God, 
who was descended from David, and was also of Mary; who was truly born, and did eat and drink. He was 
truly persecuted under Pontius Pilate; He was truly crucified, and [truly] died, in the sight of beings in heaven, 
and on earth, and under the earth. He was also truly raised from the dead, His Father quickening Him, even 
as after the same manner His Father will so raise up us who believe in Him by Christ Jesus, apart from 
whom we do not possess the true life. Descended from David, and was also of Mary; who was truly 
begotten of God and of the Virgin, but not after the same manner. For indeed God and man are not the 

same. He truly assumed a body; for "the Word was made flesh, "(1) and lived upon earth without sin. For 
says He, "Which of you convicteth me of sin?"(2) He did in reality both eat and drink. He was crucified and 
died under Pontius Pilate. He really, and not merely in appearance, was crucified, and died, in the sight of 
beings in heaven, and on earth, and under the earth. By those in heaven I mean such as are possessed of 
incorporeal natures; by those on earth, the Jews and Romans, and such persons as were present at that 
time when the Lord was crucified; and by those under the earth, the multitude that arose along with the Lord. 
For says the Scripture, "Many bodies of the saints that slept arose, "(3) their graves being opened. He 
descended, indeed, into Hades alone, but He arose accompanied by a multitude; and rent asunder that 
means(4) of separation which had existed from the beginning of the world, and cast down its partition-wall. 
He also rose again in three days, the Father raising Him up; and after spending forty days with the apostles, 
He was received up to the Father, and "sat down at His right hand, expecting till His enemies are placed 
under His feet."(5) On the day of the preparation, then, at the third hour, He received the sentence from 
Pilate, the Father permitting that to happen; at the sixth hour He was crucified; at the ninth hour He gave up 
the ghost; and before sunset He was buried. (6) During the Sabbath He continued under the earth in the tomb 
in which Joseph of Arimathaea had laid Him. At the dawning of the Lord's day He arose from the dead, 
according to what was spoken by Himself, "As Jonah was three days and three nights in the whale's belly, 
so shall the Son of man also be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth. "(7) The day of the 
preparation, then, comprises the passion; the Sabbath embraces the burial; the Lord's Day contains the 
resurrection. 

CHAP. X.-THE REALITY OF CHRIST'S PASSION. 

But if, as some that are without God, that is, the unbelieving, say, that He only seemed to suffer (they 
themselves only seeming to exist), then why am I in bonds? Why do I long to be exposed to s the wild 
beasts? Do I therefore die in vain?(9) Am I not then guilty of falsehood^ 0) against [the cross of] the Lord? 
But if, as some that are without God, that is, the unbelieving, say, He became man in appearance [only], that 
He did not in reality take unto Him a body, that He died in appearance [merely], and did not in very deed 
suffer, then for what reason am I now in bonds, and long to be exposed to(8) the wild beasts? In such a case, 
I die in vain, and am guilty of falsehood^ 0) against the cross of the Lord. Then also does the prophet in vain 
declare, "They shall look on Him whom they have pierced, and mourn over themselves as over one 
beloved. "(1 1) These men, therefore, are not less unbelievers than were those that crucified Him. But as for 
me, I do not place my hopes in one who died for me in appearance, but in reality. For that which is false is 
quite abhorrent to the truth. Mary then did truly conceive a body which had God inhabiting it. And God the 
Word was truly born of the Virgin, having clothed Himself with a body of like passions with our own. He who 
forms all men in the womb, was Himself really in the womb, and made for Himself a body of the seed of the 
Virgin, but without any intercourse of man. He was carried in the womb, even as we are, for the usual period 
of time; and was really born, as we also are; and was in reality nourished with milk, and partook of common 
meat and drink, even as we do. And when He had lived among men for thirty years, He was baptized by 
John, really and not in appearance; and when He had preached the Gospel three years, and done signs 
and wonders, He who was Himself the Judge was judged by the Jews, falsely so called, and by Pilate the 
governor; was scourged, was smitten on the cheek, was spit upon; He wore a crown of thorns and a purple 
robe; He was condemned: He was crucified in reality, and not in appearance, not in imagination, not in 
deceit. He really died, and was buried, and rose from the dead, even as He prayed in a certain place, 
saying, "But do Thou, O Lord, raise me up again, and I shall recompense them."(1) And the Father, who 
always hears Him, (2) answered and said, "Arise, O God, and judge the earth; for Thou shall receive all the 
heathen for Thine inheritance. "(3) The Father, therefore, who raised Him up, will also raise us up through 
Him, apart from whom no one will attain to true life. For says He, "I am the life; he that believeth in me, even 
though he die, shall live: and every one that liveth and believeth in me, even though he die, shall live for 
ever."(4) Do ye therefore flee from these ungodly heresies; for they are the inventions of the devil, that 
serpent who was the author of evil, and who by means of the woman deceived Adam, the father of our race. 

CHAP. XI. -AVOID THE DEADLY ERRORS OF THE DOCETAE. 

Flee, therefore, those evil offshoots [of Satan], which produce death-bearing fruit, whereof if any one tastes, 
he instantly dies. For these men are not the planting of the Father. For if they were, they would appear as 
branches of the cross, and their fruit would be incorruptible. By it(9) He calls you through His passion, as 
being His members. The head, therefore, cannot be born by itself, without its members; God, who is [the 
Saviour] Himself, having promised their union. (10) 

Do ye also avoid those wicked offshoots of his, (5) Simon his firstborn son, and Menander, and Basilides, 
and all his wicked mob of followers, (6) the worshippers of a man, whom also the prophet Jeremiah 

pronounces accursed. (7) Flee also the impure Nicolaitanes, falsely so called, (8) who are lovers of 
pleasure, and given to calumnious speeches. Avoid also the children of the evil one, Theodotus and 
Cleobulus, who produce death-bearing fruit, whereof if any one tastes, he instantly dies, and that not a mere 
temporary death, but one that shall endure for ever. These men are not the planting of the Father, but are an 
accursed brood. And says the Lord, "Let every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted be rooted 
up. "(11) For if they had been branches of the Father, they would not have been "enemies of the cross of 
Christ,"(12) but rather of those who "killed the Lord of glory. "(13) But now, by denying the cross, and being 
ashamed of the passion, they cover the transgression of the Jews, those fighters against God, those 
murderers of the Lord; for it were too little to style them merely murderers of the prophets. But Christ invites 
you to [share in] His immortality, by His passion and resurrection, inasmuch as ye are His members. 

CHAP. XII. -CONTINUE IN UNITY AND LOVE. 

I salute you from Smyrna, together with the Churches of God which are with me, who have refreshed me in all 
things, both in the flesh and in the spirit. My bonds, which I carry about with me for the sake of Jesus Christ 
(praying that I may attain to God), exhort you. Continue in harmony among yourselves, and in prayer with 
one another; for it becomes every one of you, and especially the presbyters, to refresh the bishop, to the 
hon-our of the Father, of Jesus Christ, and of the apostles. I entreat you in love to hear me, that I may not, by 
having written, be a testimony against you. And do ye also pray for me, who have need of your love, along 
with the mercy of God, that I may be worthy of the lot for which I am destined, and that I may not be found 
reprobate. 

I salute you from Smyrna, together with the Churches of God which are with me, whose rulers have refreshed 
me in every respect, both in the flesh and in the spirit. My bonds, which I carry about with me for the sake of 
Jesus Christ (praying that I may attain to God), exhort you. Continue in harmony among yourselves, and in 
supplication; for it becomes every one of you, and especially the presbyters, to refresh the bishop, to the 
honour of the Father, and to the honour of Jesus Christ and of the apostles. I entreat you in love to hear me, 
that I may not, by having thus written, be a testimony against you. And do ye also pray for me, who have 
need of your love, along with the mercy of God, that I may be thought worthy to attain the lot for which I am 
now designed, and that I may not be found reprobate. 

CHAP. XIII. -CONCLUSION. 

The love of the Smymaeans and Ephesians salutes you. Remember in your prayers the Church which is in 
Syria, from which also I am not worthy to receive my appellation, being the last(1) of them. Fare ye well in 
Jesus Christ, while ye continue subject to the bishop, as to the command [of God], and in like manner to the 
presbytery. And do ye, every man, love one another with an undivided heart. Let my spirit be sanctified(2) 
by yours, not only now, but also when I shall attain to God. For I am as yet exposed to danger. But the Father 
is faithful in Jesus Christ to fulfil both mine and your petitions: in whom may ye be found unblameable. 
The love of the Smyrnaeans and Ephesians salutes you. Remember our Church which is in Syria, from 
which I am not worthy to receive my appellation, being the last(1) of those of that place. Fare ye well in the 
Lord Jesus Christ, while ye continue subject to the bishop, and in like manner to the presbyters and to the 
deacons. And do ye, every man, love one another with an undivided heart. My spirit salutes you, (2) not only 
now, but also when I shall have attained to God; for I am as yet exposed to danger. But the Father of Jesus 
Christ is faithful to fulfil both mine and your petitions: in whom may we be found without spot. May I have joy of 
you in the Lord.
