Ignatius to Polycarp
Translation: Ante-Nicene Fathers, Roberts & Donaldson (1885), public domain
Source: https://archive.org/details/EarlyChurchFathers38Volumes

THE EPISTLE OF IGNATIUS TO POLYCARP SHORTER 
AND LONGER VERSIONS 

Ignatius, who is also called Theophorus, to Polycarp, Bishop of the Church of the Smyrnaaans, or rather, who 
has, as his own bishop, God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ:[wishes] abundance of happiness. 
Ignatius, bishop of Antioch, and a witness for Jesus Christ, to Polycarp, Bishop of the Church of the 
Smyrnaaans, or rather, who has, as his own bishop, God the Father, and Jesus Christ:[wishes] abundance of 
happiness. 

CHAP. I.-- COMMENDATION AND EXHORTATION. 

HAVING obtained good proof that thy mind is fixed in God as upon an immoveable rock, I loudly glorify[His 
name] that I have been thought worthy[to behold] thy blameless face,(1) which may I ever enjoy in God! I 
entreat thee, by the grace with which thou art clothed, to press forward in thy course, and to exhort all that 
they may be saved. Maintain thy position with all care, both in the flesh and spirit. Have a regard to preserve 
unity, than which nothing is better. Bear with all, even as the Lord does with thee. Support(2) all in love, as 
also thou doest. Give thyself to prayer without ceasing. (3) Implore additional understanding to what thou 
already hast. Be watchful, possessing a sleepless spirit. Speak to every man separately, as God enables 
thee. (4) Bear the infirmities of all, as being a perfect athlete[in the Christian life]: where the labour is great, the 
gain is all the more. HAVING obtained good proof that thy mind is fixed in God as upon an immoveable 
rock, I loudly glorify[His name] that I have been thought worthy to behold thy blameless face,(1) which may I 
ever enjoy in God! I entreat thee, by the grace with which thou art clothed, to press forward in thy course, and 
to exhort all that they may be saved. Maintain thy position with all care, both in the flesh and spirit. Have a 
regard to preserve unity, than which nothing is better. Bear with all even as the Lord does with thee. 
Support(2) all in love, as also thou doest. Give thyself to prayer Without ceasing. (3) Implore additional 
understanding to what thou already hast. Be watchful, possessing a sleepless spirit. Speak to every man 
separately, as God enables thee. (4) Bear the infirmities of all, as being a perfect athlete[in the Christian life], 
even as does the Lord of all. For says[the Scripture], "He Himself took our infirmities, and bare our 
sicknesses. "(5) Where the labour is great, the gain is all the more. 

CHAP. II. -EXHORTATIONS. 

If thou lovest the good disciples, no thanks are due to thee on that account; but rather seek by meekness to 
subdue the more troublesome. Every kind of wound is not healed with the same plaster. Mitigate violent 
attacks[of disease] by gentle applications. (6) Be in all things "wise as a serpent, and harmless always as a 
If thou lovest the good disciples, no thanks are due to thee on that account; but rather seek by meekness to 
subdue the more troublesome. Every kind of wound is not healed with the same plaster. Mitigate violent 
attacks[of disease] by gentle applications. (1) Be in all things "wise as a serpent, and harmless as a 
dove. "(2) For this purpose thou art composed of both flesh and spirit, that thou mayest deal tenderly(3) with 
those[evils] that present themselves visibly before thee. And as respects those that are not seen, (4) pray 
that[God] would reveal them unto thee, in order that thou mayest be wanting in nothing, but mayest abound 
in every gift. The times call for thee, as pilots do for the winds, and as on tossed with tempest seeks for the 
haven, so that both thou[and those under thy care] may attain to God. Be sober as an athlete of God: the 
prize set before thee is immortality and eternal life, of which thou art also persuaded. In all things may my 
soul be for thing, (5) and my bonds also, which thou hast loved, dove. "(2) For this purpose thou art 
composed of both soul and body, art both fleshly and spiritual, that thou mayest correct those[evils] that 
present themselves visibly before thee; and as respects those that are not seen, mayest pray that these 
should be revealed to thee, so that thou mayest be wanting in nothing, but mayest abound in every gift. The 
times call upon thee to pray. For as the wind aids the pilot of a ship, and as havens are advantageous for 
safety to a tempest-tossed vessel, so is also prayer to thee, in order that thou mayest attain to God. Be 
sober as an athlete of God, whose will is immortality and eternal life; of which thou art also persuaded. In all 
things may my soul be for thine, (5) and my bonds also, which thou hast loved. 

CHAP. III. --EXHORTATIONS. 

Let not those who seem worthy of credit, but teach strange doctrines, (6) fill thee with apprehension. Stand 
firm, as does an anvil which is beaten. It is the part of a noble(7) athlete to be wounded, and yet to conquer. 
And especially, we ought to bear all things for the sake of God, that He also may bear with us. Be ever 
becoming more zealous than what thou art. Weigh carefully the times. Look for Him who is above all time, 
eternal and invisible, yet who became visible for our sakes; impalpable and impassible, yet who became 
passible on our account; and who in every kind of way suffered for our sakes. 

Let not those who seem worthy of credit, but teach strange doctrines, (6) fill thee with apprehension. Stand 
firm, as does an anvil which is beaten. It is the part of a noble(7) athlete to be wounded, and yet to conquer. 
And especially we ought to bear all things for the sake of God, that He also may bear with us, and bring us 
into His kingdom. Add more and more to thy diligence; run thy race with increasing energy; weigh carefully 
the times. Whilst thou art here, be a conqueror; for here is the course, and there are the crowns, Look for 
Christ, the Son of God; who was before time, yet appeared in time; who was invisible by nature, yet visible in 
the flesh; who was impalpable, and could not be touched, as being without a body, but for our sakes 
became such, might be touched and handled in the body; who was impassible as God, but became 
passible for our sakes as man; and who in every kind of way suffered for our sakes. 

CHAP. IV.--EXHORTATIONS. 

Let not widows be neglected. Be thou, after the Lord, their protector s and friend. Let nothing be done without 

thy consent; neither do thou anything without the approval of God, which indeed thou dost not, inasmuch as 

thou art stedfast. Let your assembling together be of of frequent(9) occurrence: seek after all by name.(1 0) 

Do not despise either male or female slaves, yet neither let them be puffed up with conceit, but rather let 

them 

Let not the widows be neglected. Be thou, after the Lord, their protector and friend. Let nothing be done 

without thy consent; neither do thou anything without the approval of God, which indeed thou doest not. Be 

thou stedfast. Let your assembling together be of frequent(9) occurrence: seek after all by name. (10) Do not 

despise either male or female slaves, yet neither let them be puffed up with conceit, but rather let them 

submit themselves(11) the more, for the glory of God, that they may obtain from God a better liberty. Let them 

not wish to be set free[from slavery] at the public expense, that they be not found slaves to their own 

desires. 

submit themselves(l) the more, for the glory of God, that they my obtain from God a better liberty. Let them 

not long to be set free[from slavery] at the public expense, that they be not found slaves to their own 

desires. 

CHAP. V.--THE DUTIES OF HUSBANDS AND WIVES. 

Flee evil arts; but all the more discourse in public regarding them. (2) Speak to my sisters, that they love the 
Lord, and be satisfied with their husbands both in the flesh and spirit. In like manner also, exhort my brethren, 
in the name of Jesus Christ, that they love their wives, even as the Lord the Church. (3) If any one can 
continue in a state of purity, (4) to the honour of Him who is Lord of the flesh, (5) let him so remain without 
boasting. If he begins to boast, he is undone; and if he reckon himself greater than the bishop, he is ruined. 
But it becomes both men and women who marry, to form their union with the approval of the bishop, that their 
marriage may be according to God, and not after their own lust. Let all things be done to the honour of 
God. (7) 

Flee evil arts; but all the more discourse in public regarding them. Speak to my sisters, that they love the 
Lord, and be satisfied with their husbands both in the flesh and spirit. In like manner also, exhort my brethren, 
in the name of Jesus Christ, that they love their wives, even as the Lord the Church. If any one can continue in 
a state of purity, (4) to the honour of the flesh of the Lord, let him so remain without boasting. If he shall boast, 
he is undone; and if he seeks to be more prominent(6) than the bishop, he is ruined. But it becomes both 
men and women who marry, to form their union with the approval of the bishop, that their marriage may be 
according to the Lord, and not after their own lust. Let all things be done to the honour of God. (7) 

CHAP. VI. --THE DUTIES OF THE CHRISTIAN FLOCK. 

Give ye heed to the bishop, that God also may give heed to you. My soul be for theirs(9) that are 
submissive to the bishop, to the presbyters, and to the deacons, and may my portion be along with them in 
God! Labour together with one another; strive in company together; run together; suffer together; sleep 
together; and awake together, as the stewards, and associates, (10) and servants of God. Please ye Him 
under whom ye fight, and from whom ye receive your wages. Let none of you be found a deserter. Let your 
baptism endure as your arms; your faith as your helmet; your love as your spear; your patience as a 

complete panoply. Let your works be the charge(12) assigned to you, that ye may receive a worthy 
recompense. Be long-suffering, therefore, with one another, in meekness, as God is towards you. May I have 
joy of you for ever!(13) 

Give ye heed to the bishop, that God also may give heed to you. My soul be for theirs(9) that are 
submissive to the bishop, to the presbytery, and to the deacons: may I have my portion with them from God! 
Labour together with one another; strive in company together; run together; suffer together; sleep together; 
and awake together, as the stewards, and associates, (1 0) and servants of God. Please ye Him under 
whom ye fight, and from whom ye shall receive your wages. Let none of you be found a deserter. Let your 
baptism endure as your arms; your faith as your helmet; your love as your spear; your patience as a 
complete panoply. Let your works be the charge assigned to you, that you may obtain for them a most 
worthy(11) recompense. Be long-suffering, therefore, with one another, in meekness, and God shall be so 
with you. May I have joy of you for ever!(13) 

CHAP. VII. -REQUEST THAT POLYCARP WOULD SEND A MESSENGER TO ANTIOCH. 

Seeing that the Church which is at Antioch in Syria is, as report has informed me, at peace, through your 
prayers, I also am the more encouraged, resting without anxiety in God,(1) if indeed by means of suffering I 
may attain to God, so that, through your prayers, I may be found a disciple[of Christ]. (2) It is fitting, O 
Polycarp, most blessed in God, to assemble a very solemn(3) council, and to elect one whom you greatly 
love, and know to be a man of activity, who may be designated the messenger of God;(4) and to bestow on 
him this honour that he may go into Syria, and glorify your ever active love to the praise of Christ. A Christian 
has not power over himself, but must always be ready for s the service of God. Now, this work is both God's 
and yours, when ye shall have completed it to His glory. (6) For I trust that, through grace, ye are prepared for 
every good work pertaining to God. Knowing, therefore, your energetic love of the truth, I have exhorted you 
by this brief Epistle. 

Seeing that the Church which is at Antioch in Syria is, as report has informed me, at peace, through your 
prayers, I also am the more encouraged, resting without anxiety in God,(1) if indeed by means of suffering I 
may attain to God, so that, through your prayers, I may be found a disciple[of Christ]. It is fitting, O Polycarp, 
most blessed in God, to assemble a very solemn(3) council, and to elect one whom you greatly love, and 
know to be a man of activity, who may be designated the messenger of God;(4) and to bestow on him the 
honour of going into Syria, so that, going into Syria, he may glorify your ever active love to the praise of God. 
A Christian has not power over himself, but must always be ready for(5) the service of God. Now, this work is 
both God's and yours, when ye shall have completed it. For I trust that, through grace, ye are prepared for 
every good work pertaining to God. Knowing your energetic love of the truth, I have exhorted you by this 
brief Epistle. 

CHAP. VIM. --LET OTHER CHURCHES ALSO SEND TO ANTIOCH. 

Inasmuch as I have not been able to write to all the Churches, because I must suddenly sail from Troas to 
Neapolis, as the will(7)[of the emperor] enjoins, [I beg that] thou, as being acquainted with the purpose(8) of 
God, wilt write to the adjacent Churches, that they also may act in like manner, such as are able to do so 
sending messengers, (9) and the others transmitting letters through those persons who are sent by thee, that 
thou(10) mayest be glorified by a work(1 1) which shall be remembered for ever, as indeed thou art worthy to 
be. I salute all by name, and in particutar the wife of Epitropus, with all her house and children. I salute 
Attalus, my beloved. I salute him who shall be deemed worthy to go[from you] into Syria. Grace shall be with 
him for ever, and with Polycarp that sends him. I pray for your happiness for ever in our God, Jesus Christ, by 
whom continue ye in the unity and under the protection of God, (12) I salute Alee, my dearly beloved. (13) 
Fare ye well in the Lord. 

Inasmuch, therefore, as I have not been able to write to all Churches, because I must suddenly sail from 
Troas to Neapolis, as the will(7)[of the emperor] enjoins, [I beg that] thou, as being acquainted with the 
purpose s of God, wilt write to the adjacent Churches, that they also may act in like manner, such as are able 
to do so sending messenger, and the others transmitting letters through those persons who are sent by 
thee, that thou mayest be glorified by a work(1 1) which shall be remembered for ever, as indeed thou art 
worthy to be. I salute all by name, and in particular the wife of Epitropus, with all her house and children. I 
salute Attalus, my beloved. I salute him who shall be deemed worthy to go[from you] into Syria. Grace shall 
be with him for ever, and with Polycarp that sends him. I pray for your happiness for ever in our God, Jesus 
Christ, by whom continue ye in the unity and under the protection of God. I salute Alee, my dearly 
betoved.(13) Amen. Grace[be with you]. Fare ye well in the Lord.
