Irenaeus, Against Heresies, Books IV-V
Translation: Roberts-Donaldson 1885 (Ante-Nicene Fathers), Public Domain
Source: https://archive.org/details/EarlyChurchFathers38Volumes

BOOK IV. 
PREFACE. 

1. By transmitting to thee, my very dear friend, this fourth book of the work which is [entitled] The Detection 
and Refuation of False Knowledge, I shall, as I have promised, add weight, by means of the words of the 
Lord, to what I have already advanced; so that thou also, as thou hast requested, mayest obtain from me the 
means of confuting all the heretics everywhere, and not permit them, beaten back at all points, to launch out 
further into the deep of error, nor to be drowned in the sea of ignorance; but that thou, turning them into the 
haven of the truth, mayest cause them to attain their salvation. 

2. The man, however, who would undertake their conversion, must possess an accurate knowledge of their 
systems or schemes of doctrine. For it is impossible for any one to heal the sick, if he has no knowledge of 
the disease of the patients. This was the reason that my predecessors-much superior men to myself, 
too-were unable, notwithstanding, to refute the Valentinians satisfactorily, because they were ignorant of 
these men's system;(1) which I have with all care delivered to thee in the first book in which I have also 
shown that their doctrine is a recapitulation of all the heretics. For which reason also, in the second, we have 
had, as in a mirror, a sight of their entire discomfiture. For they who oppose these men (the Valentinians) by 
the right method, do [thereby] oppose all who are of an evil mind; and they who overthrow them, do in fact 
overthrow every kind of heresy. 

3. For their system is blasphemous above all [others], since they represent that the Maker and Framer, who 
is one God, as I have shown, was produced from a defect or apostasy. They utter blasphemy, also, against 
our Lord, by cutting off and dividing Jesus from Christ, and Christ from the Saviour, and again the Saviour 
from the Word, and the Word from the Only-begotten. And since they allege that the Creator originated from 
a defect or apostasy, so have they also taught that Christ and the Holy Spirit were emitted on account of this 
defect, and that the Saviour was a product of those Aeons who were produced from a defect; so that there is 
nothing but blasphemy to be found among them. In the preceding book, then, the ideas of the apostles as to 
all these points have been set forth, [to the effect] that not only did they, "who from the beginning were 
eye-witnesses and ministers of the word"(2) of truth, hold no such opinions, but that they did also preach to 
us to shun these doctrines, (3) foreseeing by the Spirit those weak-minded persons who should be led 
astray. (4) 

4. For as the serpent beguiled Eve, by promising her what he had not himself,(5) so also do these men, by 
pretending [to possess] superior knowledge, and [to be acquainted with] ineffable mysteries; and, by 
promising that admittance which they speak of as taking place within the Pleroma, plunge those that believe 
them into death, rendering them apostates from Him who made them. And at that time, indeed, the apostate 
angel, having effected the disobedience of mankind by means of the serpent, imagined that he escaped 
the notice of the Lord; wherefore God assigned him the form(6) and name [of a serpent]. But now, since the 
last times are [come upon us], evil is spread abroad among men, which not only renders them apostates, 
but by many machinations does [the devil] raise up blasphemers against the Creator, namely, by means of 
all the heretics already mentioned. For all these, although they issue forth from diverse regions, and 
promulgate different [opinions], do nevertheless concur in the same blasphemous design, wounding [men] 
unto death, by teaching blasphemy against God our Maker and Supporter, and derogating from the 
salvation of man. Now man is a mixed organization of soul and flesh, who was formed after the likeness of 
God, and moulded by His hands, that is, by the Son and Holy Spirit, to whom also He said, "Let Us make 
man."(1) This, then, is the aim of him who envies our life, to render men disbelievers in their own salvation, 
and blasphemous against God the Creator. For whatsoever all the heretics may have advanced with the 
utmost solemnity, they come to this at last, that they blaspheme the Creator, and disallow the salvation of 
God's workmanship, which the flesh truly is; on behalf of which I have proved, in a variety of ways, that the 
Son of God accomplished the whole dispensation [of mercy], and have shown that there is none other 
called God by the Scriptures except the Father of all, and the Son, and those who possess the adoption. 

CHAP. I. --THE LORD ACKNOWLEDGED BUT ONE GOD AND FATHER. 

1 . Since, therefore, this is sure and stedfast, that no other God or Lord was announced by the Spirit, except 
Him who, as God, rules over all, together with His Word, and those who receive the Spirit of adoption, (2) that 
is, those who believe in the one and true God, and in Jesus Christ the Son of God; and likewise that the 
apostles did Of themselves term no one else as God, or name [no other] as Lord; and, what is much more 
important, [since it is true] that our Lord [acted likewise], who did also command us to confess no one as 
Father, except Him who is in the heavens, who is the one God and the one Father;-those things are clearly 
shown to be false which these deceivers and most perverse sophists advance, maintaining that the being 
whom they have themselves invented is by nature both God and Father; but that the I Demiurge is naturally 
neither God nor Father, but is so termed merely by courtesy (verbo tenus), because of his ruling the 
creation, these perverse mythologists state, setting their thoughts against God; and, putting aside the 
doctrine of Christ, and of themselves divining falsehoods, they dispute against the entire dispensation of 
God. For they maintain that their Aeons, and gods, and fathers, and lords, are also still further termed 
heavens, together with their Mother, whom they do also call "the Earth," and "Jerusalem," while they also 
style her many other names. 

2. Now to whom is it not clear, that if the Lord had known many fathers and gods, He would not have taught 
His disciples to know [only] one God, (3) and to call Him alone Father? But He did the rather distinguish 
those who by word merely (verbo tenus) are termed gods, from Him who is truly God, that they should not err 
as to His doctrine, nor understand one [in mistake] for another. And if He did indeed teach us to call one 
Being Father and God, while He does from time to time Himself confess other fathers and gods in the same 
sense, then He will appear to enjoin a different course upon His disciples from what He follows Himself. 
Such conduct, however, does not bespeak the good teacher, but a misleading and invidious one. The 
apostles, too, according to these men's showing, are proved to be transgressors of the commandment, 
since they confess the Creator as God, and Lord, and Father, as I have shown-if He is not alone God and 
Father. Jesus, therefore, will be to them the author and teacher of such transgression, inasmuch as He 
commanded that one Being should be called Father,(4) thus imposing upon them the necessity of 
confessing the Creator as their Father, as has been pointed out. 

CHAP. II. -PROOFS FROM THE PLAIN TESTIMONY OF MOSES, AND OF THE OTHER 
PROPHETS, WHOSE WORDS ARE THE WORDS OF CHRIST, THAT THERE IS BUT ONE 
GOD, THE FOUNDER OF THE WORLD, WHOM OUR LORD PREACHED, AND WHOM HE 
CALLED HIS FATHER. 

1 . Moses, therefore, making a recapitulation of the whole law, which he had received from the Creator 
(Demiurge), thus speaks in Deuteronomy: "Give ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak; and hear, O earth, the 
words of my mouth. "(5) Again, David saying that his help came from the Lord, asserts: "My help is from the 
LORD, who made heaven and earth. "(6) And Esaias confesses that words were uttered by God, who made 
heaven and earth, and governs them. He says: "Hear, O heavens; and give ear, O earth: for the LORD hath 
spoken. "(7) And again: "Thus saith the LORD God, who made the heaven, and stretched it out; who 
established the earth, and the things in it; and who giveth breath to the people upon it, and spirit to them who 
walktherein."(8) 

2. Again, our Lord Jesus Christ confesses this same Being as His Father, where He says: "I confess to thee, 
O Father, Lord of heaven and earth. "(1) What Father will those men have us to understand [by these words], 
those who are most perverse sophists of Pandora? Whether shall it be Bythus, whom they have fabled of 
themselves; or their Mother; or the Only-begotten? Or shall it be he whom the Marcionites or the others have 
invented as god (whom I indeed have amply demonstrated to be no god at all); or shall it be (what is really 
the case) the Maker of heaven and earth, whom also the prophets proclaimed, -whom Christ, too, confesses 
as His Father,-whom also the law announces, saying: "Hear, O Israel; The Lord thy God is one God?"(2) 

3. But since the writings (litera) of Moses are the words of Christ, He does Himself declare to the Jews, as 
John has recorded in the Gospel: "If ye had believed Moses, ye would have believed Me: for he wrote of 
Me. But if ye believe not his writings, neither will ye believe My words. "(3) He thus indicates in the cleareat 
manner that the writings of Moses are His words. If, then, [this be the case with regard] to Moses, so also, 
beyond a doubt, the words of the other prophets are His [words], as I have pointed out. And again, the Lord 
Himself exhibits Abraham as having said to the rich man, with reference to all those who were still alive: "If 
they do not obey Moses and the prophets, neither, if any one were to rise from the dead and go to them, will 
they believe him. "(4) 

4. Now, He has not merely related to us a story respecting a poor man and a rich one; but He has taught us, 
in the first place, that no one should lead a luxurious life, nor, living in worldly pleasures and perpetual 

feastings, should be the slave of his lusts, and forget God. "For there was," He says, "a rich man, who was 
clothed in purple and fine linen, and delighted himself with splendid feasts. "(5) 

Of such persons, too, the Spirit has spoken by Esaias: "They drink wine with [the accompaniment of] harps, 
and tablets, and psalteries, and flutes; but they regard not the works of God, neither do they consider the 
work of His hands. "(6) Lest, therefore, we should incur the same punishment as these men, the Lord reveals 
[to us] their end; showing at the same time, that if they obeyed Moses and the prophets, they would believe 
in Him whom these had preached, the Son of God, who rose from the dead, and bestows life upon us; and 
He shows that all are from one essence, that is, Abraham, and Moses, and the prophets, and also the Lord 
Himself, who rose from the dead, in whom many believe who are of the circumcision, who do also hear 
Moses and the prophets announcing the coming of the Son of God. But those who scoff [at the truth] assert 
that these men were from another essence, and they do not know the first-begotten from the dead; 
understanding Christ as a distinct being, who continued as if He were impassible, and Jesus, who suffered, 
as being altogether separate [from Him]. 

5. For they do not receive from the Father the knowledge of the Son; neither do they learn who the Father is 
from the Son, who teaches clearly and without parables Him who truly is God. He says: "Swear not at all; 
neither by heaven, for it is God's throne; nor by the earth, for it is His footstool; neither by Jerusalem, for it is 
the city of the great King. "(7) For these words are evidently spoken with reference to the Creator, as also 
Esaias says: "Heaven is my throne, the earth is my footstool. "(8) And besides this Being there is no other 
God; otherwise He would not be termed by the Lord either" God" or" the great King;" for a Being who can be 
so described admits neither of any other being compared with nor set above Him. For he who has any 
superior over him, and is under the power of another, this being never can be called either "God" or "the 
great King." 

6. But neither will these men be able to maintain that such words were uttered in an ironical manner, since it 
is proved to them by the words themselves that they were in earnest. For He who uttered them was Truth, 
and did truly vindicate His own house, by driving out of it the changers of money, who were buying and 
selling, saying unto them: "It is written, My house shall be called the house of prayer; but ye have made it a 
den of thieves. "(9) And what reason had He for thus doing and saying, and vindicating His house, if He did 
preach another God? But [He did so], that He might point out the transgressors of His Father's law; for 
neither did He bring any accusation against the house, nor did He blame the law, which He had come to 
fulfil; but He reproved those who were putting His house to an improper use, and those who were 
transgressing the law. And therefore the scribes and Pharisees, too, who from the times of the law had 
begun to despise God, did not receive His Word, that is, they did not believe on Christ. Of these Esaias 
says: "Thy princes are rebellious, companions of thieves, loving gifts, following after rewards, not judging 
the fatherless, and negligent of the cause of the widows. "(10) And Jeremiah, in like manner: "They," he says, 
"who rule my people did not know me; they are senseless and imprudent children; they are wise to do evil, 
but to do well they have no knowledge. "(1) 

7. But as many as feared God, and were anxious about His law, these ran to Christ, and were all saved. For 
He said to His disciples: "Go ye to the sheep of the house of Israel, (2) which have perished." And many 
more Samaritans, it is said, when the Lord had tarried among, them, two days, "believed because of His 
words, and said to the woman, Now we believe, not because of thy saying, for we ourselves have heard 
[Him], and know that this man is truly the Saviour of the world. "(3) And Paul likewise declares, "And so all 
Israel shall be saved;"(4) but he has also said, that the law was our pedagogue [to bring us] to Christ 
Jesus. (5) Let them not therefore ascribe to the law the unbelief of certain [among them]. For the law never 
hindered them from believing in the Son of God; nay, but it even exhorted them(6) so to do, saying(7) that 
men can be saved in no other way from the old wound of the serpent than by believing in Him who, in the 
likeness of sinful flesh, is lifted up from the earth upon the tree of martyrdom, and draws all things to 
Himself,(8) and vivifies the dead. 

CHAP. III. --ANSWER TO THE CAVILS OF THE GNOS TICS. WE ARE NOT TO SUPPOSE 
THAT THE TRUE GOD CAN BE CHANGED, OR COME TO AN END BECAUSE THE 
HEAVENS, WHICH ARE HIS THRONE AND THE EARTH, HIS FOOTSTOOL, SHALL PASS 
AWAY. 

1 . Again, as to their malignantly asserting that if heaven is indeed the throne of God, and earth His footstool, 
and if it is declared that the heaven and earth shall pass away, then when these pass away the God who 
sitteth above must also pass away, and therefore He cannot be the God who is over all; in the first place, 
they are ignorant what the expression means, that heaven is [His] throne and earth [His] footstool. For they 
do not know what God is, but they imagine that He sits after the fashion of a man, and is contained within 
bounds, but does not contain. And they are also unacquainted with [the meaning of] the passing away of the 
heaven and earth; but Paul was not ignorant of it when he declared, "For the figure of this world passeth 

away. "(9) In the next place, David explains their question, for he says that when the fashion of this world 
passes away, not only shall God remain, but His servants also, expressing himself thus in the 101st Psalm: 
"In the beginning, Thou; O LORD, hast founded the earth, and the heavens are the works of Thy hands. 
They shall perish, but Thou shalt endure, and all shall wax old as a garment; and as a vesture Thou shalt 
change them, and they shall be changed: but Thou art the same, and Thy years shall not fail. The children 
of Thy servants shall continue, and their seed shall be established for ever;"(1 0))pointing out plainly what 
things they are that pass away, and who it is that doth endure for ever God, together with His servants. And in 
like manner Esaias says: "Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth beneath; for the heaven 
has been set together as smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and they who dwell therein 
shall die in like manner. But my salvation shall be for ever, and my righteousness shall not pass away. "(1 1) 

CHAP. IV. -ANSWER TO ANOTHER OBJECTION, SHOWING THAT THE DESTRUCTION 
OF JERUSALEM, WHICH WAS THE CITY OF THE GREAT KING, DIMINISHED NOTHING 
FROM THE SUPREME MAJESTY" AND POWER OF GOD, FOR THAT THIS DESTRUCTION 
WAS PUT IN EXECUTION BY THE MOST WISE COUNSEL OF THE SAME GOD. 

1. Further, also, concerning Jerusalem and the Lord, they venture to assert that, if it had been "the city of the 
great King, "(12) it would not have been deserted. (13) This is just as if any one should say, that if straw were a 
creation of God, it would never part company with the wheat; and that the vine twigs, if made by God, never 
would be lopped away and deprived of the clusters. But as these [vine twigs] have not been originally 
made for their own sake, but for that of the fruit growing upon them, which being come to maturity and taken 
away, they are left behind, and those which do not conduce to fructification are lopped off altogether; so also 
[was it with] Jerusalem, which had in herself borne the yoke of bondage (under which man was reduced, 
who in former times was not subject to God when death was reigning, and being subdued, became a fit 
subject for liberty), when the fruit of liberty had come, and reached maturity, and been reaped and stored in 
the barn, and when those which had the power to produce fruit had been carried away from her [i.e., from 
Jerusalem], and scattered throughout all the world. Even as Esaias saith, "The children of Jacob shall strike 
root, and Israel shall flourish, and the whole world shall be filled with his fruit. "(1) The fruit, therefore, having 
been sown throughout all the world, she (Jerusalem) was deservedly forsaken, and those things which had 
formerly brought forth fruit abundantly were taken away; for from these, according to the flesh, were Christ 
and the apostles enabled to bring forth fruit. But now these are no longer useful for bringing forth fruit. For all 
things which have a beginning in time must of course have an end in time also. 

2. Since, then, the law originated with Moses, it terminated with John as a necessary consequence. Christ 
had come to fulfil it: wherefore "the law and the prophets were" with them "until John. "(2) And therefore 
Jerusalem, taking its commencement from David, (3) and fulfilling its own times, must have an end of 
legislation^) when the new covenant was revealed. For God does all things by measure and in order; 
nothing is unmeasured with Him, because nothing is out of order. Well spake he, who said that the 
unmeasurable Father was Himself subjected to measure in the Son; for the Son is the measure of the 
Father, since He also comprehends Him. But that the administration of them (the Jews) was temporary, 
Esaias says: "And the daughter of Zion shall be left as a cottage in a vineyard, and as a lodge in a garden 
of cucumbers. "(5) And when shall these things be left behind? Is it not when the fruit shall be taken away, and 
the leaves alone shall be left, which now have no power of producing fruit? 

3. But why do we speak of Jerusalem, since, indeed, the fashion of the whole world must also pass away, 
when the time of its disappearance has come, in order that the fruit indeed may be gathered into the garner, 
but the chaff, left behind, may be consumed by fire? "For the day of the Lord cometh as a burning furnace, 
and all sinners shall be stubble, they who do evil things, and the day shall burn them up. "(6) Now, who this 
Lord is that brings such a day about, John the Baptist points out, when he says of Christ, "He shall baptize 
you with the Holy Ghost and with fire, having His fan in His hand to cleanse His floor; and He will gather His 
fruit into the garner, but the chaff He will burn up with unquenchable fire. "(7) For He who makes the chaff and 
He who makes the wheat are not different persons, but one and the same, who judges them, that is, 
separates them. But the wheat and the chaff, being inanimate and irrational, have been made such by 
nature. But man, being endowed with reason, and in this respect like to God, having been made free in his 
will, and with power over himself, is himself the cause to himself, that sometimes he becomes wheat, and 
sometimes chaff. Wherefore also he shall be justly condemned, because, having been created a rational 
being, he lost the true rationality, and living irrationally, opposed the righteousness of God, giving himself 
over to every earthly spirit, and serving all lusts; as says the prophet, "Man, being in honour, did not 
understand: he was assimilated to senseless beasts, and made like to them. "(8) 

CHAP. V.--THE AUTHOR RETURNS TO HIS FORMER ARGUMENT, AND SHOWS THAT 

THERE WAS BUT ONE GOD ANNOUNCED BY THE LAW AND PROPHETS, WHOM 
CHRIST CONFESSES AS HIS FATHER, AND WHO, THROUGH HIS WORD, ONE LIVING 
GOD WITH HIM, MADE HIMSELF KNOWN TO MEN IN BOTH COVENANTS. 

1. God, therefore, is one and the same, who rolls up the heaven as a book, and renews the face of the earth; 
who made the things of time, for man, so that coming to maturity in them, he may produce the fruit of 
immortality; and who, through His kindness, also bestows [upon him] eternal things, "that in the ages to 
come He may show the exceeding riches of His grace;"(9) who was announced by the law and the 
prophets, whom Christ confessed as His Father. Now He is the Creator, and He it is who is God over all, as 
Esaias says, "I am witness, saith the LORD God, and my servant whom I have chosen, that ye may know, 
and believe, and understand that I AM. Before me there was no other God, neither shall be after me. I am 
God, and besides me there is no Saviour. I have proclaimed, and I have saved. "(10) And again: "I myself 
am the first God, and I am above things to come."(1 1) For neither in an ambiguous, nor arrogant, nor boastful 
manner, does He say these things; but since it was impossible, without God, to come to a knowledge of 
God, He teaches men, through His Word, to know God. To those, therefore, who are ignorant of these 
matters, and on this account imagine that they have discovered another Father, justly does one say, "Ye do 
err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God. "(12) 

2. For our Lord and Master, in the answer which He gave to the Sadducees, who say that there is no 
resurrection, and who do therefore dishonour God, and lower the credit of the law, did both indicate a 
resurrection, and reveal God, saying to them, "Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God." 
"For, touching the resurrection of the dead," He says, "have ye not read that which was spoken by God, 
saying, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?(1) And He added, "He is not the 
God of the dead, but of the living; for all live to Him." By these arguments He unquestionably made it clear, 
that He who spake to Moses out of the bush, and declared Himself to be the God of the fathers, He is the 
God of the living. For who is the God of the living unless He who is God, and above whom there is no other 
God? Whom also Daniel the prophet, when Cyrus king of the Persians said to him, "Why dost thou not 
worship Bel?"(2) did proclaim, saying, "Because I do not worship idols made with hands, but the living God, 
who established the heaven and the earth and has dominion over all flesh." Again did he say, "I will adore 
the Lord my God, because He is the living God." He, then, who was adored by the prophets as the living 
God, He is the God of the living; and His Word is He who also spake to Moses, who also put the 
Sadducees to silence, who also bestowed the gift of resurrection, thus revealing [both] truths to those who 
are blind, that is, the resurrection and God [in His true character]. For if He be not the God of the dead, but of 
the living, yet was called the God of the fathers who were sleeping, they do indubitably live to God, and 
have not passed out of existence, since they are children of the resurrection. But our Lord is Himself the 
resurrection, as He does Himself declare, "I am the resurrection and the life. "(3) But the fathers are His 
children; for it is said by the prophet: "Instead of thy fathers, thy children have been made to thee. "(4) Christ 
Hi'mself, therefore, together with the Father, is the God of the living, who spake to Moses, and who was also 
manifested to the fathers. 

3. And teaching this very thing, He said to the Jews: "Your father Abraham rejoiced that he should see my 
day; and he saw it, and was glad"(5) What is intended? "Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto 
him for righteousness. "(6) In the first place, [he believed] that He was the maker of heaven and earth, the 
only God; and in the next place, that He would make his seed as the stars of heaven. This is what is meant 
by Paul, [when he says,] "as lights in the world. "(7) Righteously, therefore, having left his earthly kindred, he 
followed the Word of God, walking as a pilgrim with the Word, that he might [afterwards] have his abode with 
the Word. 

4. Righteously also the apostles, being of the race of Abraham, left the ship and their father, and followed the 
Word. Righteously also do we, possessing the same faith as Abraham, and taking up the cross as Isaac 
did the wood? follow Him. For in Abraham man had learned beforehand, and had been accustomed to 
follow the Word of God. For Abraham, according to his faith, followed the command of the Word of God, and 
with a ready mind delivered up, as a sacrifice to God, his only-begotten and beloved son, in order that God 
also might be pleased to offer up for all his seed His own beloved and only-begotten Son, as a sacrifice for 
our redemption. 

5. Since, therefore, Abraham was a prophet and saw in the Spirit the day of the Lord's coming, and the 
dispensation of His suffering, through whom both he himself and all who, following the example of his faith, 
trust in God, should be saved, he rejoiced exceedingly. The Lord, therefore, was not unknown to Abraham, 
whose day he desired to see;(9) nor, again, was the Lord's Father, for he had learned from the Word of the 
Lord, and believed Him; wherefore it was accounted to him by the Lord for righteousness. For faith towards 
God justifies a man; and therefore he said, "I will stretch forth my hand to the most high God, who made the 
heaven and the earth. "(10) All these truths, however, do those holding perverse opinions endeavour to 

overthrow, because of one passage, which they certainly do not understand correctly. 

CHAP. VI. -EXPLANATION OF THE WORDS OF CHRIST, "NO MAN KNOWETH THE 
FATHER, BUT THE SON," ETC.; WHICH WORDS THE HERETICS MISINTERPRET. pROOF 
THAT, BY THE FATHER REVEALING THE SON, AND BY THE SON BEING REVEALED, 
THE FATHER WAS NEVER UNKNOWN. 

1. For the Lord, revealing Himself to His disciples, that He Himself is the Word, who imparts knowledge of 
the Father, and reproving the Jews, who imagined that they, had [the knowledge of] God, while they 
nevertheless rejected His Word, through whom God is made known, declared, "No man knoweth the Son, 
but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whom the Son has willed to 
reveal [Him]."(1 1) Thus hath Matthew set it down, and Luke in like manner, and Mark(1) the very same; for 
John omits this passage. They, however, who would be wiser than the apostles, write [the verse] in the 
following manner: "No man knew the Father, but the Son; nor the Son, but the Father, and he to whom the 
Son has willed to reveal [Him];" and they explain it as if the true God were known to none prior to our Lord's 
advent; and that God who was announced by the prophets, they allege not to be the Father of Christ. 
But if Christ did then [only] begin to have existence when He came [into the world] as man, and [if] the Father 
did remember [only] in the times of Tiberius Caesar to provide for [the wants of] men, and His Word was 
shown to have not always coexisted with His creatures; [it may be remarked that] neither then was it 
necessary that another God should be proclaimed, but [rather] that the reasons for so great carelessness 
and neglect on His part should be made the subject of investigation. For it is fitting that no such question 
should arise, and gather such strength, that it would indeed both change God, and destroy our faith in that 
Creator who supports us by means of His creation. For as we do direct our faith towards the Son, so also 
should we possess a firm and immoveable love towards the Father. In his book against Marcion, Justin(2) 
does well say: "I would not have believed the Lord Himself, if He had announced any other than He who is 
our framer, maker, and nourisher. But because the only-begotten Son came to us from the one God, who 
both made this world and formed us, and contains and administers all things, summing up His own 
handiwork in Himself, my faith towards Him is steadfast, and my love to the Father immoveable, God 
bestowing both upon us." 

3. For no one can know the Father, unless through the Word of God, that is, unless by the Son revealing 
[Him]; neither can he have knowledge of the Son, unless through the good pleasure of the Father. But the 
Son performs the good pleasure of the Father; for the Father sends, and the Son is sent, and comes. And 
His Word knows that His Father is, as far as regards us, invisible and infinite; and since He cannot be 
declared [by any one else], He does Himself declare Him to us; and, on the other hand, it is the Father 
alone who knows His own Word. And both these truths has our Lord declared. Wherefore the Son reveals 
the knowledge of the Father through His own manifestation. For the manifestation of the Son is the 
knowledge of the Father; for all things are manifested through the Word. In order, therefore, that we might 
know that the Son who came is He who imparts to those believing on Him a knowledge of the Father, He 
said to His disciples:(3) "No man knoweth the Son but the Father, nor the Father but the Son, and those to 
whomsoever the Son shall reveal Him;" thus setting Himself forth and the Father as He [really] is, that we 
may not receive any other Father, except Him who is revealed by the Son. 

4. But this [Father] is the Maker of heaven and earth, as is shown from His words; and not he, the false father, 
who has been invented by Marcion, or by Valentinus, or by Basilides, or by Carpocrates, or by Simon, or by 
the rest of the "Gnostics," falsely so called. For none of these was the Son of God; but Christ Jesus our Lord 
[was], against whom they set their teaching in opposition, and have the daring to preach an unknown God. 
But they ought to hear [this] against themselves: How is it that He is unknown, who is known by them? for, 
whatever is known even by a few, is not unknown. But the Lord did not say that both the Father and the Son 
could not be known at all (in tatum), for in that case His advent would have been superfluous. For why did He 
come hither? Was it that He should say to us, "Never mind seeking after God; for He is unknown, and ye 
shall not find Him;" as also the disciples of Valentinus falsely declare that Christ said to their AEons? But this 
is indeed vain. For the Lord taught us that no man is capable of knowing God, unless he be taught of God; 
that is, that God cannot be known without God: but that this is the express will of the Father, that God should 
be known. For they shall know(4) Him to whomsoever the Son has revealed Him. 

5. And for this purpose did the Father reveal the Son, that through His instrumentality He might be 
manifested to all, and might receive those righteous ones who believe in Him into incorruption and 
everlasting enjoyment (now, to believe in Him is to do His will); but He shall righteously shut out into the 
darkness which they have chosen for themselves, those who do not believe, and who do consequently 
avoid His light. The Father therefore has revealed Himself to all, by making His Word visible to all; and, 
conversely, the Word has declared to all the Father and the Son, since He has become visible to all. And 

therefore the righteous judgment of God [shall fall] upon all who, like others, have seen, but have not, like 
others, believed. 

6. For by means of the creation itself, the Word reveals God the Creator; and by means of the world [does 
He declare] the Lord the Maker of the world; and by means of the formation [of man] the Artificer who formed 
him; and by the Son that Father who begat the Son: and these things do indeed address all men in the same 
manner, but all do not in the same way believe them. But by the law and the prophets did the Word preach 
both Himself and the Father alike [to all]; and all the people heard Him alike, but all did not alike believe. 
And through the Word Himself who had been made visible and palpable, was the Father shown forth, 
although all did not equally believe in Him; but all saw the Father in the Son: for the Father is the invisible of 
the Son, but the Son the visible of the Father. And for this reason all spake with Christ when He was present 
[upon earth], and they named Him God. Yea, even the demons exclaimed, on beholding the Son: "We 
know Thee who Thou art, the Holy One of God.'" And the devil looking at Him, and tempting Him, said: "If 
Thou art the Son of God;"(2)-all thus indeed seeing and speaking of the Son and the Father, but all not 
believing [in them]. 

7. For it was fitting that the truth should receive testimony from all, and should become [a means of] judgment 
for the salvation indeed of those who believe, but for the condemnation of those who believe not; that all 
should be fairly judged, and that the faith in the Father and Son should be approved by all, that is, that it 
should be established by all [as the one means of salvation], receiving testimony from all, both from those 
belonging to it, since they are its friends, and by those having no connection with it, though they are its 
enemies. For that evidence is true, and cannot be gainsaid, which elicits even from its adversaries striking a 
testimonies in its behalf; they being convinced with respect to the matter in hand by their own plain 
contemplation of it, and bearing testimony to it, as well as declaring it.(4) But after a while they break forth 
into enmity, and become accusers [of what they had approved], and are desirous that their own testimony 
should not be [regarded as] true. He, therefore, who was known, was not a different being from Him who 
declared "No man knoweth the Father," but one and the same, the Father making all things subject to Him; 
while He received testimony from all that He was very man, and that He was very God, from the Father, from 
the Spirit, from angels, from the creation itself, from men, from apostate spirits and demons, from the enemy, 
and last of all, from death itself. But the Son, administering all things for the Father, works from the beginning 
even to the end, and without Him no man can attain the knowledge of God. For the Son is the knowledge of 
the Father; but the knowledge of the Son is in the Father, and has been revealed through the Son; and this 
was the reason why the Lord declared: "No man knoweth the Son, but the Father; nor the Father, save the 
Son, and those to whomsoever the Son shall reveal [Him]. "(5) For "shall reveal" was said not with reference 
to the future alone, as if then [only] the Word had begun to manifest the Father when He was born of Mary, 
but it applies indifferently throughout all time. For the Son, being present with His own handiwork from the 
beginning, reveals the Father to all; to whom He wills, and when He wills, and as the Father wills. Wherefore, 
then, in all things, and through all things, there is one God, the Father, and one Word, and one Son, and one 
Spirit, and one salvation to all who believe in Him. 

CHAP. VII. -RECAPITULATION OF THE FOREGOING ARGUMENT, SHOWING THAT 
ABRAHAM, THROUGH THE REVELATION OF THE WORD, KNEW THE FATHER, AND THE 
COMING OF THE SON OF GOD. FOR THIS CAUSE, HE REJOICED TO SEE THE DAY OF 
CHRIST, WHEN THE PROMISES MADE TO HIM SHOULD BE FULFILLED. THE FRUIT OF 
THIS REJOICING HAS FLOWED TO POSTERITY, VIZ., TO THOSE WHO ARE PARTAKERS 
IN THE FAITH OF ABRAHAM, BUT NOT TO THE JEWS WHO REJECT THE WORD OF 
GOD. 

1 . Therefore Abraham also, knowing the. Father through the Word, who made heaven and earth, confessed 
Him to be God; and having learned, by an announcement [made to him], that the Son of God would be a 
man among men, by whose advent his seed should be as the stars of heaven, he desired to see that day, 
so that he might himself also embrace Christ; and, seeing it through the spirit of prophecy, he rejoiced. (6) 
Wherefore Simeon also, one of his descendants, carried fully out the rejoicing of the patriarch, and said: 
"Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace. For mine eyes have seen Thy salvation, which Thou 
hast prepared before the face of all people: a light for the revelation of the Gentiles, (1) and the glory of the 
people Israel. "(2) And the angels, in like manner, announced tidings of great joy to the shepherds who were 
keeping watch by night. (3) Moreover, Mary said, "My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced 
in God my salvation;"(4)-the rejoicing of Abraham descending upon those who sprang from him,-those, 
namely, who were watching, and who beheld Christ, and believed in Him; while, on the other hand, there was 
a reciprocal rejoicing which passed backwards from the children to Abraham, who did also desire to see 
the day of Christ's coming. Rightly, then, did our Lord bear witness to him, saying, "Your father Abraham 

rejoiced to see my day; and he saw it, and was glad." 

2. For not alone upon Abraham's account did He say these things, but also that He might point out how all 
who have known God from the beginning, and have foretold the advent of Christ, have received the 
revelation from the Son Himself; who also in the last times was made visible and passable, and spake with 
the human race, that He might from the stones raise up children unto Abraham, and fulfil the promise which 
God had given him, and that He might make his seed as the stars of heaven, (5) as John the Baptist says: 
"For God is able from these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. "(6) Now, this Jesus did by drawing us 
off from the religion of stones, and bringing us over from hard and fruitless cogitations, and establishing in us 
a faith like to Abraham. As Paul does also testify, saying that we are children of Abraham because of the 
similarity of our faith, and the promise of inheritance. (7) 

3. He is therefore one and the same God, who called Abraham and gave him the promise. But He is the 
Creator, who does also through Christ prepare lights in the world, [namely] those who believe from among 
the Gentiles. And He says, "Ye are the light of the world;"(8) that is, as the stars of heaven. Him, therefore, I 
have rightly shown to be known by no man, unless by the Son, and to whomsoever the Son shall reveal 
Him. But the Son reveals the Father to all to whom He wills that He should be known; and neither without the 
goodwill of the Father nor without the agency of the Son, can any man know God. Wherefore did the Lord 
say to His disciples, "I am the way, the truth, and the life and no man cometh unto the Father but by Me. If ye 
had known Me, ye would have known My Father also: and from henceforth ye have both known Him, and 
have seen Him. "(9) From these words it is evident, that He is known by the Son, that is, by the Word. 

4. Therefore have the Jews departed from God, in not receiving His Word, but imagining that they could 
know the Father [apart] by Himself, without the Word, that is, without the Son; they being ignorant of that God 
who spake in human shape to Abraham, (10) and again to Moses, saying, "I have surely seen the affliction of 
My people in Egypt, and I have come down to deliver them."(1 1) For the Son, who is the Word of God, 
arranged these things beforehand from the beginning, the Father being in no want of angels, in order that He 
might call the creation into being, and form man, for whom also the creation was made; nor, again, standing 
in need of any instrumentality for the framing of created things, or for the ordering of those things which had 
reference to man; while, [at the same time,] He has a vast and unspeakable number of servants. For His 
offspring and His similitude(12) do minister to Him in every respect; that is, the Son and the Holy Spirit, the 
Word and Wisdom; whom all the angels serve, and to whom they are subject. Vain, therefore, ark those 
who, because of that declaration, "No man knoweth the Father, but the Son, "(13) do introduce another 
unknown Father. 

CHAP. VIM. -VAIN AttEMPTS OF MARCION AND HIS FOLLOWERS, WHO EXCLUDE 
ABRAHAM FROM THE SALVATION BESTOWED BY CHRIST, WHO LIBERATED NOT ONLY 
ABRAHAM, BUT THE SEED OF ABRAHAM, BY FULFILLING AND NOT DESTROYING THE 
LAW WHEN HE HEALED ON THE SABBATH-DAY. 

1 . Vain, too, is [the effort of] Marcion and his followers when they [seek to] exclude Abraham from the 
inheritance, to whom the Spirit through many men, and now by Paul, bears witness, that "he believed God, 
and it was imputed unto him for righteousness. "(14) And the Lord [also bears witness to him,] in the first 
place, indeed, by raising up children to him from the stones, and making his seed as the stars of heaven, 
saying, "They shall come from the east and from the west, from the north and from the south, and shall 
recline with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven;"(15) and then again by saying to the 
Jews, "When ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets in the kingdom of heaven, 
but you yourselves cast out."(1) This, then, is a clear point, that those who disallow his salvation, and frame 
the idea of another God besides Him who made the promise to Abraham, are outside the kingdom of God, 
and are disinherited from [the gift of] incorruption, setting at naught and blaspheming God, who introduces, 
through Jesus Christ, Abraham to the kingdom of heaven, and his seed, that is, the Church, upon which also 
is conferred the adoption and the inheritance promised to Abraham. 

2. For the Lord vindicated Abraham's posterity by loosing them from bondage and calling them to salvation, 
as He did in the case of the woman whom He healed, saying openly to those who had not faith like 
Abraham, "Ye hypocrites, (2) doth not each one of you on the Sabbath-days loose his ox or his ass, and 
lead him away to watering? And ought not this woman, being a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan hath 
bound these eighteen years, be loosed from this bond on the Sabbath-days?"(3) It is clear therefore, that 
He loosed and vivified those who believe in Him as Abraham did, doing nothing contrary to the law when 
He healed upon the Sabbath-day. For the law did not prohibit men from being healed upon the Sabbaths; 
[on the contrary,] it even circumcised them upon that day, and gave command that the offices should be 
performed by the priests for the people; yea, it did not disallow the healing even of dumb animals. Both at 
Siloam and on frequent subsequent^) occasions, did He perform cures upon the Sabbath; and for this 

reason many used to resort to Him on the Sabbath-days. For the law commanded them to abstain from 
every servile work, that is, from all grasping after wealth which is procured by trading and by otherworldly 
business; but it exhorted them to attend to the exercises of the soul, which consist in reflection, and to 
addresses of a beneficial kind for their neighbours' benefit. And therefore the Lord reproved those who 
unjustly blamed Him for having healed upon the Sabbath-days. For He did not make void, but fulfilled the 
law, by performing the offices of the high priest, propitiating God for men, and cleansing the lepers, healing 
the sick, and Himself suffering death, that exiled man might go forth from condemnation, and might return 
without fear to his own inheritance. 

3. And again, the law did not forbid those who were hungry on the Sabbath-days to take food lying ready at 
hand: it did, however, forbid them to reap and to gather into the barn. And therefore did the Lord say to those 
who were blaming His disciples because they plucked and ate the ears of corn, rubbing them in their hands, 
"Have ye not read this, what David did, when himself was an hungered; how he went into the house of God, 
and ate the shew-bread, and gave to those who were with him; which it is not lawful to eat, but for the priests 
alone?"(5) justifying His disciples by the words of the law, and pointing out that it was lawful for the priests to 
act freely. For David had been appointed a priest by God, although Saul persecuted him. For all the 
righteous possess the sacerdotal rank.(6) And all the apostles of the Lord are priests, who do inherit here 
neither lands nor houses, but serve God and the altar continually. Of whom Moses also says in 
Deuteronomy, when blessing Levi, "Who said unto his father and to his mother, I have not known thee; 
neither did he acknowledge his brethren, and he disinherited his own sons: he kept Thy commandments, 
and observed Thy covenant."(7) But who are they that have left father and mother, and have said adieu to 
all their neighbours, on account of the word of God and His covenant, unless the disciples of the Lord? Of 
whom again Moses says, "They shall have no inheritance, for the Lord Himself is their inheritance. "(8) And 
again, "The priests the Levites shall have no part in the whole tribe of Levi, nor substance with Israel; their 
substance is the offerings (fructifications) of the Lord: these shall they eat."(9) Wherefore also Paul says, "I 
do not seek after a gift, but I seek after fruit. "(1 0) To His disciples He said, who had a priesthood of the 
Lord, (11) to whom it was lawful when hungry to eat the ears of corn, (12) "For the workman is worthy of his 
meat."(13) And the priests in the temple profaned the Sabbath, and were blameless. Wherefore, then, were 
they blameless? Because when in the temple they were not engaged in secular affairs, but in the service of 
the Lord, fulfilling the law, but not going beyond it, as that man did, who of his own accord carded dry wood 
into the camp of God, and was justly stoned to death. (14) "For every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit 
shall be hewn down, and cast into the fire;"(1 5) and "whosoever shall defile the temple of God, him shall God 
defile."(16) 

CHAP. IX. -THERE IS BUT ONE AUTHOR, AND ONE END TO BOTH COVENANTS. 

1 . All things therefore are of one and the same substance, that is, from one and the same God; as also the 
Lord says to the disciples "Therefore every scribe, which is instructed unto the kingdom of heaven, is like 
unto a man that is an householder, which bringeth forth out of his treasure things new and old."(1) He did not 
teach that he who brought forth the old was one, and he that brought forth the new, another; but that they were 
one and the same. For the Lord is the good man of the house, who rules the tire house of His Father; and 
who delivers a law suited both for slaves and those who are as yet undisciplined; and gives fitting precepts 
to those that are free, and have been justified by faith, as well as throws His own inheritance open to those 
that are sons. And He called His disciples "scribes" and "teachers of the kingdom of heaven;" of whom also 
He elsewhere says to the Jews: "Behold, I send unto you wise men, and scribes, and teachers; and some 
of them ye shall kill, and persecute from city to city. "(2) Now, without contradiction, He means by those things 
which are brought forth from the treasure new and old, the two covenants; the old, that giving of the law which 
took place formerly; and He points out as the new, that manner of life required by the Gospel, of which David 
says, "Sing unto the LORD a new song;"(3) and Esaias, "Sing unto the LORD a new hymn. His beginning 
(initium), His name is glorified from the height of the earth: they declare His powers in the isles. "(4) And 
Jeremiah says: "Behold, I will make a new covenant, not as I made with your fathers"(5) in Mount Horeb. But 
one and the same householder produced both covenants, the Word of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, who 
spake with both Abraham and Moses, and who has restored us anew to liberty, and has multiplied that 
grace which is from Himself. 

2. He declares: "For in this place is One greater than the temple. "(6) But [the words] greater and less are not 
applied to those things which have nothing in common between themselves, and are of an opposite nature, 
and mutually repugnant; but are used in the case of those of the same substance, and which possess 
properties in common, but merely differ in number and size; such as water from water, and light from light, 
and grace from grace. Greater, therefore, is that legislation which has been given in order liberty than that 
given in order to bondage; and therefore it has also been diffused, not throughout one nation [only], but over 

the whole world. For one and the same Lord, who is greater than the temple, greater than Solomon, and 
greater than Jonah, confers gifts upon men, that is, His own presence, and the resurrection from the dead; 
but He does not change God, nor proclaim another Father, but that very same one, who always has more to 
measure out to those of His household. And as their love towards God increases, He bestows more and 
greater [gifts]; as also the Lord said to His disciples: "Ye shall see greater things than these. "(7) And Paul 
declares: "Not that I have already attained, or that I am justified, or already have been made perfect. For we 
know in part, and we prophesy in part; but when that which is perfect has come, the things which are in part 
shall be done away. "(8) As, therefore, when that which is perfect is come, we shall not see another Father, 
but Him whom we now desire to see (for "blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God"(9)); neither 
shall we look for another Christ and Son of God, but Him who [was born] of the Virgin Mary, who also 
suffered, in whom too we trust, and whom we love; as Esaias says: "And they shall say in that day, Behold 
our LORD God, in whom we have trusted, and we have rejoiced in our salvation;"(1 0) and Peter says in his 
Epistle: "Whom, not seeing, ye love; in whom, though now ye see Him not, ye have believed, ye shall 
rejoice with joy unspeakable;"(1 1) neither do we receive another Holy Spirit, besides Him who is with us, 
and who cries, "Abba, Father;"(12) and we shall make increase in the very same things [as now], and shall 
make progress, so that no longer through a glass, or by means of enigmas, but face to face, we shall enjoy 
the gifts of God;-so also now, receiving more than the temple, and more than Solomon, that is, the advent of 
the Son of God, we have not been taught another God besides the Framer and the Maker of all, who has 
been pointed out to us from the beginning; nor another Christ, the Son of God, besides Him who was foretold 
by the prophets. 

3. For the new covenant having been known and preached by the prophets, He who was to carry it out 
according to the good pleasure of the Father was also preached; having been revealed to men as God 
pleased; that they might always make progress through believing in Him, and by means of the [successive] 
covenants, should gradually attain to perfect salvation. (1) For there is one salvation and one God; but the 
precepts which form the man are numerous, and the steps which lead man to God are not a few. It is 
allowable for an earthly and temporal king, though he is [but] a man, to grant to his subjects greater 
advantages at times: shall not this then be lawful for God, since He is [ever] the same, and is always willing 
to confer a greater [degree of] grace upon the human race, and to honour continually with many gifts those 
who please Him? But if this be to make progress, [namely,] to find out another Father besides Him who was 
preached from the beginning; and again, besides him who is imagined to have been discovered in the 
second place, to find out a third other,-then the progress of this man will consist in his also proceeding from 
a third to a fourth; and from this, again, to another and another: and thus he who thinks that he is always 
making progress of such a kind, will never rest in one God. For, being driven away from Him who truly is 
[God], and being turned backwards, he shall be for ever seeking, yet shall never find out God;(2) but shall 
continually swim in an abyss without limits, unless, being converted by repentance, he return to the place 
from which he had been cast out, confessing one God, the Father, the Creator, and believing [in Him] who 
was declared by the law and the prophets, who was borne witness to by Christ, as He did Himself declare to 
those who were accusing His disciples of not observing the tradition of the elders: "Why do ye make void 
the law of God by reason of your tradition? For God said, Honour thy father and mother; and, Whosoever 
curseth father or mother, let him die the death. "(3) And again, He says to them a second time: "And ye have 
made void the word of God(4) by reason of your tradition;" Christ confessing in the plainest manner Him to 
be Father and God, who said in the law, "Honour thy father and mother; that it may be well with thee. "(5) For 
the true God did confess the commandment of the law as the word of God, and called no one else God 
besides His own Father. 

CHAP. X. --THE OLD TESTAMENT SCRIPTURES, AND THOSE WRITTEN BY MOSES IN 
PARTICULAR, DO EVERYWHERE MAKE MENTION OF THE SON OF GOD, AND FORETELL 
HIS ADVENT AND PASSION. FROM THIS FACT IT FOLLOWS THAT THEY WERE 
INSPIRED BY ONE AND THE SAME GOD. 

1 . Wherefore also John does appropriately relate that the Lord said to the Jews: "Ye search the Scriptures, 
in which ye think ye have eternal life; these are they which testify of me. And ye are not willing to come unto 
Me, that ye may have life. "(6) How therefore did the Scriptures testify of Him, unless they were from one and 
the same Father, instructing men beforehand as to the advent of His Son, and foretelling the salvation 
brought in by Him? "For if ye had believed Moses, ye would also have believed Me; for he wrote of Me;"(7) 
[saying this,] no doubt, because the Son of God is implanted everywhere throughout his writings: at one 
time, indeed, speaking with Abraham, when about to eat with him; at another time with Noah, giving to him 
the dimensions [of the ark]; at another; inquiring after Adam; at another, bringing down judgment upon the 
Sodomites; and again, when He becomes visible, (8) and directs Jacob on his journey, and speaks with 

Moses from the bush. (9) And it would be endless to recount [the occasions] upon which the Son of God is 
shown forth by Moses. Of the day of His passion, too, he was not ignorant; but foretold Him, after a figurative 
manner, by the name given to the passover;(10) and at that very festival, which had been proclaimed such a 
long time previously by Moses, did our Lord suffer, thus fulfilling the passover. And he did not describe the 
day only, but the place also, and the time of day at which the sufferings ceased, (11) and the sign of the 
setting of the sun, saying: "Thou mayest not sacrifice the passover within any other of thy cities which the 
LORD God gives thee; but in the place which the LORD thy God shall choose that His name be called on 
there, thou shalt sacrifice the passover at even, towards the setting of the sun. "(12) 

2. And already he had also declared His advent, saying, "There shall not fail a chief in Judah, nor a leader 
from his loins, until He come for whom it is laid up, and He is the hope of the nations; binding His foal to the 
vine, and His ass's colt to the creeping ivy. He shall wash His stole in wine, and His upper garment in the 
blood of the grape; His eyes shall be more joyous than wine,(1) and His teeth whiter than milk."(2) For, let 
those who have the reputation of investigating everything, inquire at what time a prince and leader failed out 
of Judah, and who is the hope of the nations, who also is the vine, what was the ass's colt [referred to as] 
His, what the clothing, and what the eyes, what the teeth, and what the wine, and thus let them investigate 
every one of the points mentioned; and they shall find that there was none other announced than our Lord, 
Christ Jesus. Wherefore Moses, when chiding the ingratitude of the people, said, "Ye infatuated people, and 
unwise, do ye thus requite the L0RD?"(3) And again, he indicates that He who from the beginning founded 
and created them, the Word, who also redeems and vivifies us in the last times, is shown as hanging on the 
tree, and they will not believe on Him. For he says, "And thy life shall be hanging before thine eyes, and thou 
wilt not believe thy life. "(4) And again, "Has not this same one thy Father owned thee, and made thee, and 
created thee?"(5) 

CHAP. XI. -THE OLD PROPHETS AND RIGHTEOUS MEN KNEW BEFOREHAND OF THE 
ADVENT OF CHRIST, AND EARNESTLY DESIRED TO SEE AND HEAR HIM, HE 
REVEALING HIMSELF IN THE SCRIPTURES BY THE HOLY GHOST, AND WITHOUT ANY 
CHANGE IN HIMSELF, ENRICHING MEN DAY BY DAY WITH BENEFITS, BUT 
CONFERRING THEM IN GREATER ABUNDANCE ON LATER THAN ON FORMER 
GENERATIONS. 

1 . But that it was not only the prophets and many righteous men, who, foreseeing through the Holy Spirit His 
advent, prayed that they might attain to that period in which they should see their Lord face to face, and hear 
His words, the Lord has made manifest, when He says to His disciples, "Many prophets and righteous men 
have desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things which ye 
hear, and have not heard them. "(6) In what way, then, did they desire both to hear and to see, unless they 
had foreknowledge of His future advent? But how could they have foreknown it, unless they had previously 
received foreknowledge from Himself? And how do the Scriptures testify of Him, unless all things had ever 
been revealed and shown to believers by one and the same God through the Word; He at one time 
conferring with His creature, and at another pro-pounding His law; at one time, again, reproving, at another 
exhorting, and then setting free His servant, and adopting him as a son (in filium); and, at the proper time, 
bestowing an incorruptible inheritance, for the purpose of bringing man to perfection? For He formed him for 
growth and increase, as the Scripture says: "Increase and multiply. "(7) 

2. And in this respect God differs from man, that God indeed makes, but man is made; and truly, He who 
makes is always the same; but that which is made must receive both beginning, and middle, and addition, 
and increase. And God does indeed create after a skilful manner, while, [as regards] man, he is created 
skilfully. God also is truly perfect in all things, Himself equal and similar to Himself, as He is all light, and all 
mind, and all substance, and the fount of all good; but man receives advancement and increase towards 
God. For as God is always the same, so also man, when found in God, shall always go on towards God. For 
neither does God at any time cease to confer benefits upon, or to enrich man; nor does man ever cease 
from receiving the benefits, and being enriched by God. For the receptacle of His goodness, and the 
instrument of His glorification, is the man who is grateful to Him that made him; and again, the receptacle of 
His just judgment is the ungrateful man, who both despises his Maker and is not subject to His Word; who 
has promised that He will give very much to those always bringing forth fruit, and more [and more] to those 
who have the Lord's money. "Well done," He says, "good and faithful servant: because thou hast been 
faithful in little, I will appoint thee over many things; enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. "(8) The Lord Himself 
thus promises very much. 

3. As, therefore, He has promised to give very much to those who do now bring forth fruit, according to the 
gift of His grace, but not according to the changeableness of "knowledge;" for the Lord remains the same, 
and the same Father is revealed; thus, therefore, has the one and the same Lord granted, by means of His 

advent, a greater gift of grace to those of a later period, than what He had granted to those under the Old 
Testament dispensation. For they indeed used to hear, by means of [His] servants, that the King would 
come, and they rejoiced to a certain extent, inasmuch as they hoped for His coming; but those who have 
beheld Him actually present, and have obtained liberty, and been made partakers of His gifts, do possess 
a greater amount of grace, and a higher degree of exultation, rejoicing because of the King's arrival: as also 
David says, "My soul shall rejoice in the LORD; it shall be glad in His salvation. "(1) And for this cause, upon 
His entrance into Jerusalem, all those who were in the way(2) recognised David their king in His sorrow of 
soul, and spread their garments for Him, and ornamented the way with green boughs, crying out with great 
joy and gladness, "Hosanna to the Son of David; blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord: 
hosanna in the highest."(3) But to the envious wicked stewards, who circumvented those under them, and 
ruled over those that had no great intelligence, (4) and for this reason were unwilling that the king should 
come, and who said to Him, "Hearest thou what these say?" did the Lord reply, "Have ye never read, Out of 
the mouths of babes and sucklings hast Thou perfected praise?"(5)-thus pointing out that what had been 
declared by David concerning the Son of God, was accomplished in His own person; and indicating that 
they were indeed ignorant of the meaning of the Scripture and the dispensation of God; but declaring that it 
was Himself who was announced by the prophets as Christ, whose name is praised in all the earth, and who 
perfects praise to His Father from the mouth of babes and sucklings; wherefore also His glory has been 
raised above the heavens. 

4. If, therefore, the self-same person is present who was announced by the prophets, our Lord Jesus Christ, 
and if His advent has brought in a fuller [measure of] grace and greater gifts to those who have received 
Him, it is plain that the Father also is Himself the same who was proclaimed by the prophets, and that the 
Son, on His coming, did not spread the knowledge of another Father, but of the same who was preached 
from the beginning; from whom also He has brought down liberty to those who, in a lawful manner, and with a 
willing mind, and with all the heart, do Him service; whereas to scoffers, and to those not subject to God, but 
who follow outward purifications for the praise of men (which observances had been given as a type of 
future things, -the law typifying, as it were, certain things in a shadow, and delineating eternal things by 
temporal, celestial by terrestrial), and to those who pretend that they do themselves observe more than 
what has been prescribed, as if preferring their own zeal to God Himself, while within they are full of 
hypocrisy, and covetousness, and all wickedness, — [to such] has He assigned everlasting perdition by 
cutting them off from life. 

CHAP.XII.--IT CLEARLY APPEARS THAT THERE WAS BUT ONE AUTHOR OF BOTH THE 
OLD AND THE NEW LAW, FROM THE FACT THAT CHRIST CONDEMNED TRADITIONS 
AND CUSTOMS REPUGNANT TOTHE FORMER, WHILE HE CONFIRMED ITS MOST 
IMPORTANT PRECEPTS, AND TAUGHT THAT HE WAS HIMSELF THE END OF THE 
MOSAIC LAW. 

1 . For the tradition of the elders themselves, which they pretended to observe from the law, was contrary to 
the law given by Moses. Wherefore also Esaias declares: "Thy dealers mix the wine with water,"(6) showing 
that the elders were in the habit of mingling a watered tradition with the simple command of God; that is, they 
set up a spurious law, and one contrary to the[true] law; as also the Lord made plain, when He said to them, 
"Why do ye transgress the commandment of God, for the sake of your tradition?"(7) For not only by actual 
transgression did they set the law of God at nought, mingling the wine with water; but they also set up their 
own law in opposition to it, which is termed, even to the present day, the Pharisaical. In this [law] they 
suppress certain things, add others, and interpret others, again, as they think proper, which their teachers 
use, each one in particular; and desiring to uphold these traditions, they were unwilling to be subject to the 
law of God, which prepares them for the coming of Christ. But they did even blame the Lord for healing on 
the Sabbath-days, which, as I have already observed, the law did not prohibit. For they did themselves, in 
one sense, perform acts of healing upon the Sabbath-day, when they circumcised a man [on that day]; but 
they did not blame themselves for transgressing the command of God through tradition and the aforesaid 
Pharisaical law, and for not keeping the commandment of the law, which is the love of God. 

2. But that this is the first and greatest commandment, and that the next [has respect to love] towards our 
neighbour, the Lord has taught, when He says that the entire law and the prophets hang upon these two 
commandments. Moreover, He did not Himself bring down [from heaven] any other commandment greater 
than this one, but renewed this very same one to His disciples, when He enjoined them to love God with all 
their heart, and others as themselves. But if He had descended from another Father, He never would have 
made use of the first and greatest commandment of the law; but He would undoubtedly have endeavoured 
by all means to bring down a greater one than this from the perfect Father, so as not to make use of that 
which had been given by the God of the law. And Paul in like manner declares, "Love is the fulfilling of the 

law:"(1) and [he declares] that when all other things have been destroyed, there shall remain "faith, hope, 
and love; but the greatest of all is love;"(2) and that apart from the love of God, neither knowledge avails 
anything, (3) nor the understanding of mysteries, nor faith, nor prophecy, but that without love all are hollow 
and vain; moreover, that love makes man perfect; and that he who loves God is perfect, both in this world 
and in that which is to come. For we do never cease from loving God; but in proportion as we continue to 
contemplate Him, so much the more do we love Him. 

3. As in the law, therefore, and in the Gospel [likewise], the first and greatest commandment is, to love the 
Lord God with the whole heart, and then there follows a commandment like to it, to love one's neighbour as 
one's self; the author of the law and the Gospel is shown to be one and the same. For the precepts of an 
absolutely perfect life, since they are the same in each Testament, have pointed out [to us] the same God, 
who certainly has promulgated particular laws adapted for each; but the more prominent and the greatest 
[commandments], without which salvation cannot [be attained], He has exhorted [us to observe] the same in 
both. 

4. The Lord, too, does not do away with this [God], when He shows that the law was not derived from another 
God, expressing Himself as follows to those who were being instructed by Him, to the multitude and to His 
disciples: "The scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses' seat. All, therefore, whatsoever they bid you observe, 
that observe and do; but do not ye after their works: for they say, and do not. For they bind heavy burdens, 
and lay them upon men's shoulders; but they themselves will not so much as move them with a finger."(4) 
He therefore did not throw blame upon that law which was given by Moses, when He exhorted it to be 
observed, Jerusalem being as yet in safety; but He did throw blame upon those persons, because they 
repeated indeed the words of the law, yet were without love. And for this reason were they held as being 
unrighteous as respects God, and as respects their neighbours. As also Isaiah says: "This people 
honoureth Me with their lips, but their heart is far from Me: howbeit in vain do they worship Me, teaching the 
doctrines and the commandments of men. "(5) He does not call the law given by Moses commandments of 
men, but the traditions of the eiders themselves which they had invented, and in upholding which they made 
the law of God of none effect, and were on this account also not subject to His Word. For this is what Paul 
says concerning these men: "For they, being ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about to establish 
their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God. For Christ is the end of 
the law for righteousness to every one that believeth."(6) And how is Christ the end of the law, if He be not 
also the final Cause of it? For He who has brought in the end has Himself also wrought the beginning; and it 
is He who does Himself say to Moses, "I have surely seen the affliction of my people which is in Egypt, and I 
have come down to deliver them;"(7) it being customary from the beginning with the Word of God to ascend 
and descend for the purpose of saving those who were in affliction. 

5. Now, that the law did beforehand teach mankind the necessity of following Christ, He does Himself make 
manifest, when He replied as follows to him who asked Him what he should do that he might inherit eternal 
life: "If thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments. "(8) But upon the other asking "Which?"" again the 
Lord replies: "Do not commit adultery, do not kill, do not steal, do not bear false witness, hon-our father and 
mother, and thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself, "-setting as an ascending series (velut gradus) before 
those who wished to follow Him, the precepts of the law, as the entrance into life; and What He then said to 
one He said to all. But when the former said, "All these have I done" (and most likely he had not kept them, 
for in that case the Lord would not have said to him, "Keep the commandments"), the Lord, exposing his 
covetousness, said to him, "If thou wilt be perfect, go, sell all that thou hast, and distribute to the poor; and 
come, follow me;" promising to those who would act thus, the portion belonging to the apostles 
(apostolorum partem). And He did not preach to His followers another God the Father, besides Him who 
was proclaimed by the law from the beginning; nor another Son; nor the Mother, the enthymesis of the AEon, 
who existed in suffering and apostasy; nor the Pleroma of the thirty AEons, which has been proved vain, and 
incapable of being believed in; nor that fable invented by the other heretics. But He taught that they should 
obey the commandments which God enjoined from the beginning, and do away with their former 
covetousness by good works, (9) and follow after Christ. But that possessions distributed to the poor do 
annul former covetousness, Zaccheus made evident, when he said, "Behold, the half of my goods I give to 
the poor; and if I have defrauded any one, I restore fourfold. "(1) 

CHAP. XIII. -CHRIST DID NOT ABROGATE THE NATURAL PRECEPTS OF THE LAW, BUT 
RATHER FULFILLED AND EXTENDED THEM. HE REMOVED THE YOKE AND BONDAGE 
OF THE OLD LAW, SO THAT MANKIND, BEING NOW SET FREE, MIGHT SERVE GOD 
WITH THAT TRUSTFUL PIETY WHICH BECOMETH SONS. 

1 . And that the Lord did not abrogate the natural [precepts] of the law, by which man(2) is justified, which also 
those who were justified by faith, and who pleased God, did observe previous to the giving of the law, but 

that He extended and fulfilled them, is shown from His words. "For," He remarks, "it has been said to them of 
old time, Do not commit adultery. But I say unto you, That every one who hath looked upon a woman to lust 
after her, hath committed adultery with her already in his heart."(3) And again: "It has been said, Thou shalt 
not kill. But I say unto you, Every one who is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the 
judgment."(4) And, "It hath been said, Thou shalt not forswear thyself. But I say unto you, Swear not at all; but 
let your conversation be, Yea, yea, and Nay, nay. "(5) And other statements of a like nature. For all these do 
not contain or imply an opposition to and an overturning of the [precepts] of the past, as Marcion's followers 
do strenuously maintain; but [they exhibit] a fulfilling and an extension of them, as He does Himself declare: 
"Unless your righteousness shall exceed that of the scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the 
kingdom of heaven. "(6) For what meant the excess referred to? In the first place, [we must] believe not only 
in the Father, but also in His Son now revealed; for He it is who leads man into fellowship and unity with God. 
In the next place, [we must] not only say, but we must do; for they said, but did not. And [we must] not only 
abstain from evil deeds, but even from the desires after them. Now He did not teach us these things as 
being opposed to the law, but as fulfilling the law, and implanting in us the varied righteousness of the law. 
That would have been contrary to the law, if He had commanded His disciples to do anything which the law 
had prohibited. But this which He did command-namely, not only to abstain from things forbidden by the 
law, but even from longing after them-is not contrary to [the law], as I have remarked, neither is it the 
utterance of one destroying the law, but of one fulfilling, extending, and affording greater scope to it. 

2. For the law, since it was laid down for those in bondage, used to instruct the soul by means of those 
corporeal objects which were of an external nature, drawing it, as by a bond, to obey its commandments, 
that man might learn to serve God. But the Word set free the soul, and taught that through it the body should 
be willingly purified. Which having been accomplished, it followed as of course, that the bonds of slavery 
should be removed, to which man had now become accustomed, and that he should follow God without 
fetters: moreover, that the laws of liberty should be extended, and subjection to the king increased, so that 
no one who is convened should appear unworthy to Him who set him free, but that the piety and obedience 
due to the Master of the household should be equally rendered both by servants and children; while the 
children possess greater confidence [than the servants], inasmuch as the working of liberty is greater and 
more glorious than that obedience which is rendered in [a state of] slavery. 

3. And for this reason did the Lord, instead of that [commandment], "Thou shalt not commit adultery," forbid 
even concupiscence; and instead of that which runs thus, "Thou shalt not kill," He prohibited anger; and 
instead of the law enjoining the giving of tithes, [He told us] to share(7) all our possessions with the poor; 
and not to love our neighbours only, but even our enemies; and not merely to be liberal givers and 
bestowers, but even that we should present a gratuitous gift to those who take away our goods. For "to him 
that taketh away thy coat," He says, "give to him thy cloak also; and from him that taketh away thy goods, 
ask them not again; and as ye would that men should do unto you, do ye unto them:"(8) so that we may not 
grieve as those who are unwilling to be defrauded, but may rejoice as those who have given willingly, and 
as rather conferring a favour upon our neighbours than yielding to necessity. "And if any one," He says, 
"shall compel thee [to go] a mile, go with him twain;"(9) so that thou mayest not follow him as a slave, but 
may as a free man go before him, showing thyself in all things kindly disposed and useful to thy neighbour, 
not regarding their evil intentions, but performing thy kind offices, assimilating thyself to the Father, "who 
maketh His sun to rise upon the evil and the good, and sendeth rain upon the just and unjust."(1) Now all 
these [precepts], as I have already observed, were not the injunctions] of one doing away with the law, but 
of one fulfilling, extending, and widening it among us; just as if one should say, that the more extensive 
operation of liberty implies that a more complete subjection and affection towards our Liberator had been 
implanted within us. For He did not set us free for this purpose, that we should depart from Him (no one, 
indeed, while placed out of reach of the Lord's benefits, has power to procure for himself the means of 
salvation), but that the more we receive His grace, the more we should love Him. Now the more we have 
loved Him, the more glory shall we receive from Him, when we are continually in the presence of the Father. 

4. Inasmuch, then, as all natural precepts are common to us and to them (the Jews), they had in them indeed 
the beginning and origin; but in us they have received growth and completion. For to yield assent to God, 
and to follow His Word, and to love Him above all, and one's neighbour as one's self (now man is 
neighbour to man), and to abstain from every evil deed, and all other things of a like nature which are 
common to both [covenants], do reveal one and the same God. But this is our Lord, the Word of God, who in 
the first instance certainly drew slaves to God, but afterwards He set those free who were subject to Him, as 
He does Himself declare to His disciples: "I will not now call you servants, for the servant knoweth not what 
his lord doeth; but I have called you friends, for all things which I have heard from My Father I have made 
known. "(2) For in that which He says, "I will not now call you servants," He indicates in the most marked 
manner that it was Himself who did originally appoint for men that bondage with respect to God through the 
law, and then afterwards conferred upon them freedom. And in that He says, "For the servant knoweth not 

what his lord doeth," He points out, by means of His own advent, the ignorance of a people in a servile 
condition. But when He terms His disciples "the friends of God," He plainly declares Himself to be the Word 
of God, whom Abraham also followed voluntarily and under no compulsion (sine vinculis), because of the 
noble nature of his faith, and so became "the friend of God. "(3) But the Word of God did not accept of the 
friendship of Abraham, as though He stood in need of it, for He was perfect from the beginning ("Before 
Abraham was," He says, "I am"(4)), but that He in His goodness might bestow eternal life upon Abraham 
himself, inasmuch as the friendship of God imparts immortality to those who embrace it. 

CHAP. XIV. -IF GOD DEMANDS OBEDIENCE FROM MAN, IF HE FORMED MAN, CALLED 
HIM AND PLACED HIM UNDER LAWS, IT WAS MERELY FOR MAN'S WELFARE; NOT 
THAT GOD STOOD IN NEED OF MAN, BUT THAT HE GRACIOUSLY CONFERRED UPON 
MAN HIS FAVOURS IN EVERY POSSIBLE MANNER. 

1 . In the beginning, therefore, did God form Adam, not as if He stood in need of man, but that He might have 
[some one] upon whom to confer His benefits. For not alone antecedently to Adam, but also before all 
creation, the Word glorified His Father, remaining in Him; and was Himself glorified by the Father, as He did 
Himself declare, "Father, glorify Thou Me with the glory which I had with Thee before the world was. "(5) Nor 
did He stand in need of our service when He ordered us to follow Him; but He thus bestowed salvation upon 
ourselves. For to follow the Saviour is to be a partaker of salvation, and to follow light is to receive light. But 
those who are in light do not themselves illumine the light, but are illumined and revealed by it: they do 
certainly contribute nothing to it, but, receiving the benefit, they are illumined by the light. Thus, also, service 
[rendered] to God does indeed profit God nothing, nor has God need of human obedience; but He grants to 
those who follow and serve Him life and in-corruption and eternal glory, bestowing benefit upon those who 
serve [Him], because they do serve Him, and on His followers, because they do follow Him; but does not 
receive any benefit from them: for He is rich, perfect, and in need of nothing. But for this reason does God 
demand service from men, in order that, since He is good and merciful, He may benefit those who continue 
in His service. For, as much as God is in want of nothing, so much does man stand in need of fellowship with 
God. For this is the glory of man, to continue and remain permanently in God's service. Wherefore also did 
the Lord say to His disciples, "Ye have not chosen Me, but I have chosen you;"(6) indicating that they did not 
glorify Him when they followed Him; but that, in following the Son of God, they were glorified by Him. And 
again, "I will, that where I am, there they also may be, that they may behold My glory;"(7) not vainly boasting 
because of this, but desiring that His disciples should share in His glory: of whom Esaias also says, "I will 
bring thy seed from the east, and will gather thee from the west; and I will say to the north, Give up; and to the 
south, Keep not back: bring My sons from far, and My daughters from the ends of the earth; all, as many as 
have been called in My name: for in My glory I have prepared, and formed, and made him."(1) Inasmuch as 
then, "wheresoever the carcase is, there shall also the eagles be gathered together,"(2) we do participate in 
the glory of the Lord, who has both formed us, and prepared us for this, that, when we are with Him, we may 
partake of His glory. 

2. Thus it was, too, that God formed man at the first, because of His munificence; but chose the patriarchs for 
the sake of their salvation; and prepared a people beforehand, teaching the headstrong to follow God; and 
raised up prophets upon earth, accustoming man to bear His Spirit [within him], and to hold communion with 
God: He Himself, indeed, having need of nothing, but granting communion with Himself to those who stood 
in need of it, and sketching out, like an architect, the plan of salvation to those that pleased Him. And He did 
Himself furnish guidance to those who beheld Him not in Egypt, while to those who became unruly in the 
desert He promulgated a law very suitable [to their condition]. Then, on the people who entered into the 
good land He bestowed a noble inheritance; and He killed the fatted calf for those converted to the Father, 
and presented them with the finest robe. (3) Thus, in a variety of ways, He adjusted the human race to an 
agreement with salvation. On this account also does John declare in the Apocalypse, "And His voice as the 
sound of many waters. "(4) For the Spirit [of God] is truly [like] many waters, since the Father is both rich and 
great. And the Word, passing through all those [men], did liberally confer benefits upon His subjects, by 
drawing up in writing a law adapted and applicable to every class [among them]. 

3. Thus, too, He imposed upon the [Jewish] people the construction of the tabernacle, the building of the 
temple, the election of the Levites, sacrifices also, and oblations, legal monitions, and all the other service 
of the law. He does Himself truly want none of these things, for He is always full of all good, and had in 
Himself all the odour of kindness, and every perfume of sweet-smelling savours, even before Moses 
existed. Moreover, He instructed the people, who were prone to turn to idols, instructing them by repeated 
appeals to persevere and to serve God, calling them to the things of primary importance by means of those 
which were secondary; that is, to things that are real, by means of those that are typical; and by things 
temporal, to eternal; and by the carnal to the spiritual; and by the earthly to the heavenly; as was also said to 

Moses, "Thou shalt make all things after the pattern of those things which thou sawest in the mount."(5) For 
during forty days He was learning to keep [in his memory] the words of God, and the celestial patterns, and 
the spiritual images, and the types of things to come; as also Paul says: "For they drank of the rock which 
followed them: and the rock was Christ."(6) And again, having first mentioned what are contained in the law, 
he goes on to say: "Now all these things happened to them in a figure; but they were written for our 
admonition, upon whom the end of the ages is come." For by means of types they learned to fear God, and 
to continue devoted to His service. 

CHAP. XV. -AT FIRST GOD DEEMED IT SUFFICIENT TO INSCRIBE THE NATURAL LAW, 
OR THE DECALOGUE, UPON THE HEARTS OF MEN; BUT AFTERWARDS HE FOUND IT 
NECESSARY TO BRIDLE, WITH THE YOKE OF THE MOSAIC LAW, THE DESIRES OF THE 
JEWS, WHO WERE ABUSING THEIR LIBERTY; AND EVEN TO ADD SOME SPECIAL 
COMMANDS, BECAUSE OF THE HARDNESS OF THEIR HEARTS. 

1. They (the Jews) had therefore a law, a course of discipline, and a prophecy of future things. For God at 
the first, indeed, warning them by means of natural precepts, which from the beginning He had implanted in 
mankind, that is, by means of the Decalogue (which, if any one does not observe, he has no salvation), did 
then demand nothing more of them. As Moses says in Deuteronomy, "These are all the words which the 
Lord spake to the whole assembly of the sons of Israel on the mount, and He added no more; and He wrote 
them on two tables of stone, and gave them to me. "(7) For this reason [He did so], that they who are willing 
to follow Him might keep these commandments. But when they turned themselves to make a calf, and had 
gone back in their minds to Egypt, desiring to be slaves instead of free-men, they were placed for the future 
in a state of servitude suited to their wish,-[a slavery] which did not indeed cut them off from God, but 
subjected them to the yoke of bondage; as Ezekiel the prophet, when stating the reasons for the giving of 
such a law, declares: "And their eyes were after the desire of their heart; and I gave them statutes that were 
not good, and judgments in which they shall not live. "(8) Luke also has recorded that Stephen, who was the 
first elected into the diaconate by the apostles, (1) and who was the first slain for the testimony of Christ, 
spoke regarding Moses as follows: "This man did indeed receive the commandments of the living God to 
give to us, whom your fathers would not obey, but thrust [Him from them], and in their hearts turned back 
again into Egypt, saying unto Aaron, Make us gods to go before us; for we do not know what has happened 
to [this] Moses, who led us from the land of Egypt. And they made a calf in those days, and offered 
sacrifices to the idol, and were rejoicing in the works of their own hands. But God turned, and gave them up 
to worship the hosts of heaven; as it is written in the book of the prophets:(2) O ye house of Israel, have ye 
offered to Me sacrifices and oblations for forty years in the wilderness? And ye took up the tabernacle of 
Moloch, and the star of the god Remphan,(3) figures which ye made to worship them;"(4) pointing out plainly, 
that the law being such, was not given to them by another God, but that, adapted to their condition of 
servitude, [it originated] from the very same [God as we worship]. Wherefore also He says to Moses in 
Exodus: "I will send forth My angel before thee; for I will not go up with thee, because thou art a stiff-necked 
people. "(5) 

2. And not only so, but the Lord also showed that certain precepts were enacted for them by Moses, on 
account of their hardness [of heart], and because of their unwillingness to be obedient, when, on their saying 
to Him, "Why then did Moses command to give a writing of divorcement, and to send away a wife?" He said 
to them, "Because of the hardness of your hearts he permitted these things to you; but from the beginning it 
was not so;"(6) thus exculpating Moses as a faithful servant, but acknowledging one God, who from the 
beginning made male and female, and reproving them as hard-hearted and disobedient. And therefore it 
was that they received from Moses this law of divorcement, adapted to their hard nature. But why say I these 
things concerning the Old Testament? For in the New also are the apostles found doing this very thing, on 
the ground which has been mentioned, Paul plainly declaring, But these things I say, not the Lord. "(7) And 
again: "But this I speak by permission, not by commandment. "(8) And again: "Now, as concerning virgins, I 
have no commandment from the Lord; yet I give my judgment, as one that hath obtained mercy of the Lord 
to be faithful. "(9) But further, in another place he says: "That Satan tempt you not for your incontinence. "(1 0) If, 
therefore, even in the New Testament, the apostles are found granting certain precepts in consideration of 
human infirmity, because of the incontinence of some, lest such persons, having grown obdurate, and 
despairing altogether of their salvation, should become apostates from God, -it ought not to be wondered 
at, if also in the Old Testament the same God permitted similar indulgences for the benefit of His people, 
drawing them on by means of the ordinances already mentioned, so that they might obtain the gift of 
salvation through them, while they obeyed the Decalogue, and being restrained by Him, should not revert to 
idolatry, nor apostatize from God, but learn to love Him with the whole heart. And if certain persons, because 
of the disobedient and ruined Israelites, do assert that the giver (doctor) of the law was limited in power, they 

will find in our dispensation, that "many are called, but few chosen;"(1 1) and that there are those who 
inwardly are wolves, yet wear sheep's clothing in the eyes of the world (foris); and that God has always 
preserved freedom, and the power of self-government in man, (12) while at the same time He issued His 
own exhortations, in order that those who do not obey Him should be righteously judged (condemned) 
because they have not obeyed Him; and that those who have obeyed and believed on Him should be 
honoured with immortality. 

CHAP. XVI. --PERFECT RIGHTEOUSNESS WAS CONFERRED NEITHER BY 
CIRCUMCISION NOR BY ANY OTHER LEGAL CEREMONIES. THE DECALOGUE, 
HOWEVER, WAS NOT CANCELLED BY CHRIST, BUT IS ALWAYS IN FORCE: MEN WERE 
NEVER RELEASED FROM ITS COMMANDMENTS. 

1 . Moreover, we learn from the Scripture itself, that God gave circumcision, not as the completer of 
righteousness, but as a sign, that the race of Abraham might continue recognisable. For it declares: "God 
said unto Abraham, Every male among you shall be circumcised; and ye shall circumcise the flesh of your 
foreskins, as a token of the covenant between Me and you. "(13) This same does Ezekiel the prophet say 
with regard to the Sabbaths: "Also I gave them My Sabbaths, to be a sign between Me and them, that they 
might know that I am the Lord, that sanctify them. "(14) And in Exodus, God says to Moses: "And ye shall 
observe My Sabbaths; for it shall be a sign between Me and you for your generations. "(1) These things, 
then, were given for a sign; but the signs were not unsymbolical, that is, neither unmeaning nor to no 
purpose, inasmuch as they were given by a wise Artist; but the circumcision after the flesh typified that after 
the Spirit. For "we," says the apostle, "have been circumcised with the circumcision made without hands. "(2) 
And the prophet declares, "Circumcise the hardness of your heart."(3) But the Sabbaths taught that we 
should continue day by day in God's service. (4) "For we have been counted," says the Apostle Paul, "all 
the day long as sheep for the slaughter;"(5) that is, consecrated [to God], and ministering continually to our 
faith, and persevering in it, and abstaining from all avarice, and not acquiring or possessing treasures upon 
earth. (6) Moreover, the Sabbath of God (requietio Dei), that is, the kingdom, was, as it were, indicated by 
created things; in which [kingdom], the man who shall have persevered in serving God (Deo assistere) 
shall, in a state of rest, partake of God's table. 

2. And that man was not justified by these things, but that they were given as a sign to the people, this fact 
shows,-that Abraham himself, without circumcision and without observance of Sabbaths, "believed God, 
and it was imputed unto him for righteousness; and he was called the friend of God. "(7) Then, again, Lot, 
without circumcision, was brought out from Sodom, receiving salvation from God. So also did Noah, 
pleasing God, although he was uncircumcised, receive the dimensions [of the ark], of the world of the 
second race [of men]. Enoch, too, pleasing God, without circumcision, discharged the office of God's legate 
to the angels although he was a man, and was translated, and is preserved until now as a witness of the just 
judgment of God, because the angels when they had transgressed fell to the earth for judgment, but the man 
who pleased [God] was translated for salvation. (8) Moreover, all the rest of the multitude of those righteous 
men who lived before Abraham, and of those patriarchs who preceded Moses, were justified independently 
of the things above mentioned, and without the law of Moses. As also Moses himself says to the people in 
Deuteronomy: "The LORD thy God formed a covenant in Horeb. The LORD formed not this covenant with 
your fathers, but for you. "(9) 

3. Why, then, did the Lord not form the covenant for the fathers? Because "the law was not established for 
righteous men. "(10) But the righteous fathers had the meaning of the Decalogue written in their hearts and 
souls, (1 1) that is, they loved the God who made them, and did no injury to their neighbour. There was 
therefore no occasion that they should be cautioned by prohibitory mandates (correptoriis Uteris), (12) 
because they had the righteousness of the law in themselves. But when this righteousness and love to God 
had passed into oblivion, and became extinct in Egypt, God did necessarily, because of His great goodwill 
to men, reveal Himself by a voice, and led the people with power out of Egypt, in order that man might again 
become the disciple and follower of God; and He afflicted those who were disobedient, that they should not 
contemn their Creator; and He fed them with manna, that they might receive food for their souls (uti 
rationalem acciperent escam); as also Moses says in Deuteronomy: "And fed thee with manna, which thy 
fathers did not know, that thou mightest know that man cloth not live by bread alone; but by every word of 
God proceeding out of His mouth doth man live. "(13) And it enjoined love to God, and taught just dealing 
towards our neighhour, that we should neither be unjust nor unworthy of God, who prepares man for His 
friendship through the medium of the Decalogue, and likewise for agreement with his neighbour-matters 
which did certainly profit man himself; God, however, standing in no need of anything from man. 

4. And therefore does the Scripture say, "These words the Lord spake to all the assembly of the children of 
Israel in the mount, and He added no more;"(14) for, as I have already observed, He stood in need of 

nothing from them. And again Moses says: "And now Israel, what cloth the LORD thy God require of thee, but 
to fear the LORD thy God, to walk in all His ways, and to love Him, and to serve the LORD thy God with all 
thy heart, and with all thy soul?"(1 5) Now these things did indeed make man glorious, by supplying what was 
wanting to him, namely, the friendship of God; but they profited God nothing, for God did not at all stand in 
need of man's love. For the glory of God was wanting to man, which he could obtain in no other way than by 
serving God. And therefore Moses says to them again: "Choose life, that thou mayest live, and thy seed, to 
love the LORD thy God, to hear His voice, to cleave unto Him; for this is thy life, and the length of thy 
days."(1) Preparing man for this life, the Lord Himself did speak in His own person to all alike the words of 
the Decalogue; and therefore, in like manner, do they remain permanently with us, (2) receiving by means of 
His advent in the flesh, extension and increase, but not abrogation. 

5. The laws of bondage, however, were one by one promulgated to the people by Moses, suited for their 
instruction or for their punishment, as Moses himself declared: "And the LORD commanded me at that time 
to teach you statutes and judgments. "(3) These things, therefore, which were given for bondage, and for a 
sign to them, He cancelled by the new covenant of liberty. But He has increased and widened those laws 
which are natural, and noble, and common to all, granting to men largely and without grudging, by means of 
adoption, to know God the Father, and to love Him with the whole heart, and to follow His word unswervingly, 
while they abstain not only from evil deeds, but even from the desire after them. But He has also increased 
the feeling of reverence; for sons should have more veneration than slaves, and greater love for their father. 
And therefore the Lord says, "As to every idle word that men have spoken, they shall render an account for it 
in the day of judgment."(4) And, "he who has looked upon a woman to lust after her, hath committed adultery 
with her already in his heart;"(5) and, "he that is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of 
the judgment."(6) [All this is declared,] that we may know that we shall give account to God not of deeds 
only, as slaves, but even of words and thoughts, as those who have truly received the power of liberty, in 
which [condition] a man is more severely tested, whether he will reverence, and fear, and love the Lord. And 
for this reason Peter says "that we have not liberty as a cloak of maliciousness, "(7) but as the means of 
testing and evidencing faith. 

CHAP. XVII. -PROOF THAT GOD DID NOT APPOINT THE LEVITICAL DISPENSATION FOR 
HIS OWN SAKE, OR AS REQUIRING SUCH SERVICE; FOR HE DOES, IN FACT, NEED 
NOTHING FROM MEN. 

1 . Moreover, the prophets indicate in the fullest manner that God stood in no need of their slavish 
obedience, but that it was upon their own account that He enjoined certain observances in the law. And 
again, that God needed not their oblation, but [merely demanded it], on account of man himself who offers it, 
the Lord taught distinctly, as I have pointed out. For when He perceived them neglecting righteousness, and 
abstaining from the love of God, and imagining that God was to be propitiated by sacrifices and the other 
typical observances, Samuel did even thus speak to them: "God does not desire whole burnt-offerings and 
sacrifices, but He will have His voice to be hearkened to. Behold, a ready obedience is better than 
sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams. "(8) David also says: "Sacrifice and oblation Thou didst not 
desire, but mine ears hast Thou perfected;(9) burnt-offerings also for sin Thou hast not required. "(10) He 
thus teaches them that God desires obedience, which renders them secure, rather than sacrifices and 
holocausts, which avail them nothing towards righteousness; and [by this declaration] he prophesies the 
new covenant at the same time. Still clearer, too, does he speak of these things in the fiftieth Psalm: "For if 
Thou hadst desired sacrifice, then would I have given it: Thou wilt not delight in burnt-offerings. The .sacrifice 
of God is a broken spirit; a broken and contrite heart the Lord will not despise. "(11) Because, therefore, God 
stands in need of nothing, He declares in the preceding Psalm: "I will take no calves out of thine house, nor 
he-goats out of thy fold. For Mine are all the beasts of the earth, the herds and the oxen on the mountains: I 
know all the fowls of heaven, and the various tribes(1 2) of the field are Mine. If I were hungry, I would not tell 
thee: for the world is Mine, and the fulness thereof. Shall I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of 
goats?"(13) Then, lest it might be supposed that He refused these things in His anger, He continues, giving 
him (man) counsel: "Offer unto God the sacrifice of praise, and pay thy vows to the Most High; and call upon 
Me in the day of thy trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify Me;"(14) rejecting, indeed, those 
things by which sinners imagined they could propitiate God, and showing that He does Himself stand in 
need of nothing; but He exhorts and advises them to those, things by which man is justified and draws nigh 
to God. This same declaration does Esaias make: "To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto 
Me? saith the Lord. I am full."(1) And when He had repudiated holocausts, and sacrifices, and oblations, as 
likewise the new moons, and the sabbaths, and the festivals, and all the rest of the services accompanying 
these, He continues, exhorting them to what pertained to salvation: "Wash you, make you clean, take away 
wickedness from your hearts from before mine eyes: cease from your evil ways, learn to do well, seek 

judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow; and come, let us reason 
together, saith the LORD." 

2. For it was not because He was angry, like a man, as many venture to say, that He rejected their 
sacrifices; but out of compassion to their blindness, and with the view of suggesting to them the true 
sacrifice, by offering which they shall appease God, that they may receive life from Him. As He elsewhere 
declares: "The sacrifice to God is an afflicted heart: a sweet savour to God is a heart glorifying Him who 
formed it."(2) For if, when angry, He had repudiated these sacrifices of theirs, as if they were persons 
unworthy to obtain His compassion, He would not certainly have urged these same things upon them as 
those by which they might be saved. But inasmuch as God is merciful, He did not cut them off from good 
counsel. For after He had said by Jeremiah, "To what purpose bring ye Me incense from Saba, and 
cinnamon from a far country? Your whole burnt-offerings and sacrifices are not acceptable to Me;"(3) He 
proceeds: "Hear the word of the Lord, all Judah. These things saith the LORD, the God of Israel, Make 
straight your ways and your doings, and I will establish you in this place. Put not your trust in lying words, for 
they will not at all profit you, saying, The temple of the LORD, The temple of the LORD, it is [here]. "(4) 

3. And again, when He points out that it was not for this that He led them out of Egypt, that they might offer 
sacrifice to Him, but that, forgetting the idolatry of the Egyptians, they should be able to hear the voice of the 
Lord, which was to them salvation and glory, He declares by this same Jeremiah: "Thus saith the LORD; 
Collect together your burnt-offerings with your sacrifices and eat flesh. For I spake not unto your fathers nor 
commanded them in the day that I brought them out of Egypt, concerning burnt-offerings or sacrifices: but 
this word I commanded them, saying, Hear My voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be My people; 
and walk in all My ways whatsoever I have commanded you, that it may be well with you. But they obeyed 
not, nor hearkened; but walked in the imaginations of their own evil heart, and went backwards, and not 
forwards. "(5) And again, when He declares by the same man, "But let him that glorieth, glory in this, to 
understand and know that I am the LORD, who doth exercise loving-kindness, and righteousness, and 
judgment in the earth;"(6) He adds, "For in these things I delight, says the LORD," but not in sacrifices, nor in 
holocausts, nor in oblations. For the people did not receive these precepts as of primary importance 
(principaliter), but as secondary, and for the reason already alleged, as Isaiah again says: "Thou hast not 
[brought to] Me the sheep of thy holocaust, nor in thy sacrifices hast thou glorified Me: thou hast not served 
Me in sacrifices, nor in [the matter of] frankincense hast thou done anything laboriously; neither hast thou 
bought for Me incense with money, nor have I desired the fat of thy sacrifices; but thou hast stood before Me 
in thy sins and in thine iniquities. "(7) He says, therefore, "Upon this man will I look, even upon him that is 
humble, and meek, and who trembles at My words. "(8) "For the fat and the fat flesh shall not take away from 
thee thine unrighteousness. "(9) "This is the fast which I have chosen, saith the LORD. Loose every band of 
wickedness, dissolve the connections of violent agreements, give rest to those that are shaken, and cancel 
every unjust document. Deal thy bread to the hungry willingly, and lead into thy house the roofless stranger. 
If thou hast seen the naked, cover him, and thou shalt not despise those of thine own flesh and blood 
(domesticos seminis tui). Then shall thy morning light break forth, and thy health shall spring forth more 
speedily; and righteousness shall go before thee, and the glory of the LoRD shall surround thee: and whilst 
thou an yet speaking, I will say, Behold, here I am. "(10) And Zechariah also, among the twelve prophets, 
pointing out to the people the will of God, says: "These things does the LORD Omnipotent declare: Execute 
true judgment, and show mercy and compassion each one to his brother. And oppress not the widow, and 
the orphan, and the proselyte, and the poor; and let none imagine evil against your brother in his heart."(1 1) 
And again, he says: "These are the words which ye shall utter. Speak ye the truth every man to his 
neighbour, and execute peaceful judgment in your gates, and let none of you imagine evil in his heart 
against his brother, and ye shall not love false swearing: for all these things I hate, saith the LORD 
Almighty. "(1) Moreover, David also says in like manner: "What man is there who desireth life, and would fain 
see good days? Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile. Shun evil, and do good: 
seek peace, and pursue it. "(2) 

4. From all these it is evident that God did not seek sacrifices and holocausts from them, but faith, and 
obedience, and righteousness, because of their salvation. As God, when teaching them His will in Hosea 
the prophet, said, "I desire mercy rather than sacrifice, and the knowledge of God more than 
burnt-offerings. "(3) Besides, our Lord also exhorted them to the same effect, when He said, "But if ye had 
known what [this] meaneth, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the 
guiltless. "(4) Thus does He bear witness to the prophets, that they preached the truth; but accuses these 
men (His hearers) of being foolish through their own fault. 

5. Again, giving directions to His disciples to offer to God the first-fruits(5) of His own, created things-not as if 
He stood in need of them, but that they might be themselves neither unfruitful nor ungrateful-He took that 
created thing, bread, and gave thanks, and said, "This is My body. "(6) And the cup likewise, which is part of 
that creation to which we belong, He confessed to be His blood, and taught the new oblation of the new 

covenant; which the Church receiving from the apostles, offers to God throughout all the world, to Him who 
gives us as the means of subsistence the first-fruits of His own gifts in the New Testament, concerning which 
Malachi, among the twelve prophets, thus spoke beforehand: "I have no pleasure in you, saith the LORD 
Omnipotent, and I will not accept sacrifice at your hands. For from the rising of the sun, unto the going down 
[of the same], My name is glorified among the Gentiles, and in every place incense is offered to My name, 
and a pure sacrifice; for great is My name among the Gentiles, saith the LORD Omnipotent;"(7)-indicating in 
the plainest manner, by these words, that the former people [the Jews] shall indeed cease to make 
offerings to God, but that in every place sacrifice shall be offered to Him, and that a pure one; and His name 
is glorified among the Gentiles. (8) 

6. But what other name is there which is glorified among the Gentiles than that of our Lord, by whom the 
Father is glorified, and man also? And because it is [the name] of His own Son, who was made man by Him, 
He calls it His own. Just as a king, if he himself paints a likeness of his son, is right in calling this likeness his 
own, for both these reasons, because it is [the likeness] of his son, and because it is his own production; so 
also does the Father confess the name of Jesus Christ, which is throughout all the world glorified in the 
Church, to be His own, both because it is that of His Son, and because He who thus describes it gave Him 
for the salvation of men. Since, therefore, the name of the Son belongs to the Father, and since in the 
omnipotent God the Church makes offerings through Jesus Christ, He says well on both these grounds, 
"And in every place incense is offered to My name, and a pure sacrifice." Now John, in the Apocalypse, 
declares that the "incense" is "the prayers of the saints. "(9) 

CHAP. XVIII. -CONCERNING SACRIFICES AND OBLATIONS, AND THOSE WHO TRULY 
OFFER THEM. 

1 . The oblation of the Church, therefore, which the Lord gave instructions to be offered throughout all the 
world, is accounted with God a pure sacrifice, and is acceptable to Him; not that He stands in need of a 
sacrifice from us, but that he who offers is himself glorified in what he does offer, if his gift be accepted. For 
by the gift both honour and affection are shown forth towards the King; and the Lord, wishing us to offer it in all 
simplicity and innocence, did express Himself thus: "Therefore, when thou offerestthy gift upon the altar, and 
shalt remember that thy brother hath ought against thee, leave thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first 
be reconciled to thy brother, and then return and offer thy gift."(1 0) We are bound, therefore, to offer to God 
the first-fruits of His creation, as Moses also says, "Thou shalt not appear in the presence of the Lord thy 
God empty;"(1 1) so that man, being accounted as grateful, by those things in which he has shown his 
gratitude, may receive that honour which flows from Him. (12) 

2. And the class of oblations in general has not been set aside; for there were both oblations there [among 
the Jews], and there are oblations here [among the Christians]. Sacrifices there were among the people; 
sacrifices there are, too, in the Church: but the species alone has been changed, inasmuch as the offering is 
now made, not by slaves, but by freemen. For the Lord is [ever] one and the same; but the character of a 
servile oblation is peculiar [to itself], as is also that of freemen, in order that, by the very oblations, the 
indication of liberty may be set forth. For with Him there is nothing purposeless, nor without signification, nor 
without design. And for this reason they (the Jews) had indeed the tithes of their goods consecrated to Him, 
but those who have received liberty set aside all their possessions for the Lord's purposes, bestowing 
joyfully and freely not the less valuable portions of their property, since they have the hope of better things 
[hereafter]; as that poor widow acted who cast all her living into the treasury of God.(1) 

3. For at the beginning God had respect to the gifts of Abel, because he offered with single-mindedness and 
righteousness; but He had no respect unto the offering of Cain, because his heart was divided with envy and 
malice, which he cherished against his brother, as God says when reproving his hidden [thoughts], "Though 
thou offerest rightly, yet, if thou dost not divide rightly, hast thou not sinned? Be at rest;"(2) since God is not 
appeased by sacrifice. For if any one shall endeavour to offer a sacrifice merely to outward appearance, 
unexceptionably, in due order, and according to appointment, while in his soul he does not assign to his 
neighbour that fellowship with him which is right and proper, nor is under the fear of God;-he who thus 
cherishes secret sin does not deceive God by that sacrifice which is offered correctly as to outward 
appearance; nor will such an oblation profit him anything, but [only] the giving up of that evil which has been 
conceived within him, so that sin may not the more, by means of the hypocritical action, render him the 
destroyer of himself.(3) Wherefore did the Lord also declare: "Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, 
hypocrites, for ye are like whited sepulchres. For the sepulchre appears beautiful outside, but within it is full 
of dead men's bones, and all uncleanness; even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but 
within ye are full of wickedness and hypocrisy. "(4) For while they were thought to offer correctly so far as 
outward appearance went, they had in themselves jealousy like to Cain; therefore they slew the Just One, 
slighting the counsel of the Word, as did also Cain. For [God] said to him, "Be at rest;" but he did not assent. 

Now what else is it to "be at rest" than to forego purposed violence? And saying similar things to these men, 
He declares: "Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse that which is within the cup, that the outside may be clean 
also. "(5) And they did not listen to Him. For Jeremiah says, "Behold, neither thine eyes nor thy heart are 
good; but [they are turned] to thy covetousness, and to shed innocent blood, and for injustice, and for 
man-slaying, that thou mayest do it."(6) And again Isaiah saith, "Ye have taken counsel, but not of Me; and 
made covenants, [but] not by My Spirit."(7) In order, therefore, that their inner wish and thought, being brought 
to light, may show that God is without blame, and worketh no evil— that God who reveals what is hidden [in 
the heart], but who worketh not evil-when Cain was by no means at rest, He saith to him: "To thee shall be 
his desire, and thou shalt rule over him. "(8) Thus did He in like manner speak to Pilate: "Thou shouldest 
have no power at all against Me, unless it were given thee from above;"(9) God always giving up the 
righteous one [in this life to suffering], that he, having been tested by what he suffered and endured, may [at 
last] be accepted; but that the evildoer, being judged by the actions he has performed, may be rejected. 
Sacrifices, therefore, do not sanctify a man, for God stands in no need of sacrifice; but it is the conscience of 
the offerer that sanctifies the sacrifice when it is pure, and thus moves God to accept [the offering] as from a 
friend. "But the sinner," says He, "who kills a calf [in sacrifice] to Me, is as if he slew a dog. "(10) 

4. Inasmuch, then, as the Church offers with single-mindedness, her gift is justly reckoned a pure sacrifice 
with God. As Paul also says to the Philippians, "I am full, having received from Epaphroditus the things that 
were sent from you, the odour of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, pleasing to God."(1 1) For it behoves 
us to make an oblation to God, and in all things to be found grateful to God our Maker, in a pure mind, and in 
faith without hypocrisy, in well-grounded hope, in fervent love, offering the first-fruits of His own created 
things. And the Church alone offers this pure oblation to the Creator, offering to Him, with giving of thanks, [the 
things taken] from His creation. But the Jews do not offer thus: for their hands are full of blood; for they have 
not received the Word, through whom it is offered to God.(1) Nor, again, do any of the conventicles 
(synagogoe) of the heretics [offer this]. For some, by maintaining that the Father is different from the Creator, 
do, when they offer to Him what belongs to this creation of ours, set Him forth as being covetous of another's 
property, and desirous of what is not His own. Those, again, who maintain that the things around us 
originated from apostasy, ignorance, and passion, do, while offering unto Him the fruits of ignorance, 
passion, and apostasy, sin against their Father, rather subjecting Him to insult than giving Him thanks. But 
how can they be consistent with themselves, [when they say] that the bread over which thanks have been 
given is the body of their Lord, (2) and the cup His blood, if they do not call Himself the Son of the Creator of 
the world, that is, His Word, through whom the wood fructifies, and the fountains gush forth, and the earth 
gives "first the blade, then the ear, then the full corn in the ear."(3) 

5. Then, again, how can they say that the flesh, which is nourished with the body of the Lord and with His 
blood, goes to corruption, and does not partake of life? Let them, therefore, either alter their opinion, or 
cease from offering the things just mentioned. (4) But our opinion is in accordance with the Eucharist, and the 
Eucharist in turn establishes our opinion. For we offer to Him His own, announcing consistently the fellowship 
and union of the flesh and Spirit.(5) For as the bread, which is produced from the earth, when it receives the 
invocation of God, is no longer common bread, (6) but the Eucharist, consisting of two realities, earthly and 
heavenly; so also our bodies, when they receive the Eucharist, are no longer corruptible, having the hope of 
the resurrection to eternity. 

6. Now we make offering to Him, not as though He stood in need of it, but rendering thanks for His gift, (7) and 
thus sanctifying what has been created. For even as God does not need our possessions, so do we need 
to offer something to God; as Solomon says: "He that hath pity upon the poor, lendeth unto the Lord. "(8) For 
God, who stands in need of nothing, takes our good works to Himself for this purpose, that He may grant us 
a recompense of His own good things, as our Lord says: "Come, ye blessed of My Father, receive the 
kingdom prepared for you. For I was an hungered, and ye gave Me to eat: I was thirsty, and ye gave Me 
drink: I was a stranger, and ye took Me in: naked, and ye clothed Me; sick, and ye visited Me; in prison, and 
ye came to Me. "(9) As, therefore, He does not stand in need of these [services], yet does desire that we 
should render them for our own benefit, lest we be unfruitful; so did the Word give to the people that very 
precept as to the making of oblations, although He stood in no need of them, that they might learn to serve 
God: thus is it, therefore, also His will that we, too, should offer a gift at the altar, frequently and without 
intermission. The altar, then, is in heaven(10) (for towards that place are our prayers and oblations directed); 
the temple likewise [is there], as John says in the Apocalypse, "And the temple of God was opened:"(1 1) 
the tabernacle also: "For, behold," He says, "the tabernacle of God, in which He will dwell with men." 

CHAP.XIX. -EARTHLY THINGS MAY BE THE TYPE OF HEAVENLY, BUT THE LATTER 
CANNOT BE THE TYPES OF OTHERS STILL SUPERIOR AND UNKNOWN; NOR CAN WE, 
WITHOUT ABSOLUTE MADNESS, MAINTAIN THAT GOD IS KNOWN TO US ONLY AS THE 
TYPE OF A STILL UNKNOWN AND SUPERIOR BEING. 

1 . Now the gifts, oblations, and all the sacrifices, did the people receive in a figure, as was shown to Moses 
in the mount, from one and the same God, whose name is now glorified in the Church among all nations. But 
it is congruous that those earthly things, indeed, which are spread all around us, should be types of the 
celestial, being [both], however, created by the same God. For in no other way could He assimilate an 
image of spiritual things [to suit our comprehension]. But to allege that those things which are super-celestial 
and spiritual, and, as far as we are concerned, invisible and ineffable, are in their turn the types of celestial 
things and of another Pleroma, and [to say] that God is the image of another Father, is to play the part both 
of wanderers from the truth, and of absolutely foolish and stupid persons. For, as I have repeatedly shown, 
such persons will find it necessary to be continually finding out types of types, and images of images, and 
will never [be able to] fix their minds on one and the true God. For their imaginations range beyond God, 
they having in their hearts surpassed the Master Himself, being indeed in idea elated and exalted above 
[Him], but in reality turning away from the true God. 

2. To these persons one may with justice say (as Scripture itself suggests), To what distance above God do 
ye lift up your imaginations, O ye rashly elated men? Ye have heard "that the heavens are meted out in the 
palm of [His] hand:"(1) tell me the measure, and recount the endless multitude of cubits, explain to me the 
fulness, the breadth, the length, the height, the beginning and end of the measurement-things which the 
heart of man understands not, neither does it comprehend them. For the heavenly treasuries are indeed 
great: God cannot be measured in the heart, and incomprehensible is He in the mind; He who holds the 
earth in the hollow of His hand. Who perceives the measure of His right hand? Who knoweth His finger? Or 
who doth understand His hand, -that hand which measures immensity; that hand which, by its own measure, 
spreads out the measure of the heavens, and which comprises in its hollow the earth with the abysses; 
which contains in itself the breadth, and length, and the deep below, and the height above of the whole 
creation; which is seen, which is heard and understood, and which is invisible? And for this reason God is 
"above all principality, and power, and dominion, and every name that is named, "(2) of all things which have 
been created and established. He it is who fills the heavens, and views the abysses, who is also present 
with every one of us. For he says, "Am I a God at hand, and not a God afar off? If any man is hid in secret 
places, shall I not see him?"(3) For His hand lays hold of all things, and that it is which illumines the heavens, 
and lightens also the things which are under the heavens, and trieth the reins and the hearts, is also present 
in hidden things, and in our secret [thoughts], and does openly nourish and preserve us. 

3. But if man comprehends not the fulness and the greatness of His hand, how shall any one be able to 
understand or know in his heart so great a God? Yet, as if they had now measured and thoroughly 
investigated Him, and explored Him on every side? they feign that beyond Him there exists another 
Pleroma of AEons, and another Father; certainly not looking up to celestial things, but truly descending into 
a profound abyss (Bythus) of madness; maintaining that their Father extends only to the border of those 
things which are beyond the Pleroma, but that, on the other hand, the Demiurge does not reach so far as the 
Pleroma; and thus they represent neither of them as being perfect and comprehending all things. For the 
former will be defective in regard to the whole world formed outside of the Pleroma, and the latter in respect 
of that [ideal] world which was formed within the Pleroma; and [therefore] neither of these can be the God of 
all. But that no one can fully declare the goodness of God from the things made by Him, is a point evident to 
all. And that His greatness is not defective, but contains all things, and extends even to us, and is with us, 
every one will confess who entertains worthy conceptions of God. 

CHAP. XX.--THAT ONE GOD FORMED ALL THINGS IN THE WORLD, BY MEANS OF THE 
WORD AND THE HOLY SPIRIT: AND THAT ALTHOUGH HE IS TO US IN THIS LIFE 
INVISIBLE AND INCOMPREHENSIBLE, NEVERTHELESS HE IS NOT UNKNOWN; 
INASMUCH AS HIS WORKS DO DECLARE HIM, AND HIS WORD HAS SHOWN THAT IN 
MANY MODES HE MAY BE SEEN AND KNOWN. 

1 . As regards His greatness, therefore, it is not possible to know God, for it is impossible that the Father can 
be measured; but as regards His love (for this it is which leads us to God by His Word), when we obey Him, 
we do always learn that there is so great a God, and that it is He who by Himself has established, and 
selected, and adorned, and contains all things; and among the all things, both ourselves and this our world. 
We also then were made, along with those things which are contained by Him. And this is He of whom the 
Scripture says, "And God formed man, taking clay of the earth, and breathed into his face the breath of 
life. "(5) It was not angels, therefore, who made us, nor who formed us, neither had angels power to make an 
image of God, nor any one else, except the Word of the Lord, nor any Power remotely distant from the 
Father of all things. For God did not stand in need of these [beings], in order to the accomplishing of what He 
had Himself determined with Himself beforehand should be done, as if He did not possess His own hands. 

For with Him were always present the Word and Wisdom, the Son and the Spirit, by whom and in whom, 
freely and spontaneously, He made all things, to whom also He speaks, saying, "Let Us make man after 
Our image and likeness;"(1) He taking from Himself the substance of the creatures [formed], and the pattern 
of things made, and the type of all the adornments in the world. 

2. Truly, then, the Scripture declared, which says, "First(2) of all believe that there is one God, who has 
established all things, and completed them, and having caused that from what had no being, all things 
should come into existence:" He who contains all things, and is Himself contained by no one. Rightly also 
has Malachi said among the prophets: "Is it not one God who hath established us? Have we not all one 
Father?"(3) In accordance with this, too, does the apostle say, "There is one God, the Father, who is above 
all, and in us all. "(4) Likewise does the Lord also say: "All things are delivered to Me by My Father;"(5) 
manifestly by Him who made all things; for He did not deliver to Him the things of another, but His own. But in 
all things [it is implied that] nothing has been kept back [from Him], and for this reason the same person is 
the Judge of the living and the dead; "having the key of David: He shall Open, and no man shall shut: He 
shall shut, and no man shall open. "(6) For no one was able, either in heaven or in earth, or under the earth, to 
open the book of the Father, or to behold Him, with the exception of the Lamb who was slain, and who 
redeemed us with His own blood, receiving power over all things from the same God who made all things 
by the Word, and adorned them by [His] Wisdom, when "the Word was made flesh;" that even as the Word 
of God had the sovereignty in the heavens, so also might He have the sovereignty in earth, inasmuch as 
[He was] a righteous man, "who did no sin, neither was there found guile in His mouth;"(7) and that He might 
have the pre-eminence over those things which are under the earth, He Himself being made "the 
first-begotten of the dead;"(8) and that all things, as I have already said, might behold their King; and that the 
paternal light might meet with and rest upon the flesh of our Lord, and come to us from His resplendent flesh, 
and that thus man might attain to immortality, having been invested with the paternal light. 

3. I have also largely demonstrated, that the Word, namely the Son, was always with the Father; and that 
Wisdom also, which is the Spirit, was present with Him, anterior to all creation, He declares by Solomon: 
"God by Wisdom founded the earth, and by understanding hath He established the heaven. By His 
knowledge the depths burst forth, and the clouds dropped down the dew. "(9) And again: "The Lord created 
me the beginning of His ways in His work: He set me up from everlasting, in the beginning, before He made 
the earth, before He established the depths, and before the fountains of waters gushed forth; before the 
mountains were made strong, and before all the hills, He brought me forth. "(10) And again: "When He 
prepared the heaven, I was with Him, and when He established the fountains of the deep; when He made 
the foundations of the earth strong, I was with Him preparing [them]. I was He in whom He rejoiced, and 
throughout all time I was daily glad before His face, when He rejoiced at the completion of the world, and 
was delighted in the sons of men."(1 1) 

4. There is therefore one God, who by the Word and Wisdom created and arranged all things; but this is the 
Creator (Demiurge) who has granted this world to the human race, and who, as regards His greatness, is 
indeed unknown to all who have been made by Him (for no man has searched out His height, either among 
the ancients who have gone to their rest, or any of those who are now alive); but as regards His love, He is 
always known through Him by whose means He ordained all things. Now this is His Word, our Lord Jesus 
Christ, who in the last times was made a man among men, that He might join the end to the beginning, that is, 
man to God. Wherefore the prophets, receiving the prophetic gift from the same Word, announced His 
advent according to the flesh, by which the blending and communion of God and man took place according 
to the good pleasure of the Father, the Word of God foretelling from the beginning that God should be seen 
by men, and hold converse with them upon earth, should confer with them, and should be present with His 
own creation, saving it, and becoming capable of being perceived by it, and freeing us from the hands of all 
that hate us, that is, from every spirit of wickedness; and causing us to serve Him in holiness and 
righteousness all our days, (12) in order that man, having embraced the Spirit of God, might pass into the 
glory of the Father. 

5. These things did the prophets set forth in a prophetical manner; but they did not, as some allege, 
[proclaim] that He who was seen by the prophets was a different [God], the Father of all being invisible. Yet 
this is what those [heretics] declare, who are altogether ignorant of the nature of prophecy. For prophecy is 
a prediction of things future, that is, a setting forth beforehand of those things which shall be afterwards. The 
prophets, then, indicated beforehand that God should be seen by men; as the Lord also says, "Blessed are 
the pure in heart, for they shall see God."(1) But in respect to His greatness, and His wonderful glory, "no 
man shall see God and live, "(2) for the Father is incomprehensible; but in regard to His love, and kindness, 
and as to His infinite power, even this He grants to those who love Him, that is, to see God, which thing the 
prophets did also predict. "For those things that are impossible with men, are possible with God. "(3) For 
man does not see God by his own powers; but when He pleases He is seen by men, by whom He wills, and 
when He wills, and as He wills. For God is powerful in all things, having been seen at that time indeed, 

prophetically through the Spirit, and seen, too, adoptively through the Son; and He shall also be seen 
paternally in the kingdom of heaven, the Spirit truly preparing man in the Son(4) of God, and the Son leading 
him to the Father, while the Father, too, confers [upon him] incorruption for eternal life, which comes to every 
one from the fact of his seeing God. For as those who see the light are within the light, and partake of its 
brilliancy; even so, those who see God are in God, and receive of His splendour. But [His] splendour 
vivifies them; those, therefore, who see God, do receive life. And for this reason, He, [although] beyond 
comprehension, and boundless and invisible, rendered Himself visible, and comprehensible, and within the 
capacity of those who believe, that He might vivify those who receive and behold Him through faith. (5) For 
as His greatness is past finding out, so also His goodness is beyond expression; by which having been 
seen, He bestows life upon those who see Him. It is not possible to live apart from life, and the means of life 
is found in fellowship with God; but fellowship with God is to know God, and to enjoy His goodness. 

6. Men therefore shall see God, that they may live, being made immortal by that sight, and attaining even 
unto God; which, as I have already said, was declared figuratively by the prophets, that God should be seen 
by men who bear His Spirit [in them], and do always wait patiently for His coming. As also Moses says in 
Deuteronomy, "We shall see in that day that God will talk to man, and he shall live. "(6) For certain of these 
men used to see the prophetic Spirit and His active influences poured forth for all kinds of gifts; others, 
again, [beheld] the advent of the Lord, and that dispensation which obtained from the beginning, by which 
He accomplished the will of the Father with regard to things both celestial and terrestrial; and others 
[beheld] paternal glories adapted to the times, and to those who saw and who heard them then, and to all 
who were subsequently to hear them. Thus, therefore, was God revealed; for God the Father is shown forth 
through all these [operations], the Spirit indeed working, and the Son ministering, while the Father was 
approving, and man's salvation being accomplished. As He also declares through Hosea the prophet: "I," 
He says, "have multiplied visions, and have used similitudes by the ministry (in manibus) of the 
prophets. "(7) But the apostle expounded this very passage, when he said, "Now there are diversities of 
gifts, but the same Spirit; and there are differences of ministrations, but the same Lord; and there are 
diversities of operations, but it is the same God which worketh all in all. But the manifestation of the Spirit is 
given to every man to profit withal. "(8) But as He who worketh all things in all is God, [as to the points] of what 
nature and how great He is, [God] is invisible and indescribable to all things which have been made by 
Him, but He is by no means unknown: for all things learn through His Word that there is one God the Father, 
who contains all things, and who grants existence to all, as is written in the Gospel: "No man hath seen God 
at any time, except the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father; He has declared [Him.]"(9) 

7. Therefore the Son of the Father declares [Him] from the beginning, inasmuch as He was with the Father 
from the beginning, who did also show to the human race prophetic visions, and diversities of gifts, and His 
own ministrations, and the glory of the Father, in regular order and connection, at the fitting time for the benefit 
[of mankind]. For where there is a regular succession, there is also fixedness; and where fixedness, there 
suitability to the period; and where suitability, there also utility. And for this reason did the Word become the 
dispenser of the paternal grace for the benefit of men, for whom He made such great dispensations, 
revealing God indeed to men, but presenting man to God, and preserving at the same time the invisibility of 
the Father, lest man should at any time become a despiser of God, and that he should always possess 
something towards which he might advance; but, on the other hand, revealing God to men through many 
dispensations, lest man, failing away from God altogether, should cease to exist. For the glory of God is a 
living man; and the life of man consists in beholding God. For if the manifestation of God which is made by 
means of the creation, affords life to all living in the earth, much more does that revelation of the Father which 
comes through the Word, give life to those who see God. 

8. Inasmuch, then, as the Spirit of God pointed out by the prophets things to come, forming and adapting us 
beforehand for the purpose of our being made subject to God, but it was still a future thing that man, through 
the good pleasure of the Holy Spirit, should see [God], it necessarily behoved those through whose 
instrumentality future things were announced, to see God, whom they intimated as to be seen by men; in 
order that God, and the Son of God, and the Son, and the Father, should not only be prophetically 
announced, but that He should also be seen by all His members who are sanctified and instructed in the 
things of God, that man might be disciplined beforehand and previously exercised for a reception into that 
glory which shall afterwards be revealed in those who love God. For the prophets used not to prophesy in 
word alone, but in visions also, and in their mode of life, and in the actions which they performed, according 
to the suggestions of the Spirit. After this invisible manner, therefore, did they see God, as also Esaias says, 
"I have seen with mine eyes the King, the LORD Of hosts, "(1) pointing out that man should behold God with 
his eyes, and hear His voice. In this manner, therefore, did they also see the Son of God as a man 
conversant with men, while they prophesied what was to happen, saying that He who was not come as yet 
was present proclaiming also the impassible as subject to suffering, and declaring that He who was then in 
heaven had descended into the dust of death. (2) Moreover, [with regard to] the other arrangements 

concerning the summing up that He should make, some of these they beheld through visions, others they 
proclaimed by word, while others they indicated typically by means of [outward] action, seeing visibly those 
things which were to be seen; heralding by word of mouth those which should be heard; and performing by 
actual operation what should take place by action; but [at the same time] announcing all prophetically. 
Wherefore also Moses declared that God was indeed a consuming fire(3) (igneum) to the people that 
transgressed the law, and threatened that God would bring upon them a day of fire; but to those who had the 
fear of God he said, "The LORD God is merciful and gracious, and long-suffering, and of great 
commiseration, and true, and keeps justice and mercy for thousands, forgiving unrighteousness, and 
transgressions, and sins. "(4) 

9. And the Word spake to Moses, appearing before him, "just as any one might speak to his friend. "(5) But 
Moses desired to see Him openly who was speaking with him, and was thus addressed: "Stand in the deep 
place of the rock, and with My hand I will cover thee. But when My splendour shall pass by, then thou shalt 
see My back pans, but My face thou shalt not see: for no man sees My face, and shall live. "(6) Two facts are 
thus signified: that it is impossible for man to see God; and that, through the wisdom of God, man shall see 
Him in the last times, in the depth of a rock, that is, in His coming as a man. And for this reason did He [the 
Lord] confer with him face to face on the top of a mountain, Elias being also present, as the Gospel 
relates, (7) He thus making good in the end the ancient promise. 

10. The prophets, therefore, did not openly behold the actual face of God, but [they saw] the dispensations 
and the mysteries through which man should afterwards see God. As was also said to Elias: "Thou shalt go 
forth tomorrow, and stand in the presence of the LORD; and, behold, a wind great and strong, which shall 
rend the mountains, and break the rocks in pieces before the LORD. And the LORD [was] not in the wind; 
and after the wind an earthquake, but the LORD [was] not in the earthquake; and after the earthquake a fire, 
but the Lord [was] not in the fire; and after the fire a scarcely audible voice" (vox aurae tenuis). (8) For by 
such means was the prophet-very indignant, because of the transgression of the people and the slaughter 
of the prophets-both taught to act in a more gentle manner; and the Lord's advent as a man was pointed 
out, that it should be subsequent to that law which was given by Moses, mild and tranquil, in which He would 
neither break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax. (9) The mild and peaceful repose of His 
kingdom was indicated likewise. For, after the wind which rends the mountains, and after the earthquake, 
and after the fire, come the tranquil and peaceful times of His kingdom, in which the spirit of God does, in the 
most gentle manner, vivify and increase mankind. This, too, was made still clearer by Ezekiel, that the 
prophets saw the dispensations of God in part, but not actually God Himself. For when this man had seen 
the vision(1) of God, and the cherubim, and theirwheels, and when he had recounted the mystery of the 
whole of that progression, and had beheld the likeness of a throne above them, and upon the throne a 
likeness as of the figure of a man, and the things which were upon his loins as the figure of amber, and what 
was below like the sight of fire, and when he set forth all the rest of the vision of the thrones, lest any one 
might happen to think that in those [visions] he had actually seen God, he added: "This was the 
appearance of the likeness of the glory of God. "(2) 

1 1 . If, then, neither Moses, nor Elias, nor Ezekiel, who had all many celestial visions, did see God; but if what 
they did see were similitudes of the splendour of the Lord, And prophecies of things to come; it is manifest 
that the Father is indeed invisible, of whom also the Lord said, "No man hath seen God at any time. "(3) But 
His Word, as He Himself willed it, and for the benefit of those who beheld, did show the Father's brightness, 
and explained His purposes (as also the Lord said: "The only-begotten God, (4) which is in the bosom of the 
Father, He hath declared [Him];" and He does Himself also interpret the Word of the Father as being rich 
and great); not in one figure, nor in one character, did He appear to those seeing Him, but according to the 
reasons and effects aimed at in His dispensations, as it is written in Daniel. For at one time He was seen 
with those who were around Ananias, Azarias, Misael, as present with them in the furnace of fire, in the 
burning, and preserving them from [the effects of] fire: "And the appearance of the fourth," it is said, "was like 
to the Son of God. "(5) At another time [He is represented as] "a stone cut out of the mountain without 
hands, "(6) and as smiting all temporal kingdoms, and as blowing them away (ventilans ea), and as Himself 
filling all the earth. Then, too, is this same individual beheld as the Son of man coming in the clouds of 
heaven, and drawing near to the Ancient of Days, and receiving from Him all power and glory, and a 
kingdom. "His dominion," it is said, "is an everlasting dominion, and His kingdom shall not perish. "(7) John 
also, the Lord's disciple, when beholding the sacerdotal and glorious advent of His kingdom, says in the 
Apocalypse: "I turned to see the voice that spake with me. And, being turned, I saw seven golden 
candlesticks; and in the midst of the candlesticks One like unto the Son of man, clothed with a garment 
reaching to the feet, and girt about the paps with a golden girdle; and His head and His hairs were white, as 
white as wool, and as snow; and His eyes were as a flame of fire; and His feet like unto fine brass, as if He 
burned in a furnace. And His voice [was] as the voice of waters; and He had in His right hand seven stars; 
and out of His mouth went a sharp two-edged sword; and His countenance was as the sun shining in his 

strength. "(8) For in these words He sets forth something of the glory [which He has received] from His 
Father, as [where He makes mention of] the head; something in reference to the priestly office also, as in the 
case of the long garment reaching to the feet. And this was the reason why Moses vested the high priest 
after this fashion. Something also alludes to the end [of all things], as [where He speaks of] the fine brass 
burning in the fire, which denotes the power of faith, and the continuing instant in prayer, because of the 
consuming fire which is to come at the end of time. But when John could not endure the sight (for he says, "I 
fell at his feet as dead;"(9) that what was written might come to pass: "No man sees God, and shall live"(10)), 
and the Word reviving him, and reminding him that it was He upon whose bosom he had leaned at supper, 
when he put the question as to who should betray Him, declared: "I am the first and the last, and He who 
liveth, and was dead, and behold I am alive for evermore, and have the keys of death and of hell." And after 
these things, seeing the same Lord in a second vision, he says: "For I saw in the midst of the throne, and of 
the four living creatures, and in the midst of the elders, a Lamb standing as it had been slain, having seven 
horns, and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God, sent forth into all the earth. "(1 1) And again, he 
says, speaking of this very same Lamb: "And behold a white horse; and He that sat upon him was called 
Faithful and True; and in righteousness doth He judge and make war. And His eyes were as a flame of fire, 
and on His head were many crowns; having a name written, that no man knoweth but Himself: and He was 
girded around with a vesture sprinkled with blood: and His name is called The Word of God. And the armies 
of heaven followed Him upon white horses, clothed in pure white linen. And out of His mouth goeth a sharp 
sword, that with it He may smite the nations; and He shall rule (pascet) them with a rod of iron: and He 
treadeth the wine-press of the fierceness of the wrath of God Almighty. And He hath upon His vesture and 
upon His thigh a name written, KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF L0RDS."(1) Thus does the Word of God 
always preserve the outlines, as it were, of things to come, and points out to men the various forms 
(species), as it were, of the dispensations of the Father, teaching us the things pertaining to God. 
12. However, it was not by means of visions alone which were seen, and words which were proclaimed, but 
also in actual works, that He was beheld by the prophets, in order that through them He might prefigure and 
show forth future events beforehand. For this reason did Hosea the prophet take "a wife of whoredoms," 
prophesying by means of the action, "that in committing fornication the earth should fornicate from the 
LORD, "(2) that is, the men who are upon the earth; and from men of this stamp it will be God's good pleasure 
to take out(3) a Church which shall be sanctified by fellowship with His Son, just as that woman was 
sanctified by intercourse with the prophet. And for this reason, Paul declares that the "unbelieving wife is 
sanctified by the believing husband. "(4) Then again, the prophet names his children, "Not having obtained 
mercy," and "Not a people, "(5) in order that, as says the apostle, "what was not a people may become a 
people; and she who did not obtain mercy may obtain mercy. And it shall come to pass, that in the place 
where it was said, This is not a people, there shall they be called the children of the living God. "(6) That 
which had been done typically through his actions by the prophet, the apostle proves to have been done 
truly by Christ in the Church. Thus, too, did Moses also take to wife an Ethiopian woman, whom he thus made 
an Israelitish one, showing by anticipation that the wild olive tree is grafted into the cultivated olive, and 
made to partake of its fatness. For as He who was born Christ according to the flesh, had indeed to be 
sought after by the people in order to be slain, but was to be set free in Egypt, that is, among the Gentiles, to 
sanctify those who were there in a state of infancy, from whom also He perfected His Church in that place (for 
Egypt was Gentile from the beginning, as was Ethiopia also); for this reason, by means of the marriage of 
Moses, was shown forth the marriage of the Word;(7) and by means of the Ethiopian bride, the Church taken 
from among the Gentiles was made manifest; and those who do detract from, accuse, and deride it, shall not 
be pure. For they shall be full of leprosy, and expelled from the camp of the righteous. Thus also did Rahab 
the harlot, while condemning herself, inasmuch as she was a Gentile, guilty of all sins, nevertheless receive 
the three spies, (8) who were spying out all the land, and hid them at her home; [which three were] doubtless 
[a type of] the Father and the Son, together with the Holy Spirit. And when the entire city in which she lived fell 
to ruins at the sounding of the seven trumpets, Rahab the harlot was preserved, when all was over [in 
ultimis], together with all her house, through faith of the scarlet sign; as the Lord also declared to those who 
did not receive His advent,-the Pharisees, no doubt, nullify the sign of the scarlet thread, which meant the 
passover, and the redemption and exodus of the people from Egypt,- when He said, "The publicans and 
the harlots go into the kingdom of heaven before you. "(9) 

CHAP. XXI. -ABRAHAM'S FAITH WAS IDENTICAL WITH OURS; THIS FAITH WAS 
PREFIGURED BY THE WORDS AND ACTIONS OF THE OLD PATRIARCHS. 

1 . But that our faith was also prefigured in Abraham, and that he was the patriarch of our faith, and, as it were, 
the prophet of it, the apostle has very fully taught, when he says in the Epistle to the Galatians: "He therefore 
that ministereth to you the Spirit, and worketh miracles among you, [doeth he it] by the works of the law, or by 
the hearing of faith? Even as Abraham believed God, and it was accounted unto him for righteousness. 
Know ye therefore, that they which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham. But the Scripture, 
foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, announced beforehand unto Abraham, that in 
him all nations should be blessed. So then they which be of faith shall be blessed with faithful Abraham. "(10) 
For which [reasons the apostle] declared that this man was not only the prophet of faith, but also the father of 
those who from among the Gentiles believe in Jesus Christ, because his faith and ours are one and the 
same: for he believed in things future, as if they were already accomplished, because of the promise of 
God; and in like manner do we also, because of the promise of God, behold through faith that inheritance 
[laid up for us] in the [future] kingdom. 

2. The history of Isaac, too, is not without a symbolical character. For in the Epistle to the Romans, the 
apostle declares: "Moreover, when Rebecca had conceived by one, even by our father Isaac," she 
received answer(1) from the Word, "that the purpose of God according to election might stand, not of works, 
but of Him that calleth, it was said unto her, Two nations are in thy womb, and two manner of people are in 
thy body; and the one people shall overcome the other, and the eider shall serve the younger."(2) From 
which it is evident, that not only [were there] prophecies of the patriarchs, but also that the children brought 
forth by Rebecca were a prediction of the two nations; and that the one should be indeed the greater, but the 
other the less; that the one also should be under bondage, but the other free; but [that both should be] of one 
and the same father. Our God, one and the same, is also their God, who knows hidden things, who knoweth 
all things before they can come to pass; and for this reason has He said, "Jacob have I loved, but Esau 
have I hated. "(3) 

3. If any one, again, will look into Jacob's actions, he shall find them not destitute of meaning, but full of 
import with regard to the dispensations. Thus, in the first place, at his birth, since he laid hold on his brother's 
heel, (4) he was called Jacob, that is, the supplanter-one who holds, but is not held; binding the feet, but not 
being bound; striving and conquering; grasping in his hand his adversary's heel, that is, victory. For to this 
end was the Lord born, the type of whose birth he set forth beforehand, of whom also John says in the 
Apocalypse: "He went forth conquering, that He should conquer."(5) In the next place, [Jacob] received the 
rights of the first-born, when his brother looked on them with contempt; even as also the younger nation 
received Him, Christ, the first-begotten, when the elder nation rejected Him, saying, "We have no king but 
Caesar."(6) But in Christ every blessing [is summed up], and therefore the latter people has snatched away 
the blessings of the former from the Father, just as Jacob took away the blessing of this Esau. For which 
cause his brother suffered the plots and persecutions of a brother, just as the Church suffers this self-same 
thing from the Jews. In a foreign country were the twelve tribes born, the race of Israel, inasmuch as Christ 
was also, in a strange country, to generate the twelve-pillared foundation of the Church. Various coloured 
sheep were allotted to this Jacob as his wages; and the wages of Christ are human beings, who from 
various and diverse nations come together into one cohort of faith, as the Father promised Him, saying, 
"Ask of Me, and I will give Thee the heathen for Thine inheritance, the uttermost parts of the earth for Thy 
possession. "(7) And as from the multitude of his sons the prophets of the Lord [afterwards] arose, there was 
every necessity that Jacob should beget sons from the two sisters, even as Christ did from the two laws of 
one and the same Father; and in like manner also from the handmaids, indicating that Christ should raise up 
sons of God, both from freemen and from slaves after the flesh, bestowing upon all, in the same manner, the 
gift of the Spirit, who vivifies us. (8) But he (Jacob) did all things for the sake of the younger, she who had the 
handsome eyes, (9) Rachel, who prefigured the Church, for which Christ endured patiently; who at that time, 
indeed, by means of His patriarchs and prophets, was prefiguring and declaring beforehand future things, 
fulfilling His part by anticipation in the dispensations of God, and accustoming His inheritance to obey God, 
and to pass through the world as in a state of pilgrimage, to follow His word, and to indicate beforehand 

things to come. For with God there is nothing without purpose or due signification. 

CHAP. XXII. -CHRIST DID NOT COME FOR THE SAKE OF THE MEN OF ONE AGE ONLY, 
BUT FOR ALL WHO, LIVING RIGHTEOUSLY AND PIOUSLY, HAD BELIEVED UPON HIM; 
AND FOR THOSE, TOO, WHO SHALL BELIEVE. 

1 Now in the last days, when the fulness of the time of liberty had arrived, the Word Himself did by Himself 
"wash away the filth of the daughters of Zion,"(10) when He washed the disciples' feet with His own 
hands. (1 1) For this is the end of the human race inheriting God; that as in the beginning, by means of our first 
[parents], we were all brought into bondage, by being made subject to death; so at last, by means of the 
New Man, all who from the beginning [were His] disciples, having been cleansed and washed from things 
pertaining to death, should come to the life of God. For He who washed the feet of the disciples sanctified 
the entire body, and rendered it clean. For this reason, too, He administered food to them in a recumbent 
posture, indicating that those who were lying in the earth were they to whom He came to impart life. As 
Jeremiah declares, "The holy Lord remembered His dead Israel, who slept in the land of sepulture; and He 
descended to them to make known to them His salvation, that they might be saved. "(1) For this reason also 
were the eyes of the disciples weighed down when Christ's passion was approaching; and when, in the first 
instance, the Lord found them sleeping, He let it pass, -thus indicating the patience of God in regard to the 
state of slumber in which men lay; but coming the second time, He aroused them, and made them stand up, 
in token that His passion is the arousing of His sleeping disciples, on whose account "He also descended 
into the lower parts of the earth, "(2) to behold with His eyes the state of those who were resting from their 
labours, (3) in reference to whom He did also declare to the disciples: "Many prophets and righteous men 
have desired to see and hear what ye do see and hear."(4) 

2. For it was not merely for those who believed on Him in the time of Tiberius Caesar that Christ came, nor 
did the Father exercise His providence for the men only who are now alive, but for all men altogether, who 
from the beginning, according to their capacity, in their generation have both feared and loved God, and 
practised justice and piety towards their neighbours, and have earnestly desired to see Christ, and to hear 
His voice. Wherefore He shall, at His second coming, first rouse from their sleep all persons of this 
description, and shall raise them up, as well as the rest who shall be judged, and give them a place in His 
kingdom. For it is truly "one God who" directed the patriarchs towards His dispensations, and "has justified 
the circumcision by faith, and the uncircumcision through faith. "(5) For as in the first we were prefigured, so, 
on the other hand, are they represented in us, that is, in the Church, and receive the recompense for those 
things which they accomplished. 

CHAP. XXIII. -THE PATRIARCHS AND PROPHETS BY POINTING OUT THE ADVENT OF 
CHRIST, FORTIFIED THEREBY, AS IT WERE, THE WAY OF POSTERITY TO THE FAITH 
OF CHRIST; AND SO THE LABOURS OF THE APOSTLES WERE LESSENED INASMUCH 
AS THEY GATHERED IN THE FRUITS OF THE LABOURS OF OTHERS. 

1 . For which reason the Lord declared to the disciples: "Behold, I say unto you, Lift up your eyes, and look 
upon the districts (regiones), for they are white [already] to harvest. For the harvest-man receiveth wages, 
and gathereth fruit unto life eternal, that both he that soweth and he that reapeth may rejoice together. For in 
this is the saying true, that one soweth and another reapeth. For I have sent you forward to reap that whereon 
ye bestowed no labour; other men have laboured, and ye have entered into their labours. "(6) Who, then, are 
they that have laboured, and have helped forward the dispensations of God? It is clear that they are the 
patriarchs and prophets, who even prefigured our faith, and disseminated through the earth the advent of the 
Son of God, who and what He should be: so that posterity, possessing the fear of God, might easily accept 
the advent of Christ, having been instructed by the prophets. And for this reason it was, that when Joseph 
became aware that Mary was with child, and was minded to put her away privily, the angel said to him in 
sleep: "Fear not to take to thee Mary thy wife; for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost. For she 
shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call His name Jesus; for He shall save His people from their sins. "(7) 
And exhorting him [to this], he added: "Now all this has been done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken 
from the Lord by the prophet, saying, Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and His 
name shall be called Emmanuel;" thus influencing him by the words of the prophet, and warding off blame 
from Mary, pointing out that it was she who was the virgin mentioned by Isaiah beforehand, who should give 
birth to Emmanuel. Wherefore, when Joseph was convinced beyond all doubt, he both did take Mary, and 
joyfully yielded obedience in regard to all the rest of the education of Christ, undertaking a journey into 
Egypt and back again, and then a removal to Nazareth. [For this reason,] those who knew not the Scriptures 
nor the promise of God, nor the dispensation of Christ, at last called him the father of the child. For this 
reason, too, did the Lord Himself read at Capernaum the prophecies of lsaiah:(8) "The Spirit of the Lord is 

upon Me, because He hath anointed Me; to preach the Gospel to the poor hath He sent Me, to heal the 
broken-hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and sight to the blind. "(9) At the same time, showing 
that it was He Himself who had been foretold by Esaias the prophet, He said to them: "This day is this 
Scripture fulfilled in your ears." 

2. For this reason, also, Philip, when he had discovered the eunuch of the Ethiopians' queen reading these 
words which had been written: "He was led as a sheep to the slaughter; and as a lamb is dumb before the 
shearer, so He opened not His mouth: in His humiliation His judgment was taken away;"(1 0) and all the rest 
which the prophet proceeded to relate in regard to His passion and His coming in the flesh, and how He 
was dishonoured by those who did not believe Him; easily persuaded him to believe on Him, that He was 
Christ Jesus, who was crucified under Pontius Pilate, and suffered whatsoever the prophet had predicted, 
and that He was the Son of God, who gives eternal life to men. And immediately when [Philip] had baptized 
him, he departed from him. For nothing else [but baptism] was wanting to him who had been already 
instructed by the prophets: he was not ignorant of God the Father, nor of the rules as to the [proper] manner 
of life, but was merely ignorant of the advent of the Son of God, which, when he had become acquainted 
with, in a short space of time, he went on his way rejoicing, to be the herald in Ethiopia of Christ's advent. 
Therefore Philip had no great labour to go through with regard to this man, because he was already 
prepared in the fear of God by the prophets. For this reason, too, did the apostles, collecting the sheep 
which had perished of the house of Israel, and discoursing to them from the Scriptures, prove that this 
crucified Jesus was the Christ, the Son of the living God; and they persuaded a great multitude, who, 
however, [already] possessed the fear of God. And there were, in one day, baptized three, and four, and 
five thousand men.(1) 

CHAP XXIV.--THE CONVERSION OF THE GENTILES WAS MORE DIFFICULT THAN THAT 
OF THE JEWS; THE LABOURS OF THOSE APOSTLES, THEREFORE WHO ENGAGED IN 
THE FORMER TASK, WERE GREATER THAN THOSE WHO UNDERTOOKTHE LATTER. 

1. Wherefore also Paul, since he was the apostle of the Gentiles, says, "I laboured more than they all. "(2) For 
the instruction of the former, [viz., the Jews,] was an easy task, because they could allege proofs from the 
Scriptures, and because they, who were in the habit of hearing Moses and the prophets, did also readily 
receive the First-begotten of the dead, and the Prince of the life of God,-Him who, by the spreading forth of 
hands, did destroy Amalek, and vivify man from the wound of the serpent, by means of faith which was 
[exercised] towards Him. As I have pointed out in the preceding book, the apostle did, in the first place, 
instruct the Gentiles to depart from the superstition of idols, and to worship one God, the Creator of heaven 
and earth, and the Framer of the whole creation; and that His Son was His Word, by whom He founded all 
things; and that He, in the last times, was made a man among men; that He reformed the human race, but 
destroyed and conquered the enemy of man, and gave to His handiwork victory against the adversary. But 
although they who were of the circumcision still did not obey the words of God, for they were despisers, yet 
they were previously instructed not to commit adultery, nor fornication, nor theft, nor fraud; and that 
whatsoever things are done to our neighbours' prejudice, were evil, and detested by God. Wherefore also 
they did readily agree to abstain from these things, because they had been thus instructed. 

2. But they were bound to teach the Gentiles also this very thing, that works of such a nature were wicked, 
prejudicial, and useless, and destructive to those who engaged in them. Wherefore he who had received 
the apostolate to the Gentiles, (3) did labour more than those who preached the Son of God among them of 
the circumcision. For they were assisted by the Scriptures, which the Lord confirmed and tiff-filled, in coming 
such as He had been announced; but here, [in the case of the Gentiles,] there was a certain foreign 
erudition, and a new doctrine [to be received, namely], that the gods of the nations not only were no gods at 
all, but even the idols of demons; and that there is one God, who is "above all principality, and dominion, 
and power, and every name which is named;"(4) and that His Word, invisible by nature, was made palpable 
and visible among men, and did descend "to death, even the death of the cross;"(5) also, that they who 
believe in Him shall be incorruptible and not subject to suffering, and shall receive the kingdom of heaven. 
These things, too, were preached to the Gentiles by word, without [the aid of] the Scriptures: wherefore, also, 
they who preached among the Gentiles underwent greater labour. But, on the other hand, the faith of the 
Gentiles is proved to be of a more noble description, since they followed the word of God without the 
instruction [derived] from the [sacred] writings (sine instructione literarum). 

CHAP. XXV.--BOTH COVENANTS WERE PREFIGURED IN ABRAHAM, AND IN THE 
LABOUR OF TAMAR; THERE WAS, HOWEVER, BUT ONE AND THE SAME GOD TO EACH 
COVENANT. 

1. For thus it had behoved the sons of Abraham [to be], whom God has raised up to him from the stones, (6) 

and caused to take a place beside him who was made the chief and the forerunner of our faith (who did also 
receive the covenant of circumcision, after that justification by faith which had pertained to him, when he was 
yet in uncircumcision, so that in him both covenants might be prefigured, that he might be the father of all who 
follow the Word of God, and who sustain a life of pilgrimage in this world, that is, of those who from among 
the circumcision and of those from among the uncircumcision are faithful, even as also "Christ(1) is the chief 
corner-stone" sustaining all things); and He gathered into the one faith of Abraham those who, from either 
covenant, are eligible for God's building. But this faith which is in uncircumcision, as connecting the end with 
the beginning, has been made [both] the first and the last. For, as I have shown, it existed in Abraham 
antecedently to circumcision, as it also did in the rest of the righteous who pleased God: and in these last 
times, it again sprang up among mankind through the coming of the Lord. But circumcision and the law of 
works occupied the intervening period. (2) 

2. This fact is indeed set forth by many other [occurrences], but typically by [the history of] Thamar, Judah's 
daughter-in-law.(3) For when she had conceived twins, one of them put forth his hand first; and as the midwife 
supposed that he was the first-born, she bound a scarlet token on his hand. But after this had been done, 
and he had drawn back his hand, his brother Phares came forth the first; then, after him, Zara, upon whom 
was the scarlet line, [was born] the second: the Scripture clearly pointing out that people which possessed 
the scarlet sign, that is, faith in a state of circumcision, which was shown beforehand, indeed, in the 
patriarchs first; but after that withdrawn, that his brother might be born; and also, in like manner, him who was 
the elder, as being born in the second place, [him] who was distinguished by the scarlet token which was 
[fastened] on him, that is, the passion of the Just One, which was prefigured from the beginning in Abel, and 
described by the prophets, but perfected in the last times in the Son of God. 

3. For it was requisite that certain facts should be announced beforehand by the fathers in a paternal 
manner, and others prefigured by the prophets in a legal one, but others, described after the form of Christ, 
by those who have received the adoption; while in one God are all things shown forth. For although 
Abraham was one, he did in himself prefigure the two covenants, in which some indeed have sown, while 
others have reaped; for it is said, "In this is the saying true, that it is one 'people' who sows, but another who 
shall reap;"(4) but it is one God who bestows things suitable upon both-seed to the sower, but bread for the 
reaper to eat. Just as it is one that planteth, and another who watereth, but one God who giveth the 
increase. (5) For the patriarchs and prophets sowed the word [concerning] Christ, but the Church reaped, that 
is, received the fruit. For this reason, too, do these very men (the prophets) also pray to have a 
dwelling-place in it, as Jeremiah says, "Who will give me in the desert the last dwelling-place?"(6) in order 
that both the sower and the reaper may rejoice together in the kingdom of Christ, who is present with all 
those who were from the beginning approved by God, who granted them His Word to be present with 
them.(7) 

CHAP. XXVI. -THE TREASURE HID IN THE SCRIPTURES IS CHRIST; THE TRUE 
EXPOSITION OF THE SCRIPTURES IS TO BE FOUND IN THE CHURCH ALONE. 

1 . If any one, therefore, reads the Scriptures with attention, he will find in them an account of Christ, and a 
foreshadowing of the new calling (vocationis). For Christ is the treasure which was hid in the field, (8) that is, in 
this world (for "the field is the world"(9)); but the treasure hid in the Scriptures is Christ, since He was pointed 
out by means of types and parables. Hence His human nature could not(10) be understood, prior to the 
consummation of those things which had been predicted, that is, the advent of Christ. And therefore it was 
said to Daniel the prophet: "Shut up the words, and seal the book even to the time of consummation, until 
many learn, and knowledge be completed. For at that time, when the dispersion shall be accomplished, 
they shall know all these things. "(1 1) But Jeremiah also says, "In the last days they shall understand these 
things. "(12) For every prophecy, before its fulfilment, is to men [full of] enigmas and ambiguities. But when 
the time has arrived, and the prediction has come to pass, then the prophecies have a clear and certain 
exposition. And for this reason, indeed, when at this present time the law is read to the Jews, it is like a fable; 
for they do not possess the explanation of all things pertaining to the advent of the Son of God, which took 
place in human nature; but when it is read by the Christians, it is a treasure, hid indeed in a field, but brought 
to light by the cross of Christ, and explained, both enriching the understanding of men, and showing forth the 
wisdom of God and declaring His dispensations with regard to man, and forming the kingdom of Christ 
beforehand, and preaching by anticipation the inheritance of the holy Jerusalem, and proclaiming 
beforehand that the man who loves God shall arrive at such excellency as even to see God, and hear His 
word, and from the hearing of His discourse be glorified to such an extent, that others cannot behold the 
glory of his countenance, as was said by Daniel: "Those who do understand, shall shine as the brightness 
of the firmament, and many of the righteous(l) as the stars for ever and ever."(2) Thus, then, I have shown it 
to be, (3) if any one read the Scriptures. For thus it was that the Lord discoursed with, the disciples after His 
resurrection from the dead, proving to them from the Scriptures themselves "that Christ must suffer, and enter 

into His glory, and that remission of sins should be preached in His name throughout all the world. "(4) And 
the disciple will be perfected, and [rendered] like the householder, "who bringeth forth from his treasure 
things new and old. "(5) 

2. Wherefore it is incumbent to obey the presbyters who are in the Church,-those who, as I have shown, 
possess the succession from the apostles; those who, together with the succession of the episcopate, have 
received the certain gift of truth, according to the good pleasure of the Father. But [it is also incumbent] to 
hold in suspicion others who depart from the primitive succession, and assemble themselves together in 
any place whatsoever, [looking upon them] either as heretics of perverse minds, or as schismaries puffed 
up and self-pleasing, or again as hypocrites, acting thus for the sake of lucre and vainglory. For all these 
have fallen from the truth. And the heretics, indeed, who bring strange fire to the altar of God-namely, 
strange doctrines-shall be burned up by the fire from heaven, as were Nadab and Abiud.(6) But such as 
rise up in opposition to the truth, and exhort others against the Church of God, [shall] remain among those in 
hell (apud inferos), being swallowed up by an earthquake, even as those who were with Chore, Dathan, and 
Abiron.(7) But those who cleave asunder, and separate the unity of the Church, [shall] receive from God the 
same punishment as Jeroboam did. (8) 

3. Those, however, who are believed to be presbyters by many, but serve their own lusts, and, do not place 
the fear of God supreme in their hearts, but conduct themselves with contempt towards others, and are 
puffed up with the pride of holding the chief seat, and work evil deeds in secret, saying, "No man sees us," 
shall be convicted by the Word, who does not judge after outward appearance (secundum gloriam), nor 
looks upon the countenance, but the heart; and they shall hear those words, to be found in Daniel the 
prophet: "O thou seed of Canaan, and not of Judah, beauty hath deceived thee, and lust perverted thy 
heart. (9) Thou that art waxen old in wicked days, now thy sins which thou hast committed aforetime are come 
to light; for thou hast pronounced false judgments, and hast been accustomed to condemn the innocent, and 
to let the guilty go free, albeit the Lord saith, The innocent and the righteous shalt thou not slay. "(10) Of whom 
also did the Lord say: "But if the evil servant shall say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming, and shall 
begin to smite the man-servants and maidens, and to eat and drink and be drunken; the lord of that servant 
shall come in a day that he looketh not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut him 
asunder, and appoint him his portion with the unbelievers. "(1 1) 

4. From all such persons, therefore, it be-bores us to keep aloof, but to adhere to those who, as I have 
already observed, do hold the doctrine of the apostles, and who, together with the order of priesthood 
(presbyterii ordine), display sound speech and blameless conduct for the confirmation and correction of 
others. (12) In this way, Moses, to whom such a leadership was entrusted, relying on a good conscience, 
cleared himself before God, saying, "I have not in covetousness taken anything belonging to one of these 
men, nor have I done evil to one of them."(1 3) In this way, too, Samuel, who judged the people so many 
years, and bore rule over Israel without any pride, in the end cleared himself, saying, "I have walked before 
you from my childhood even unto this day: answer me in the sight of God, and before His anointed (Christi 
ejus); whose ox or whose ass of yours have I taken, or over whom have I tyrannized, or whom have I 
oppressed? or if I have received from the hand of any a bribe or [so much as] a shoe, speak out against 
me, and I will restore it to you."(1) And when the people had said to him, "Thou hast not tyrannized, neither 
hast thou oppressed us neither hast thou taken ought of any man's hand," he called the Lord to witness, 
saying, "The Lord is witness, and His Anointed is witness this day, that ye have not found ought in my hand. 
And they said to him, He is witness." In this strain also the Apostle Paul, inasmuch as he had a good 
conscience, said to the Corinthians: "For we are not as many, who corrupt the Word of God: but as of 
sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God speak we in Christ;"(2) "We have injured no man, corrupted no 
man, circumvented 

no man. "(3) 

5. Such presbyters does the Church nourish, of whom also the prophet says: "I will give thy rulers in peace, 
and thy bishops in righteousness. "(4) Of whom also did the Lord declare, "Who then shall be a faithful 
steward (actor), good and wise, whom the Lord sets over His household, to give them their meat in due 
season? Blessed is that servant whom his Lord, when He cometh, shall find so doing. "(5) Paul then, 
teaching us where one may find such, says, "God hath placed in the Church, first, apostles; secondly, 
prophets; thirdly, teachers. "(6) Where, therefore, the gifts of the Lord have been placed, there it behoves us 
to learn the truth, [namely,] from those who possess that succession of the Church which is from the 
apostles? and among whom exists that which is sound and blameless in conduct, as well as that which is 
unadulterated and incorrupt in speech. For these also preserve this faith of ours in one God who created all 
things; and they increase that love [which we have] for the Son of God, who accomplished such marvellous 
dispensations for our sake: and they expound the Scriptures to us without danger, neither blaspheming 
God, nor dishonouring the patriarchs, nor despising the prophets. 

CHAP. XXVII-THE SINS OF THE MEN OF OLD TIME, WHICH INCURRED THE 

DISPLEASURE OF GOD, WERE, BY HIS PROVIDENCE, COMMITTED TO WRITING, THAT 
WE MIGHT DERIVE INSTRUCTION THEREBY, AND NOT BE FILLED WITH PRIDE. WE 
MUST NOT, THEREFORE, INFER THAT THERE WAS ANOTHER GOD THAN HE WHOM 
CHRIST PREACHED; WE SHOULD RATHER FEAR, LEST THE ONE AND THE SAME GOD 
WHO INFLICTED PUNISHMENT ON THE ANCIENTS, SHOULD BRING DOWN HEAVIER 
UPON US. 

1. As I have heard from a certain presbyter,(8) who had heard it from those who had seen the apostles, and 
from those who had been their disciples, the punishment [declared] in Scripture was sufficient for the 
ancients in regard to what they did without the Spirit's guidance. For as God is no respecter of persons, He 
inflicted a proper punishment on deeds displeasing to Him. As in the case of David, (9) when he suffered 
persecution from Saul for righteousness' sake, and fled from King Saul, and would not avenge himself of his 
enemy, he both sung the advent of Christ, and instructed the nations in wisdom, and did everything after the 
Spirit's guidance, and pleased God. But when his lust prompted him to take Bathsheba, the wife of Uriah, the 
Scripture said concerning him, "Now, the thing (sermo) which David had done appeared wicked in the eyes 
of the LORD;"(10) and Nathan the prophet is sent to him, pointing out to him his crime, in order that he, 
passing sentence upon and condemning himself, might obtain mercy and forgiveness from Christ: "And 
[Nathan] said to him, There were two men in one city; the one rich, and the other poor. The rich man had 
exceeding many flocks and herds; but the poor man had nothing, save one little ewe-lamb, which he 
possessed, and nourished up; and it had been with him and with his children together: it did eat of his own 
bread, and drank of his cup, and was to him as a daughter. And there came a guest unto the rich man; and 
he spared to take of the flock of his own ewe-lambs, and from the herds of his own oxen, to entertain the 
guest; but he took the ewe-lamb of the poor man, and set it before the man that had come unto him. And 
David's anger was greatly kindied against the man; and he said to Nathan, As the Lord liveth, the man that 
hath done this thing shall surely die (filius mortis est): and he shall restore the lamb fourfold, because he hath 
done this thing, and because he had no pity for the poor man. And Nathan said unto him, Thou art the man 
who hast done this. "(1 1) And then he proceeds with the rest [of the narrative], upbraiding him, and recounting 
God's benefits towards him, and [showing him] how much his conduct had displeased the Lord. For [he 
declared] that works of this nature were not pleasing to God, but that great wrath was suspended over his 
house. David, however, was struck with remorse on heating this, and exclaimed, "I have sinned against the 
Lord;" and he sung a penitential psalm, waiting for the coming of the Lord, who washes and makes clean the 
man who had been fast bound with [the chain of] sin. In like manner it was with regard to Solomon, while he 
continued to judge uprightly, and to declare the wisdom of God, and built the temple as the type of truth, and 
set forth the glories of God, and announced the peace about to come upon the nations, and prefigured the 
kingdom of Christ, and spake three thousand parables about the Lord's advent, and five thousand songs, 
singing praise to God, and expounded the wisdom of God in creation, [discoursing] as to the nature of every 
tree, every herb, and of all fowls, quadrupeds, and fishes; and he said, "Will God whom the heavens cannot 
contain, really dwell with men upon the earth?"(1) And he pleased God, and was the admiration of all; and all 
kings of the earth sought an interview with him (quaerebant faciem ejus) that they might hear the wisdom 
which God had conferred upon him. (2) The queen of the south, too, came to him from the ends of the earth, 
to ascertain the wisdom that was in him:(3) she whom the Lord also referred to as one who should rise up in 
the judgment with the nations of those men who do hear His words, and do not believe in Him, and should 
condemn them, inasmuch as she submitted herself to the wisdom announced by the servant of God, while 
these men despised that wisdom which proceeded directly from the Son of God. For Solomon was a 
servant, but Christ is indeed the Son of God, and the Lord of Solomon. While, therefore, he served God 
without blame, and ministered to His dispensations, then was he glorified: but when he took wives from all 
nations, and permitted them to set up idols in Israel, the Scripture spake thus concerning him: "And King 
Solomon was a lover of women, and he took to himself foreign women; and it came to pass, when Solomon 
was old, his heart was not perfect with the Lord his God. And the foreign women turned away his heart after 
strange gods. And Solomon did evil in the sight of the Lord: he did not walk after the Lord, as did David his 
father. And the Lord was angry with Solomon; for his heart was not perfect with the Lord, as was the heart of 
David his father."(4) The Scripture has thus sufficiently reproved him, as the presbyter remarked, in order 
that no flesh may glory in the sight of the Lord. 

2. It was for this reason, too, that the Lord descended into the regions beneath the earth, preaching His 
advent there also, and [declaring] the remission of sins received by those who believe in Him. (5) Now all 
those believed in Him who had hope towards Him, that is, those who proclaimed His advent, and submitted 
to His dispensations, the righteous men, the prophets, and the patriarchs, to whom He remitted sins in the 
same way as He did to us, which sins we should not lay to their charge, if we would not despise the grace of 
God. For as these men did not impute unto us (the Gentiles) our transgressions, which we wrought before 
Christ was manifested among us, so also it is not right that we should lay blame upon those who sinned 

before Christ's coming. For "all men come short of the glory of God, "(6) and are not justified of themselves, 
but by the advent of the Lord,-they who earnestly direct their eyes towards His light. And it is for our 
instruction that their actions have been committed to writing, that we might know, in the first place, that our 
God and theirs is one, and that sins do not please Him although committed by men of renown; and in the 
second place, that we should keep from wickedness. For if these men of old time, who preceded us in the 
gifts [bestowed upon them], and for whom the Son of God had not yet suffered, when they committed any sin 
and served fleshly lusts, were rendered objects of such disgrace, what shall the men of the present day 
suffer, who have despised the Lord's coming, and become the slaves of their own lusts? And truly the death 
of the Lord became [the means of] healing and remission of sins to the former, but Christ shall not die again 
in behalf of those who now commit sin, for death shall no more have dominion over Him; but the Son shall 
come in the glory of the Father, requiring from His stewards and dispensers the money which He had 
entrusted to them, with usury; and from those to whom He had given most shall He demand most. We ought 
not, therefore, as that presbyter remarks, to be puffed up, nor be severe upon those of old time, but ought 
ourselves to fear, lest perchance, after [we have come to] the knowledge of Christ, if we do things 
displeasing to God, we obtain no further forgiveness of sins, but be shut out from His kingdom. (6) And 
therefore it was that Paul said, "For if [God] spared not the natural branches, [take heed] lest He also spare 
not thee, who, when thou wert a wild olive tree, wert grafted into the fatness of the olive tree, and wert made a 
partaker of its fatness. "(7) 

3. Thou wilt notice, too, that the transgressions of the common people have been described in like manner, 
not for the sake of those who did then transgress, but as a means of instruction unto us, and that we should 
understand that it is one and the same God against whom these men sinned, and against whom certain 
persons do now transgress from among those who profess to have believed in Him. But this also, [as the 
presbyter states,] has Paul declared most plainly in the Epistle to the Corinthians, when he says, "Brethren, I 
would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our fathers were under the cloud, and were all baptized 
unto Moses in the sea, and did all eat the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink: for 
they drank of that spiritual rock that followed them; and the rock was Christ. But with many of them God was 
not well pleased, for they were overthrown in the wilderness. These things were for our example (in figuram 
nostri), to the intent that we should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted; neither be ye idolaters, as 
were some of them, as it is written:(1) The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. Neither let 
us commit fornication, as some of them also did, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand. Neither let 
us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted, and were destroyed of serpents. Neither murmur ye, as 
some of them murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer. But all these things happened to them in a 
figure, and were written for our admonition, upon whom the end of the world (saeculorum) is come. 
Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall. "(2) 

4. Since therefore, beyond all doubt and contradiction, the apostle shows that there is one and the same 
God, who did both enter into judgment with these former things, and who does inquire into those of the 
present time, and points out why these things have been committed to writing; all these men are found to be 
unlearned and presumptuous, nay, even destitute of common sense, who, because of the transgressions of 
them of old time, and because of the disobedience of a vast number of them, do allege that there was 
indeed one God of these men, and that He was the maker of the world, and existed in a state of 
degeneracy; but that there was another Father declared by Christ, and that this Being is He who has been 
conceived by the mind of each of them; not understanding that as, in the former case, God showed Himself 
not well pleased in many stances towards those who sinned, so also in the latter, "many are called, but few 
are chosen. "(3) As then the unrighteous, the idolaters, and fornicators perished, so also is it now: for both the 
Lord declares, that such persons are sent into eternal fi re ; (4) and the apostle says, "Know ye not that the 
unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor 
adulterers, not effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor 
drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God. "(5) And as it was not to those who 
are without that he said these things, but to us. lest we should be cast forth from the kingdom of God, by 
doing any such thing, he proceeds to say, "And such indeed were ye; but ye are washed, but ye are 
sanctified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of our God." And just as then, those who led 
vicious lives, and put other people astray, were condemned and cast out, so also even now the offending 
eye is plucked out, and the foot and the hand, lest the rest of the body perish in like manner.(6) And we have 
the precept: "If any man that is called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a 
drunkard, or an extortioner, with such an one no not to eat."(7) And again does the apostle say, "Let no man 
deceive you with vain words; for because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the sons of mistrust. 
Be not ye therefore par-takers with them. "(8) And as then the condemnation of sinners extended to others 
who approved of them, and joined in their society; so also is it the case at present, that "a little leaven 
leaveneth the whole lump. "(9) And as the wrath of God did then descend upon the unrighteous, here also 
does the apostle likewise say: "For the wrath of God shall be revealed from heaven against all ungodliness 

and unrighteousness of those men who hold back the truth in unrighteousness. "(1 0) And as, in those times, 
vengeance came from God upon the Egyptians who were subjecting Israel to unjust punishment, so is it 
now, the Lord truly declaring, "And shall not God avenge His own elect, which cry day and night unto Him? I 
tell you, that He will avenge them speedily. "(11) So says the apostle, in like manner, in the Epistle to the 
Thessalonians: "Seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you; 
and to you who are troubled rest with us, at the revealing of our Lord Jesus Christ from heaven with His 
mighty angels, and in a flame of fire, to take vengeance upon those who know not God, and upon those that 
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: who shall also be punished with everlasting destruction from 
the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of His power; when He shall come to be glorified in His saints, 
and to be admired in all them who have believed in Him."(1) 

CHAP. XXVIII. -THOSE PERSONS PROVE THEMSELVES SENSELESS WHO 
EXAGGERATE THE MERCY OF CHRIST, BUT ARE SILENT AS TO THE JUDGMENT, AND 
LOOK ONLY AT THE MORE ABUNDANT GRACE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT; BUT, 
FORGETFUL OF THE GREATER DEGREE OF PERFECTION WHICH IT DEMANDS FROM 
US, THEY ENDEAVOUR TO SHOW THAT THERE IS ANOTHER GOD BEYOND HIM WHO 
CREATED THE WORLD. 

1 . Inasmuch, then, as in both Testaments there is the same righteousness of God [displayed] when God 
takes vengeance, in the one case indeed typically, temporarily, and more moderately; but in the other, 
really, enduringly, and more rigidly: for the fire is eternal, and the wrath of God which shall be revealed from 
heaven from the face of our Lord (as David also says, "But the face of the Lord is against them that do evil, 
to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth"(2)), entails a heavier punishment on those who incur 
it,— the ciders pointed out that those men are devoid of sense, who, [arguing] from what happened to those 
who formerly did not obey God, do endeavour to bring in another Father, setting over against [these 
punishments] what great things the Lord had done at His coming to save those who received Him, taking 
compassion upon them; while they keep silence with regard to His judgment; and all those things which 
shall come upon such as have heard His words, but done them not, and that it were better for them if they 
had not been born, (3) and that it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha in the judgment than for 
that city which did not receive the word of His disciples. (4) 

2. For as, in the New Testament, that faith of men [to be placed] in God has been increased, receiving in 
addition [to what was already revealed] the Son of God, that man too might be a partaker of God; so is also 
our walk in life required to be more circumspect, when we are directed not merely to abstain from evil 
actions, but even from evil thoughts, and from idle words, and empty talk, and scurrilous-language:(5) thus 
also the punishment of those who do not believe the Word of God, and despise His advent, and are turned 
away backwards, is increased; being not merely temporal, but rendered also eternal. For to whomsoever 
the Lord shall say, "Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, "(6) these shall be damned for ever; and 
to whomsoever He shall say, "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you for 
eternity, "(7) these do receive the kingdom for ever, and make constant advance in it; since there is one and 
the same God the Father, and His Word, who has been always present with the human race, by means 
indeed of various dispensations, and has wrought out many things, and saved from the beginning those 
who are saved, (for these are they who love God, and follow the Word of God according to the class to 
which they belong,) and has judged those who are judged, that is, those who forget God, and are 
blasphemous, and transgressors of His word. 

3. For the sesame heretics already mentioned by us have fallen away from themselves, by accusing the 
Lord, in whom they say that they believe. For those points to which they call attention with regard to the God 
who then awarded temporal punishments to the unbelieving, and smote the Egyptians, while He saved 
those that were obedient; these same [facts, I say,] shall nevertheless repeat themselves in the Lord, who 
judges for eternity those whom He doth judge, and lets go free for eternity those whom He does let go free: 
and He shall [thus] be discovered, according to the language used by these men, as having been the 
cause of their most heinous sin to those who laid hands upon Him, and pierced Him. For if He had not so 
Come, it follows that these men could not have become the slayers of their Lord; and if He had not sent 
prophets to them, they certainly could not have killed them, nor the apostles either. To those, therefore, who 
assail us, and say, If the Egyptians had not been afflicted with plagues, and, when pursuing after Israel, 
been choked in the sea, God could not have saved His people, this answer may be given;-Unless, then, 
the Jews had become the slayers of the Lord (which did, indeed, take eternal life away from them), and, by 
killing the apostles and persecuting the Church, had fallen into an abyss of wrath, we could not have been 
saved. For as they were saved by means of the blindness of the Egyptians, so are we, too, by that of the 
Jews; if, indeed, the death of the Lord is the condemnation of those who fastened Him to the cross, and who 
did not believe His advent, but the salvation of those who believe in Him. For the apostle does also say in 

the Second [Epistle] to the Corinthians: "For we are unto God a sweet savour of Christ, in them which are 
saved, and in them which perish: to the one indeed the savour of death unto death, but to the other the 
savour of life unto life." To whom, then, is there the savour of death unto death, unless to those who believe 
not neither are subject to the Word of God? And who are they that did even then give themselves over to 
death? Those men, doubtless, who do not believe, nor submit themselves to God. And again, who are they 
that have been saved and received the inheritance? Those, doubtless, who do believe God, and who have 
continued in His love; as did Caleb [the son] of Jephunneh and Joshua [the son] of Nun, (2) and innocent 
children, (3) who have had no sense of evil. But who are they that are saved now, and receive life eternal? Is 
it not those who love God, and who believe His promises, and who "in malice have become as little 
children?"(4) 

CHAP. XXIX.-REFUTATION OF THE ARGUMENTS OF THE MARCIONITES, WHO 
ATTEMPTED TO SHOW THAT GOD WAS THE AUTHOR OF SIN, BECAUSE HE BLINDED 
PHARAOH AND HIS SERVANTS. 

1 . "But," say they, "God hardened the heart of Pharaoh and of his servants. "(5) Those, then, who allege such 
difficulties, do not read in the Gospel that passage where the Lord replied to the disciples, when they asked 
Him, "Why speakest Thou unto them in parables?"-"Because it is given unto you to know the mystery of the 
kingdom of heaven; but to thorn I speak in parables, that seeing they may not see, and hearing they may not 
hear, understanding they may not understand; in order that the prophecy of Isaiah regarding them may be 
fulfil leading, Make the heart of this people gross and make their ears dull, and blind their eyes. But blessed 
are your eyes, which see the things that ye see; and your ears, which hear what ye do hear.(6) For one and 
the same God [that blesses others] inflicts blindness upon those who do not believe, but who set Him at 
naught; just as the sun, which is a creature of His, [acts with regard] to those who, by reason of any 
weakness of the eyes cannot behold his light; but to those who believe in Him and follow Him, He grants a 
fuller and greater illumination of mind. In accordance with this word, therefore, does the apostle say, in the 
Second the] to the Corinthians: "In whom the this world hath blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest 
the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should shine [unto them]. "(7) And again, in that to the Romans: "And 
as they did not think fit to have God in their knowledge, God gave them up to a reprobate mind, to do those 
things that are not convenient."(8) Speaking of antichrist, too, he says clearly in the Second to the 
Thessalonians: "And for this cause God shall send them the working of error, that they should believe a lie; 
that they all might be judged who believed not the truth, but consented to iniquity. "(9) 

2. If, therefore, in the present time also, God, knowing the number of those who will not believe, since He 
foreknows all things, has given them over to unbelief, and turned away His face from men of this stamp, 
leaving them in the darkness which they have themselves chosen for themselves, what is there wonderful if 
He did also at that time give over to their unbelief, Pharaoh, who never would have believed, along with 
those who were with him? As the Word spake to Moses from the bush: "And I am sure that the king of Egypt 
will not let you go, unless by a mighty hand. "(10) And for the reason that the Lord spake in parables, and 
brought blindness upon Israel, that seeing they might not see, since He knew the [spirit of] unbelief in them, 
for the same reason did He harden Pharaoh's heart; in order that, while seeing that it was the finger of God 
which led forth the people, he might not believe, but be precipitated into a sea of unbelief, resting in the 
notion that the exit of these [Israelites] was accomplished by magical power, and that it was not by the 
operation of God that the Red Sea afforded a passage to the people, but that this occurred by merely 
natural causes (sed naturaliter sic se habere). 

CHAP. XXX. -REFUTATION OF ANOTHER ARGUMENT ADDUCED BY THE MARCIONITES, 
THAT GOD DIRECTED THE HEBREWS TO SPOIL THE EGYPTIANS. 

I. Those, again, who cavil and find fault because the people did, by God's command, upon the eve of their 
departure, take vessels of all kinds and raiment from the Egyptians," and so went away, from which [spoils], 
too, the tabernacle was constructed in the wilderness, prove themselves ignorant of the righteous dealings 
of God, and of His dispensations; as also the presbyter remarked: For if God had not accorded this in the 
typical exodus, no one could now be saved in our true exodus; that is, in the faith in which we have been 
established, and by which we have been brought forth from among the number of the Gentiles. For in some 
cases there follows us a small, and in others a large amount of property, which we have acquired from the 
mammon of unrighteousness. For from what source do we derive the houses in which we dwell, the 
garments in which we are clothed, the vessels which we use, and everything else ministering to our 
every-day life, unless it be from those things which, when we were Gentiles, we acquired by avarice, or 
received them from our heathen parents, relations, or friends who unrighteously obtained them?-not to 
mention that even now we acquire such things when we are in the faith. For who is there that sells, and does 

not wish to make a profit from him who buys? Or who purchases anything, and does not wish to obtain good 
value from the seller? Or who is there that carries on a trade, and does not do so that he may obtain a 
livelihood thereby? And as to those believing ones who are in the royal palace, do they not derive the 
utensils they employ from the property which belongs to Caesar; and to those who have not, does not each 
one of these [Christians] give according to his ability? The Egyptians were debtors to the [Jewish] people, 
not alone as to property, but as their very lives, because of the kindness of the patriarch Joseph in former 
times; but in what way are the heathen debtors to us, from whom we receive both gain and profit? 
Whatsoever they amass with labour, these things do we make use of without labour, although we are in the 
faith. 

2. Up to that time the people served the Egyptians in the most abject slavery, as saith the Scripture: "And the 
Egyptians exercised their power rigorously upon the children of Israel; and they made life bitter to them by 
severe labours, in mortar and in brick, and in all manner of service in the field which they did, by all the works 
in which they oppressed them with rigour."(1) And with immense labour they built for them fenced cities, 
increasing the substance of these men throughout a long course of years, and by means of every species 
of slavery; while these [masters] were not only ungrateful towards them, but had in contemplation their utter 
annihilation. In what way, then, did [the Israelites] act unjustly, if out of many things they took a few, they who 
might have possessed much property had they not served them, and might have gone forth wealthy, while, 
in fact, by receiving only a very insignificant recompense for their heavy servitude, they went away poor? It 
is just as if any free man, being forcibly carried away by another, and serving him for many years, and 
increasing his substance, should be thought, when he ultimately obtains some support, to possess some 
small portion of his [master's] property, but should in reality depart, having obtained only a little as the result 
of his own great labours, and out of vast possessions which have been acquired, and this should be made 
by any one a subject of accusation against him, as if he had not acted properly. (2) He (the accuser) will 
rather appear as an unjust judge against him who had been forcibly carried away into slavery. Of this kind, 
then, are these men also, who charge the people with blame, because they appropriated a few things out of 
many, but who bring no charge against those who did not render them the recompense due to their fathers' 
services; nay, but even reducing them to the most irksome slavery, obtained the highest profit from them. 
And [these objectors] allege that [the Israelites] acted dishonestly, because, for-sooth, they took away for 
the recompense of their labours, as I have observed, unstamped gold and silver in a few vessels; while 
they say that they themselves (for lot truth be spoken, although to some it may seem ridiculous) do act 
honestly, when they carry away in their girdles from the labours of others, coined gold, and silver, and brass, 
with Caesar's inscription and image upon it. 

3. If, however, a comparison be instituted between us and them, [I would ask] which party shall seem to have 
received [their worldly goods] in the fairer manner? Will it be the [Jewish] people, [who took] from the 
Egyptians, who were at all points their debtors; or we, [who receive property] from the Romans and other 
nations, who are under no similar obligation to us? Yea, moreover, through their instrumentality the world is 
at peace, and we walk on the highways without fear, and sail where we will. (3) Therefore, against men of this 
kind (namely, the heretics) the word of the Lord applies, which says: "Thou hypocrite, first cast the beam out 
of thine eye, and then shalt thou see clearly to pull out the mote out of thy brother's eye. "(4) For if he who lays 
these things to thy charge, and glories in his own wisdom, has been separated from the company of the 
Gentiles, and possesses nothing [derived from] other people's goods, but is literally naked, and barefoot, 
and dwells homeless among the mountains, as any of those animals do which feed on grass, he will stand 
excused [in using such language], as being ignorant of the necessities of our mode of life. But if he do 
partake of what, in the opinion of men, is the property of others, and if [at the same time] he runs down their 
type, (5) he proves himself most unjust, turning this kind of accusation against himself. For he will be found 
carrying about property not belonging to him, and coveting goods which are not his. And therefore has the 
Lord said: "Judge not, that ye be not judged: for with what judgment ye shall judge, ye shall be judged. "(1) 
[The meaning is] not certainly that we should not find fault with sinners, nor that we should consent to those 
who act wickedly; but that we should not pronounce an unfair judgment on the dispensations of God, 
inasmuch as He has Himself made provision that all things shall turn out for good, in a way consistent with 
justice. For, because He knew that we would make a good use of our substance which we should possess 
by receiving it from another, He says, "He that hath two coats, let him impart to him that hath none; and he 
that hath meat, let him do likewise. "(2) And, "For I was an hungered, and ye gave Me meat; I was thirsty, and 
ye gave Me drink; I was naked and ye clothed Me. "(3) And, "When thou doest thine alms, let not thy left hand 
know what thy right hand doeth."(4) And we are proved to be righteous by whatsoever else we do well, 
redeeming, as it were, our property from strange hands. But thus do I say, "from strange hands," not as if the 
world were not God's possession, but that we have gifts of this sort, and receive them from others, in the 
same way as these men had them from the Egyptians who knew not God; and by means of these same do 
we erect in ourselves the tabernacle of God: for God dwells in those who act uprightly, as the Lord says: 
"Make to yourselves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness, that they, when ye shall be put to flight,"(5) 

may receive you into eternal tabernacles. "(6) For whatsoever we acquired from unrighteousness when we 
were heathen, we are proved righteous, when we have become believers, by applying it to the Lord's 
advantage. 

4. As a matter of course, therefore, these things were done beforehand in a type, and from them was the 
tabernacle of God constructed; those persons justly receiving them, as I have shown, while we were pointed 
out beforehand in them,-[we] who should afterwards serve God by the things of others. For the whole 
exodus of the people out of Egypt, which took place under divine guidance, (7) was a type and image of the 
exodus of the Church which should take place from among the Gentiles;(8) and for this cause He leads it out 
at last from this world into His own inheritance, which Moses the servant of God did not [bestow], but which 
Jesus the Son of God shall give for an inheritance. And if any one will devote a dose attention to those 
things which are stated by the prophets with regard to the [time of the] end, and those which John the 
disciple of the Lord saw in the Apocalypse, (9) he will find that the nations [are to] receive the same plagues 
universally, as Egypt then did particularly. 

CHAP. XXXI-WE SHOULD NOT HASTILY IMPUTE AS CRIMES TO THE MEN OF OLD TIME 
THOSE ACTIONS WHICH THE SCRIPTURE HAS NOT CONDEMNED, BUT SHOULD 
RATHER SEEK IN THEM TYPES OF THINGS TO COME: AN EXAMPLE OF THIS IN THE 
INCEST COMMITTED BY LOT. 

1 . WHEN recounting certain matters of this kind respecting them of old time, the presbyter [before 
mentioned] was in the habit of instructing us, and saying: "With respect to those misdeeds for which the 
Scriptures themselves blame the patriarchs and prophets, we ought not to inveigh against them, nor 
become like Ham, who ridiculed the shame of his father, and so fell under a curse; but we should [rather] 
give thanks to God in their behalf, inasmuch as their sins have been forgiven them through the advent of our 
Lord; for He said that they gave thanks [for us], and gloried in our salvation.' With respect to those actions, 
again, on which the Scriptures pass no censure, but which are simply set down [as having occurred], we 
ought not to become the accusers [of those who committed them], for we are not more exact than God, nor 
can we be superior to our Master; but we should search for a type [in theme. For not one of those things 
which have been set down in Scripture without being condemned is without significance." An example is 
found in the case of Lot, who led forth his daughters from Sodom, and these then conceived by their own 
father; and who left behind him within the confines [of the land] his wife, [who remains] a pillar of salt unto this 
day. For Lot, not acting under the impulse of his own will, nor at the prompting of carnal concupiscence, nor 
having any knowledge or thought of anything of the kind, did [in fact] workout a type [of future events]. As 
says the Scripture: "And that night the eider went in and lay with her father; and Lot knew not when she lay 
down, nor when she arose. "(1) And the same thing took place in the case of the younger: "And he knew not," 
it is said, "when she slept with him, nor when she arose. "(2) Since, therefore, Lot knew not [what he did], nor 
was a slave to lust [in his actions], the arrangement [designed by God] was carried out, by which the two 
daughters (that is, the two churches(3)), who gave birth to children begotten of one and the same father, were 
pointed out, apart from [the influence of] the lust of the flesh. For there was no other person, [as they 
supposed], who could impart to them quickening seed, and the means of their giving birth to children, as it is 
written: "And the elder said unto the younger, And there is not a man on the earth to enter in unto us after the 
manner of all the earth: come, let us make our father drunk with wine, and let us lie with him, and raise up 
seed from our father."(4) 

2. Thus, after their simplicity and innocence, did these daughters [of Lot] so speak, imagining that all 
mankind had perished, even as the Sodomites had done, and that the anger of God had come down upon 
the whole earth. Wherefore also they are to be held excusable, since they supposed that they only, along 
with their father, were left for the preservation of the human race; and for this reason it was that they deceived 
their father. Moreover, by the words they used this fact was pointed out-that there is no other one who can 
confer upon the elder and younger church the [power of] giving birth to children, besides our Father. Now the 
father of the human race is the Word of God, as Moses points out when he says, "Is not He thy father who 
hath obtained thee [by generation], and formed thee, and created thee?"s At what time, then, did He pour 
out upon the human race the life-giving seed-that is, the Spirit of the remission of sins, through means of 
whom we are quickened? Was it not then, when He was eating with men, and drinking wine upon the earth? 
For it is said, "The Son of man came eating and drinking;(6) and when He had lain down, He fell asleep, and 
took repose. As He does Himself say in David, "I slept, and took repose. "(7) And because He used thus to 
act while He dwelt and lived among us, He says again, "And my sleep became sweet unto me. "(8) Now this 
whole matter was indicated through Lot, that the seed of the Father of ail-that is, of the Spirit of God, by 
whom all things were made-was commingled and united with flesh-that is, with His own workmanship; by 
which commixture and unity the two synagogues-that is, the two churches-produced from their own father 
living sons to the living God. 

3. And while these things were taking place, his wife remained in [the territory of] Sodore, no longer 
corruptible flesh, but a pillar of salt which endures for ever;(9) and by those natural processes(1 0) which 
appertain to the human race, indicating that the Church also, which is the salt of the earth, (11) has been left 
behind within the confines of the earth, and subject to human sufferings; and while entire members are often 
taken away from it, the pillar of salt still endures, (12) thus typifying the foundation of the faith which maketh 
strong, and sends forward, children to their Father. 

CHAP. XXXII. -THAT ONE GOD WAS THE AUTHOR OF BOTH TESTAMENTS, IS 
CONFIRMED BY THE AUTHORITY OF A PRESBYTER WHO HAD BEEN TAUGHT BY THE 
APOSTLES. 

1. After this fashion also did a presbyter, (13) a disciple of the apostles, reason with respect to the two 
testaments, proving that both were truly from one and the same God. For [he maintained] that there was no 
other God besides Him who made and fashioned us, and that the discourse of those men has no foundation 
who affirm that this world of ours was made either by angels, or by any other power whatsoever, or by 
another God. For if a man be once moved away from the Creator of all things, and if he grant that this 
creation to which we belong was formed by any other or through any other [than the one God], he must of 
necessity fall into much inconsistency, and many contradictions of this sort; to which he will [be able to] 
furnish no explanations which can be regarded as either probable or true. And, for this reason, those who 
introduce other doctrines conceal from us the opinion which they themselves hold respecting God, because 
they are aware of the untenable, and absurd nature of their doctrine, and are afraid lest, should they be 
vanquished, they should have some difficulty in making good their escape. But if any one believes in [only] 
one God, who also made all things by the Word, as Moses likewise says, "God said, Let there be light: and 
there was light;"(2) and as we read in the Gospel, "All things were made by Him; and without Him was 
nothing made;"(3) and the Apostle Paul [says] in like manner, "There is one Lord, one faith, one baptism, 
one God and Father, who is above all, and through all, and in us all"(4)— this man will first of all "hold the 
head, from which the whole body is compacted and bound together, and, through means of every joint 
according to the measure of the ministration of each several part, maketh increase of the body to the 
edification of itself in love. "(5) And then shall every word also seem consistent to him, (6) if he for his part 
diligently read the Scriptures in company with those who are presbyters in the Church, among whom is the 
apostolic doctrine, as I have pointed out. 

2. For all the apostles taught that there were indeed two testaments among the two peoples; but that it was 
one and the same God who appointed both for the advantage of those men (for whose(7) sakes the 
testaments were given) who were to believe in God, I have proved in the third book from the very teaching of 
the apostles; and that the first testament was not given without reason, or to no purpose, or in an accidental 
sort of manner; but that it subdued(8) those to whom it was given to the service of God, for their benefit (for 
God needs no service from men), and exhibited a type of heavenly things, inasmuch as man was not yet 
able to see the things of God through means of immediate vision;(9) and foreshadowed the images of those 
things which [now actually] exist in the Church, in order that our faith might be firmly established;(10) and 
contained a prophecy of things to come, in order that man might learn that God has foreknowledge of all 
things. 

CHAP. XXXIII.-WHOSOEVER CONFESSES THAT ONE GOD IS THE AUTHOR OF BOTH 
TESTAMENTS, AND DILIGENTLY READS THE SCRIPTURES IN COMPANY WITH THE 
PRESBYTERS OF THE CHURCH, IS A TRUE SPIRITUAL DISCIPLE; AND HE WILL 
RIGHTLY UNDERSTAND AND INTERPRET ALLTHAT THE PROPHETS HAVE DECLARED 
RESPECTING CHRIST AND THE LIBERTY OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

1. A spiritual disciple of this sort truly receiving the Spirit of God, who was from the beginning, in all the 
dispensations of God, present with mankind, and announced things future, revealed things present, and 
narrated things past-[such a man] does indeed "judge all men, but is himself judged by no man."(1 1) For he 
judges the Gentiles, "who serve the creature more than the Creator,"(12) and with a reprobate mind spend 
all their labour on vanity. And he also judges the Jews, who do not accept of the word of liberty, nor are 
willing to go forth free, although they have a Deliverer present [with them]; but they pretend, at a time 
unsuitable [for such conduct], to serve, [with observances] beyond [those required by] the law, God who 
stands in need of nothing, and do not recognise the advent of Christ, which He accomplished for the 
salvation of men, nor are willing to understand that all the prophets announced His two advents: the one, 
indeed, in which He became a man subject to stripes, and knowing what it is to bear infirmity, (13) and sat 
upon the foal of an ass, (14) and was a stone rejected by the builders, (15) and was led as a sheep to the 
slaughter,(16) and by the stretching forth of His hands destroyed Amalek;(17) while He gathered from the 

ends of the earth into His Father's fold the children who were scattered abroad, (18) and remembered His 
own dead ones who had formerly fallen asleep, (1 9) and came down to them that He might deliver them: but 
the second in which He will come on the clouds, (20) bringing on the day which burns as a furnace?(21) and 
smiting the earth with the word of His mouth?(22) and slaying the impious with the breath of His lips, and 
having a fan in His hands, and cleansing His floor, and gathering the wheat indeed into His barn, but burning 
the chaff with unquenchable fire. (23) 

2. Moreover, he shall also examine the doctrine of Marcion, [inquiring] how he holds that there are two gods, 
separated from each other by an infinite distance. (1) Or how can he be good who draws away men that do 
not belong to him from him who made them, and calls them into his own kingdom? And why is his goodness, 
which does not save all [thus], defective? Also, why does he, indeed, seem to be good as respects men, 
but most unjust with regard to him who made men, inasmuch as he deprives him of his possessions? 
Moreover, how could the Lord, with any justice, if He belonged to another father, have acknowledged the 
bread to be His body, while He took it from that creation to which we belong, and affirmed the mixed cup to 
be His blood?(2) And why did He acknowledge Himself to be the Son of man, if He had not gone through 
that birth which belongs to a human being? How, too, could He forgive us those sins for which we are 
answerable to our Maker and God? And how, again, supposing that He was not flesh, but was a man merely 
in appearance, could He have been crucified, and could blood and water have issued from His pierced 
side?(3) What body, moreover, was it that those who buried Him consigned to the tomb? And what was that 
which rose again from the dead? 

3. [This spiritual man] shall also judge all the followers of Valentinus, because they do indeed confess with 
the tongue one God the Father, and that all things derive their existence from Him, but do at the same time 
maintain that He who formed all things is the fruit of an apostasy or defect. [He shall judge them, too, 
because] they do in like manner confess with the tongue one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, but assign 
in their [system of] doctrine a production of his own to the Only-begotten, one of his own also to the Word, 
another to Christ, and yet another to the Saviour; so that, according to them, all these beings are indeed said 
[in Scripture to be], as it were, one; [while they maintain], notwithstanding, that each one of them should be 
understood [to exist] separately [from the rest], and to have [had] his own special origin, according to his 
peculiar conjunction. [It appears], then(4) that their tongues alone, forsooth, have conceded the unity [of 
God], while their [real] opinion and their understanding (by their habit of investigating profundities) have 
fallen away from [this doctrine of] unity, and taken up the notion of manifold deities,— [this, I say, must appear] 
when they shall be examined by Christ as to the points [of doctrine] which they have invented. Him, too, they 
affirm to have been born at a later period than the Pleroma of the Aeons, and that His production took place 
after [the occurrence of] a degeneracy or apostasy; and they maintain that, on account of the passion which 
was experienced by Sophia, they themselves were brought to the birth. But their own special prophet 
Homer, listening to whom they have invented such doctrines, shall himself reprove them, when he 
expresses himself as follows:- 

"Hateful to me that man as Hades' gates, 

Who one thing thinks, while he another states. "(5) 

[This spiritual man] shall also judge the vain speeches of the perverse Gnostics, by showing that they are 
the disciples of Simon Magus. 

4. He will judge also the Ebionites; [for] how can they be saved unless it was God who wrought out their 
salvation upon earth? Or how shall man pass into God, unless God has [first] passed into man? And how 
shall he (man) escape from the generation subject to death, if not by means(6) of a new generation, given in 
a wonderful and unexpected manner (but as a sign of salvation) by God-[l mean] that regeneration which 
flows from the virgin through faith?(7) Or how shall they receive adoption from God if they remain in this [kind 
of] generation, which is naturally possessed by man in this world? And how could He (Christ) have been 
greater than Solomon, (8) or greater than Jonah, or have been the Lord of David, (9) who was of the same 
substance as they were? How, too, could He have subdued(10) him who was stronger than men, (11) who 
had not only overcome man, but also retained him under his power, and conquered him who had 
conquered, while he set free mankind who had been conquered, unless He had been greater than man who 
had thus been vanquished? But who else is superior to, and more eminent than, that man who was formed 
after the likeness of God, except the Son of God, after whose image man was created? And for this reason 
He did in these last days(12) exhibit the similitude; [for] the Son of God was made man, assuming the 
ancient production [of His hands] into His own nature, (13) as I have shown in the immediately preceding 
book. 

5. He shall also judge those who describe Christ as [having become man] only in [human] opinion. For how 
can they imagine that they do themselves carry on a real discussion, when their Master was a mere 
imaginary being? Or how can they receive anything stedfast from Him, if He was a merely imagined being, 

and not a verity? And how can these men really be partaken of salvation, if He in whom they profess to 
believe, manifested Himself as a merely imaginary being? Everything, therefore, connected with these men 
is unreal, and nothing [possessed of the character of] truth; and, in these circumstances, it may be made a 
question whether (since, perchance, they themselves in like manner are not men, but mere dumb animals) 
they do not present,(1) in most cases, simply a shadow of humanity. 

6. He shall also judge false prophets, who, without having received the gift of prophecy from God, and not 
possessed of the fear of God, but either for the sake of vainglory, or with a view to some personal 
advantage, or acting in some other way under the influence of a wicked spirit, pretend to utter prophecies, 
while all the time they lie against God. 

7. He shall also judge those who give rise to schisms, who are destitute of the love of God, and who look to 
their own special advantage rather than to the unity of the Church; and who for trifling reasons, or any kind of 
reason which occurs to them, cut in pieces and divide the great and glorious body of Christ, and so far as in 
them lies, [positively] destroy it,-men who prate of peace while they give rise to war, and do in truth strain 
out a gnat, but swallow a camel. (2) For no reformation of so great importance can be effected by them, as 
will compensate for the mischief arising from their schism. He shall also judge all those who are beyond the 
pale of the truth, that is, who are outside the Church; but he himself shall be judged by no one. For to him all 
things are consistent: he has a full faith in one God Almighty, of whom are all things; and in the Son of God, 
Jesus Christ our Lord, by whom are all things, and in the dispensations connected with Him, by means of 
which the Son of God became man; and a firm belief in the Spirit of God, who furnishes us with a knowledge 
of the truth, and has set forth the dispensations of the Father and the Son, in virtue of which He dwells with 
every generation of men, (3) according to the will of the Father. 

8. True knowledge(4) is [that which consists in] the doctrine of the apostles, and the ancient constitution^) of 
the Church throughout all the world, and the distinctive manifestation of the body(6) of Christ according to the 
successions of the bishops, by which they have handed down that Church which exists in every place, and 
has come even unto us, being guarded and preserved(7) without any forging of Scriptures, by a very 
complete system(8) of doctrine, and neither receiving addition nor [suffering] curtailment [in the truths which 
she believes]; and [it consists in] reading [the word of God] without falsification, and a lawful and diligent 
exposition in harmony with the Scriptures, both without danger and without blasphemy; and [above all, it 
consists in] the pre-eminent gift of love, (9) which is more precious than knowledge, more glorious than 
prophecy, and which excels all the other gifts [of God]. 

9. Wherefore the Church does in every place, because of that love which she cherishes towards God, send 
forward, throughout all time, a multitude of martyrs to the Father; while all others(10) not only have nothing of 
this kind to point to among themselves, but even maintain that such witness-bearing is not at all necessary, 
for that their system of doctrines is the true witness [for Christ], with the exception, perhaps, that one or two 
among them, during the whole time which has elapsed since the Lord appeared on earth, have 
occasionally, along with our martyrs, borne the reproach of the name (as if he too [the heretic] had obtained 
mercy), and have been led forth with them [to death], being, as it were, a sort of retinue granted unto them. 
For the Church alone sustains with purity the reproach of those who suffer persecution for righteousness' 
sake, and endure all sorts of punishments, and are put to death because of the love which they bear to God, 
and their confession of His Son; often weakened indeed, yet immediately increasing her members, and 
becoming whole again, after the same manner as her type," Lot's wife, who became a pillar of salt. Thus, 
too, [she passes through an experience] similar to that of the ancient prophets, as the Lord declares, "For 
so persecuted they the prophets who were before you;", inasmuch as she does indeed, in a new fashion, 
suffer persecution from those who do not receive the word of God, while the self-same spirit rests upon 
her(2) [as upon these ancient prophets]. 

10. And indeed the prophets, along with other things which they predicted, also foretold this, that all those on 
whom the Spirit of God should rest, and who would obey the word of the Father, and serve Him according to 
their ability, should suffer persecution, and be stoned and slain. For the prophets prefigured in themselves 
all these things, because of their love to God, and on account of His word. For since they themselves were 
members of Christ, each; one of them in his place as a member did, in accordance with this, set forth the 
prophecy [assigned him]; all of them, although many, prefiguring only one, and proclaiming the things which 
pertain to one. For just as the working of the whole body is exhibited through means of our members, while 
the figure of a complete man is not displayed by one member, but through means of all taken together, so 
also did all the prophets prefigure the one [Christ]; while every one of them, in his special place as a 
member, did, in accordance with this, fill up the [established] dispensation, and shadowed forth beforehand 
that particular working of Christ which was connected with that member. 

11. For some of them, beholding Him in glory, saw His glorious life (conversationem) at the Father's right 
hand;(3) others beheld Him coming on the clouds as the Son of man;(4) and those who declared regarding 
Him, "They shall look on Him whom they have pierced, "(5) indicated His [second] advent, concerning which 
He Himself says, "Thinkest thou that when the Son of man cometh, He shall find faith on the earth?"(6) Paul 

also refers to this event when he says, "If, however, it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation 
to them that trouble you, and to you that are troubled rest with us, at the revelation of the Lord Jesus from 
heaven, with His mighty angels, and in a flame of fire. "(7) Others again, speaking of Him as a judge, and 
[referring], as if it were a burning furnace, [to] the day of the Lord, who "gathers the wheat into His barn, but 
will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire, "(8) were accustomed to threaten those who were unbelieving, 
concerning whom also the Lord Himself declares, "Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, which 
my Father has prepared for the devil and his angels. "(9) And the apostle in like manner says [of them], 
"Who shall be punished with everlasting death from the face of the Lord, and from the glory of His power, 
when He shall come to be glorified in His saints, and to be admired in those who believe in Him. "(10) There 
are also some [of them] who declare, "Thou art fairer than the children of men;"(11) and, "God, Thy God, 
hath anointed Thee with the oil of gladness above Thy fellows;"(12) and, "Gird Thy sword upon Thy thigh, O 
Most Mighty, with Thy beauty and Thy fairness, and go forward and proceed prosperously; and rule Thou 
because of truth, and meekness, and righteousness. "(13) And whatever other things of a like nature are 
spoken regarding Him, these indicated that beauty and splendour which exist in His kingdom, along with the 
transcendent and pre-eminent exaltation [belonging] to all who are under His sway, that those who hear 
might desire to be found there, doing such things as are pleasing to God. Again, there are those who say, 
"He is a man, and who shall know him?"(14) and, "I came unto the prophetess, and she bare a son, and His 
name is called Wonderful, Counsellor, the Mighty God;"(15) and those [of them] who proclaimed Him as 
Immanuel, [born] of the Virgin, exhibited the union of the Word of God with His own workmanship, [declaring] 
that the Word should become flesh, and the Son of God the Son of man (the pure One opening purely that 
pure womb which regenerates men unto God, and which He Himself made pure); and having become this 
which we also are, He [nevertheless] is the Mighty God, and possesses a generation which cannot be 
declared. And there are also some of them who say, "The Lord hath spoken in Zion, and uttered His voice 
from Jerusalem;"(16) and, "In Judah is God known ;"(17)-these indicated His advent which took place in 
Judea. Those, again, who declare that "God comes from the south, and from a mountain thick with 
foliage, "(18) announced His advent at Bethlehem, as I have pointed out in the preceding book.(19) From 
that place, also, He who rules, and who feeds the people of His Father, has come. Those, again, who 
declare that at His coming "the lame man shall leap as an hart, and the tongue of the dumb shall [speak] 
plainly, and the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall hear,"(1) and that "the 
hands which hang down, and the feeble knees, shall be strengthened, "(2) and that "the dead which are in 
the grave shall arise, "(3) and that He Himself shall take [upon Him] our weaknesses, and bear our 
sorrows, "(4) — [all these] proclaimed those works of healing which were accomplished by Him. 

12. Some of them, moreover-[when they predicted that] as a weak and inglorious man, and as one who 
knew what it was to bear infirmity, (5) and sitting upon the foal of an ass, (6) He should come to Jerusalem; 
and that He should give His back to stripes, (7) and His cheeks to palms [which struck Him]; and that He 
should be led as a sheep to the slaughter;(8) and that He should have vinegar and gall given Him to 
drink;(9) and that He should be forsaken by His friends and those nearest to Him;(10) and that He should 
stretch forth His hands the whole day long;(1 1) and that He should be mocked and maligned by those who 
looked upon Him;(12) and that His garments should be parted, and lots cast upon His raiment;(13) and that 
He should be brought down to the dust of death? with all [the other] things of a like nature-prophesied His 
coming in the character of a man as He entered Jerusalem, in which by His passion and crucifixion He 
endured all the things which have been mentioned. Others, again, when they said, "The holy Lord 
remembered His own dead ones who slept in the dust, and came down to them to raise them up, that He 
might save them, "(15) furnished us with the reason on account of which He suffered all these things. Those, 
moreover, who said, "In that day, saith the Lord, the sun shall go down at noon, and there shall be darkness 
over the earth in the clear day; and I will turn your feast days into mourning, and all your songs into 
lamentation, "(16) plainly announced that obscuration of the sun which at the time of His crucifixion took place 
from the sixth hour onwards, and that after this event, those days which were their festivals according to the 
law, and their songs, should be changed into grief and lamentation when they were handed over to the 
Gentiles. Jeremiah, too, makes this point still clearer, when he thus speaks concerning Jerusalem: "She that 
hath born [seven] languisheth; her soul hath become weary; her sun hath gone down while it was yet noon; 
she hath been confounded, and suffered reproach: the remainder of them will I give to the sword in the sight 
of their enemies. "(1 7) 

13. Those of them, again, who spoke of His having slumbered and taken sleep, and of His having risen 
again because the Lord sustained Him, (18) and who enjoined the principalities of heaven to set open the 
everlasting doors, that the King of glory might go in, (19) proclaimed beforehand His resurrection from the 
dead through the Father's power, and His reception into heaven. And when they expressed themselves 
thus, "His going forth is from the height of heaven, and His returning even to the highest heaven; and there is 
no one who can hide himself from His heat,"(20) they announced that very truth of His being taken up again 
to the place from which He came down, and that there is no one who can escape His righteous judgment. 

And those who said, "The Lord hath reigned; let the people be enraged: [even] He who sitteth upon the 
cherubim; let the earth be moved, "(21) were thus predicting partly that wrath from all nations which after His 
ascension came upon those who believed in Him, with the movement of the whole earth against the Church; 
and partly the fact that, when He comes from heaven with His mighty angels, the whole earth shall be 
shaken, as He Himself declares, "There shall be a great earthquake, such as has not been from the 
beginning. "(22) And again, when one says, "Whosoever is judged, let him stand opposite; and whosoever 
is justified, let him draw near to the servant(23) of God;"(24) and, "Woe unto you, for ye shall wax old as doth 
a garment, and the moth shall eat you up;" and, "All flesh shall be humbled, and the Lord alone shall be 
exalted in the highest,"(25)-it is thus indicated that, after His passion and ascension, God shall cast down 
under His feet all who were opposed to Him, and He shall be exalted above all, and there shall be no one 
who can be justified or compared to Him. 

14. And those of them who declare that God would make a new covenant(26) with men, not such as that 
which He made with the fathers at Mount Horeb, and would give to men a new heart and a new spirit;" and 
again, "And remember ye not the things of old: behold, I make new things which shall now arise, and ye 
shall know it; and I will make a way in the desert, and riven in a dry land, to give drink to my chosen people, 
my people whom I have acquired, that they may show forth my praise, "(1) — plainly announced that liberty 
which distinguishes the new covenant, and the new wine which is put into new bottles, (2) [that is], the faith 
which is in Christ, by which He has proclaimed the way of righteousness sprung up in the desert, and the 
streams of the Holy Spirit in a dry land, to give water to the elect people of God, whom He has acquired, that 
they might show forth His praise, but not that they might blaspheme Him who made these things, that is, 
God. 

1 5. And all those other points which I have shown the prophets to have uttered by means of so long a series 
of Scriptures, he who is truly spiritual will interpret by pointing out, in regard to every one of the things which 
have been spoken, to what special point in the dispensation of the Lord is referred, and [by thus exhibiting] 
the entire system of the work of the Son of God, knowing always the same God, and always acknowledging 
the same Word of God, although He has [but] now been manifested to us; acknowledging also at all times 
the same Spirit of God, although He has been poured out upon us after a new fashion in these last times, 
[knowing that He descends] even from the creation of the world to its end upon the human race simply as 
such, from whom those who believe God and follow His word receive that salvation which flows from Him. 
Those, on the other hand, who depart from Him, and despise His precepts, and by their deeds bring 
dishonour on Him who made them, and by their opinions blaspheme Him who nourishes them, heap up 
against themselves most righteous judgment.(3) He therefore (i.e., the spiritual man) sifts and tries them all, 
but he himself is tried by no man:(4) he neither blasphemes his Father, nor sets aside His dispensations, nor 
inveighs against the fathers, nor dishonours the prophets, by maintaining that they were [sent] from another 
God [than he worships], or again, that their prophecies were derived from different sources. (5) 

CHAP. XXXIV. -PROOF AGAINST THE MARCIONITES, THAT THE PROPHETS REFERRED 
IN ALLTHEIR PREDICTIONS TO OUR CHRIST. 

1 . Now I shall simply say, in opposition to all the heretics, and principally against the followers of Marcion, 
and against those who are like to these, in maintaining that time prophets were from another God [than He 
who is announced in the Gospel], read with earnest care that Gospel which has been conveyed to us by the 
apostles, and read with earnest care the prophets, and you will find that the whole conduct, and all the 
doctrine, and all the sufferings of our Lord, were predicted through them. But if a thought of this kind should 
then suggest itself to you, to say, What then did the Lord bring to us by His advent?-know ye that He brought 
all [possible] novelty, by bringing Himself who had been announced. For this very thing was proclaimed 
beforehand, that a novelty should come to renew and quicken mankind. For the advent of the King is 
previously announced by those servants who are sent [before Him], in order to the preparation and 
equipment of those men who are to entertain their Lord. But when the King has actually come, and those who 
are His subjects have been filled with that joy which was proclaimed beforehand, and have attained to that 
liberty which He bestows, and share in the sight of Him, and have listened to His words, and have enjoyed 
the gifts which He confers, the question will not then be asked by any that are possessed of sense what new 
thing the King has brought beyond [that proclaimed by] those who announced His coming. For He has 
brought Himself, and has bestowed on men those good things which were announced beforehand, which 
things the angels desired to look into. (6) 

2. But the servants would then have been proved false, and not sent by the Lord, if Christ on His advent, by 
being found exactly such as He was previously announced, had not fulfilled their words. Wherefore He said, 
"Think not that I have come to destroy the law or the prophets; I came not to destroy, but to fulfil. For verily I 
say unto you, Until heaven and earth pass away, one jot or one tittle shall not pass from the law and the 
prophets till all come to pass. "(7) For by His advent He Himself fulfilled all things, and does still fulfil in the 

Church the new covenant foretold by the law, onwards to the consummation [of all things]. To this effect also 
Paul, His apostle, says in the Epistle to the Romans, "But now, (8) without the law, has the righteousness of 
God been manifested, being witnessed by the law and the prophets; for the just shall live by faith. "(9) But this 
fact, that the just shall live by faith, had been previously announced(IO) by the prophets. 

3. But whence could the prophets have had power to predict the advent of the King, and to preach 
beforehand that liberty which was bestowed by Him, and previously to announce all things which were done 
by Christ, His words, His works, and His sufferings, and to predict the new covenant, if they had received 
prophetical inspiration from another God [than He who is revealed in the Gospel], they being ignorant, as ye 
allege, of the ineffable Father, of His kingdom, and His dispensations, which the Son of God fulfilled when 
He came upon earth in these last times? Neither are ye in a position to say that these things came to pass 
by a certain kind of chance, as if they were spoken by the prophets in regard to some other person, while 
like events happened to the Lord. For all the prophets prophesied these same things, but they never came 
to pass in the case of any one of the ancients. For if these things had happened to any man among them of 
old time, those [prophets] who lived subsequently would certainly not have prophesied that these events 
should come to pass in the last times. Moreover, there is in fact none among the fathers, nor the prophets, 
nor the ancient kings, in whose case any one of these things properly and specifically took place. For all 
indeed prophesied as to the sufferings of Christ, but they themselves were far from enduring sufferings 
similar to what was predicted. And the points connected with the passion of the Lord, which were foretold, 
were realized in no other case. For neither did it happen at the death of any man among the ancients that the 
sun set at mid-day, nor was the veil of the temple rent, nor did the earth quake, nor were the rocks rent, nor 
did the dead rise up, nor was any one of these men [of old] raised up on the third day, nor received into 
heaven, nor at his assumption were the heavens opened, nor did the nations believe in the name of any 
other; nor did any from among them, having been dead and rising again, lay open the new covenant of 
liberty. Therefore the prophets spake not of any one else but of the Lord, in whom all these aforesaid tokens 
concurred. 

4. If any one, however, advocating the cause of the Jews, do maintain that this new covenant consisted in 
the rearing of that temple which was built under Zerubbabel after the emigration to Babylon, and in the 
departure of the people from thence after the lapse of seventy years, let him know that the temple 
constructed of stones was indeed then rebuilt (for as yet that law was observed which had been made upon 
tables of stone), yet no new covenant was given, but they used the Mosaic law until the coming of the Lord; 
but from the Lord's advent, the new covenant which brings back peace, and the law which gives life, has 
gone forth over the whole earth, as the prophets said: "For out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of 
the Lord from Jerusalem; and He shall rebuke many people; and they shall break down their swords into 
ploughshares, and their spears into pruning-hooks, and they shall no longer learn to fight."(1) If therefore 
another law and word, going forth from Jerusalem, brought in such a [reign of] peace among the Gentiles 
which received it (the word), and convinced, through them, many a nation of its folly, then [only] it appears 
that the prophets spake of some other person. But if the law of liberty, that is, the word of God, preached by 
the apostles (who went forth from Jerusalem) throughout all the earth, caused such a change in the state of 
things, that these [nations] did form the swords and war-lances into ploughshares, and changed them into 
pruning-hooks for reaping the corn, [that is], into instruments used for peaceful purposes, and that they are 
now unaccustomed to fighting, but when smitten, offer also the other cheek, (2) then the prophets have not 
spoken these things of any other person, but of Him who effected them. This person is our Lord, and in Him 
is that declaration borne out; since it is He Himself who has made the plough, and introduced the 
pruning-hook, that is, the first semination of man, which was the creation exhibited in Adam, (3) and the 
gathering in of the produce in the last times by the Word; and, for this reason, since He joined the beginning 
to the end, and is the Lord of both, He has finally displayed the plough, in that the wood has been joined on 
to the iron, and i has thus cleansed His land because the Word having been firmly united to flesh, and in its 
mechanism fixed with pins, (4) has reclaimed the savage earth. In the beginning, He figured forth the 
pruning-hook by means of Abel, pointing out that there should be a gathering in of a righteous race of men. 
He says, "For behold how the just man perishes, and no man considers it; and righteous men are taken 
away, and no man layeth it to heart. "(5) These things were acted beforehand in Abel, were also previously 
declared by the prophets, but were accomplished in the Lord's person; and the same [is still true] with 
regard to us, the body following the example of the Head. 

5. Such are the arguments proper(6) [to be used] in opposition to those who maintain that the prophets [were 
inspired] by a different God, and that our Lord [came] from another Father, if perchance [these heretics] may 
at length desist from such extreme folly. This is my earnest object in adducing these Scriptural proofs, that 
confuting them, as far as in me lies, by these very passages, I may restrain them from such great 
blasphemy, and from insanely fabricating a multitude of gods. 

CHAP. XXXV.-A REFUTATION OF THOSE WHO ALLEGE THAT THE PROPHETS 

UTTERED SOME PREDICTIONS UNDER THE INSPIRATION OF THE HIGHEST, OTHERS 
FROM THE DEMIURGE. DISAGREEMENTS OF THE VALENTINIANS AMONG 
THEMSELVES WITH REGARD TO THESE SAME PREDICTIONS. 

1 . Then again, in opposition to the Valentinians, and the other Gnostics, falsely so called, who maintain that 
some parts of Scripture were spoken at one time from the Pleroma (a summitate) through means of the 
seed [derived] from that place, but at another time from the intermediate abode through means of the 
audacious mother Prunica, but that many are due to the Creator of the world, from whom also the prophets 
had their mission, we say that it is altogether irrational to bring down the Father of the universe to such straits, 
as that He should not be possessed of His own proper instruments, by which the things in the Pleroma might 
be perfectly proclaimed. For of whom was He afraid, so that He should not reveal His will after His own way 
and independently, freely, and without being involved with that spirit which came into being in a state of 
degeneracy and ignorance? Was it that He feared that very many would be saved, when more should have 
listened to the unadulterated truth? Or, on the other hand, was He incapable of preparing for Himself those 
who should announce the Saviour's advent? 

2. But if, when the Saviour came to this earth, He sent His apostles into the world to proclaim with accuracy 
His advent, and to teach the Father's will, having nothing in common with the doctrine of the Gentiles or of the 
Jews, much more, while yet existing in the Pleroma, would He have appointed His own heralds to proclaim 
His future advent into this world, and having nothing in common with those prophecies originating from the 
Demiurge. But if, when within the Pleroma, He availed Himself of those prophets who were under the law, 
and declared His own matters through their instrumentality; much more would He, upon His arrival hither, 
have made use of these same teachers, and have preached the Gospel to us by their means. Therefore let 
them not any longer assert that Peter and Paul and the other apostles proclaimed the truth, but that it was the 
scribes and Pharisees, and the others, through whom the law was propounded. But if, at His advent, He sent 
forth His own apostles in the spirit of truth, and not in that of error, He did the very same also in the case of 
the prophets; for the Word of God was always the self-same: and if the Spirit from the Pleroma was, 
according to these men's system, the Spirit of light, the Spirit of truth, the Spirit of perfection, and the Spirit of 
knowledge, while that from the Demiurge was the spirit of ignorance, degeneracy, and error, and the 
offspring of obscurity; how can it be, that in one and the same being there exists perfection and defect, 
knowledge and ignorance, error and truth, light and darkness? But if it was impossible that such should 
happen in the case of the prophets, for they preached the word of the Lord from one God, and proclaimed 
the advent of His Son, much more would the Lord Himself never have uttered words, on one occasion from 
above, but on another from degeneracy below, thus becoming the teacher at once of knowledge and of 
ignorance; nor would He have ever glorified as Father at one time the Founder of the world, and at another 
Him who is above this one, as He does Himself declare: "No man putteth a piece of a new garment upon an 
old one, nor do they put new wine into old bottles. "(1) Let these men, therefore, either have nothing whatever 
to do with the prophets, as with those that are ancients, and allege no longer that these men, being sent 
beforehand by the Demiurge, spake certain things under that new influence which pertains to the Pleroma; 
or, on the other hand, let them be convinced by our Lord, when He declares that new wine cannot be put into 
old bottles. 

3. But from what source could the offspring of their mother derive his knowledge of the mysteries within the 
Pleroma, and power to discourse regarding them? Suppose that the mother, while beyond the Pleroma, did 
bring forth this very offspring; but what is beyond the Pleroma they represent as being beyond the pale of 
knowledge, that is, ignorance. How, then, could that seed, which was conceived in ignorance, possess the 
power of declaring knowledge ? Or how did the mother herself, a shapeless and undefined being, one cast 
out of doors as an abortion, obtain knowledge of the mysteries within the Pleroma, she who was organized 
outside it and given a form there, and prohibited by Horos from entering within, and who remains outside the 
Pleroma till the consummation [of all things], that is, beyond the pale of knowledge? Then, again, when they 
say that the Lord's passion is a type of the extension of the Christ above, which he effected through Horos, 
and so imparted a form to their mother, they are refuted in the other particulars [of the Lord's passion], for 
they have no semblance of a type to show with regard to them. For when did the Christ above have vinegar 
and gall given him to drink? Or when was his raiment parted? Or when was he pierced, and blood and water 
came forth? Or when did he sweat great drops of blood? And [the same may be demanded] as to the other 
particulars which happened to the Lord, of which the prophets have spoken. From whence, then, did the 
mother or her offspring divine the things which had not yet taken place, but which should occur afterwards? 

4. They affirm that certain things still, besides these, were spoken from the Pleroma, but are confuted by 
those which are referred to in the Scriptures as beating on the advent of Christ. But what these are [that are 
spoken from the Pleroma] they are not agreed, but give different answers regarding them. For if any one, 
wishing to test them, do question one by one with regard to any passage those who are their leading men, 
he shall find one of them referring the passage in question to the Propator-that is, to Bythus; another 

attributing it to Arche-that is, to the Only-begotten; another to the Father of ail-that is, to the Word; while 
another, again, will say that it was spoken of that one iron who was [formed from the joint contributions] of the 
Aeons in the Pleroma;(1) others [will regard the passage] as referring to Christ, while another [will refer it] to 
the Saviour. One, again, more skilled than these, (2) after a long protracted silence, declares that it was 
spoken of Horos; another that it signifies the Sophia which is within the Pleroma; another that it announces 
the mother outside the Pleroma; while another will mention the God who made the world (the Demiurge). 
Such are the variations existing among them with regard to one [passage], holding discordant opinions as 
to the same Scriptures; and when the same identical passage is read out, they all begin to purse up their 
eyebrows, and to shake their heads, and they say that they might indeed utter a discourse transcendently 
lofty, but that all cannot comprehend the greatness of that thought which is implied in it; and that, therefore, 
among the wise the chief thing is silence. For that Sige (silence) which is above must be typified by that 
silence which they preserve. Thus do they, as many as they are, all depart [from each other], holding so 
many opinions as to one thing, and bearing about their clever notions in secret within themselves. When, 
therefore, they shall have agreed among themselves as to the things predicted in the Scriptures, then also 
shall they be confuted by us. For, though holding wrong opinions, they do in the meanwhile, however, 
convict themselves, since they are not of one mind with regard to the same words. But as we follow for our 
teacher the one and only true God, and possess His words as the rule of truth, we do all speak alike with 
regard to the same things, knowing but one God, the Creator of this universe, who sent the prophets, who led 
forth the people from the land of Egypt, who in these last times manifested His own Son, that He might put 
the unbelievers to confusion, and search out the fruit of righteousness. 

CHAP. XXXVI. -THE PROPHETS WERE SENT FROM ONE AND THE SAME FATHER FROM 
WHOM THE SON WAS SENT. 

1 . Which [God] the Lord does not reject, nor does He say that the prophets [spake] from another god than 
His Father; nor from any other essence, but from one and the same Father; nor that any other being made 
the things in the world, except His own Father, when He speaks as follows in His teaching: "There was a 
certain householder, and he planted a vineyard, and hedged it round about, and digged in it a winepress, 
and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far country: And when the time of the fruit drew 
near, he sent his servants unto the husbandmen, that they might receive the fruits of it. And the husbandmen 
took his servants: they cut one to pieces, stoned another, and killed another. Again he sent other servants 
more than the first: and they did unto them likewise. But last of all he sent unto them his only son, saying, 
Perchance they will reverence my son. But when the husbandmen saw the son, they said among 
themselves, This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and we shall possess his inheritance. And they caught him, 
and cast him out of the vineyard, and slew him. When, therefore, the lord of the vineyard shall come, what will 
he do unto these husbandmen? They say unto him, He will miserably destroy these wicked men, and will let 
out his vineyard to other husbandmen, who shall render him the fruits in their season. "(3) Again does the 
Lord say: "Have ye never read, The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the 
comer: this is the Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes? Therefore I say unto you, that the kingdom 
of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof."(4) By these words He 
clearly points out to His disciples one and the same Householder-that is, one God the Father, who made 
all things by Himself; while [He shows] that there are various husbandmen, some obstinate, and proud, and 
worthless, and slayers of the Lord, but others who render Him, with all obedience, the fruits in their seasons; 
and that it is the same Householder who sends at one time His servants, at another His Son. From that 
Father, therefore, from whom the Son was sent to those husbandmen who slew Him, from Him also were the 
servants [sent]. But the Son, as coming from the Father with supreme authority (principali auctoritate), used 
to express Himself thus: "But I say unto you."(1) The servants, again, [who came] as from their Lord, spake 
after the manner of servants, [delivering a message]; and they therefore used to say, "Thus saith the Lord." 
5. Whom these men did therefore preach to the unbelievers as Lord, Him did Christ teach to those who obey 
Him; and the God who had called those of the former dispensation, is the same as He who has received 
those of the latter. In other words, He who at first used that law which entails bondage, is also He who did in 
after times [call His people] by means of adoption. For God planted the vineyard of the human race when at 
the first He formed Adam and chose the fathers; then He let it out to husbandmen when He established the 
Mosaic dispensation: He hedged it round about, that is, He gave particular instructions with regard to their 
worship: He built a tower, [that is], He chose Jerusalem: He digged a winepress, that is, He prepared a 
receptacle of the prophetic Spirit. And thus did He send prophets prior to the transmigration to Babylon, and 
after that event others again in greater number than the former, to seek the fruits, saying thus to them (the 
Jews): "Thus saith the Lord, Cleanse your ways and your doings, execute just judgment, and look each one 
with pity and compassion on his brother: oppress not the widow nor the orphan, the proselyte nor the poor, 
and let none of you treasure up evil against his brother in your hearts, and love not false swearing. Wash 

you, make you clean, put away evil from your hearts, learn to do well, seek judgment, protect the 
oppressed, judge the fatherless (purillo), plead for the widow; and come, let us reason together, saith the 
Lord. "(2) And again: "Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile; depart from evil, and 
do good; seek peace, and pursue it."(3) In preaching these things, the prophets sought the fruits of 
righteousness. But last of all He sent to those unbelievers His own Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, whom the 
wicked husbandmen cast out of the vineyard when they had slain Him. Wherefore the Lord God did even 
give it up (no longer hedged around, but thrown open throughout all the world) to other husbandmen, who 
render the fruits in their seasons, -the beautiful elect tower being also raised everywhere. For the illustrious 
Church is [now] everywhere, and everywhere is i the winepress digged: because those who do receive the 
Spirit are everywhere. For inasmuch as the former have rejected the Son of God, and cast Him out of the 
vineyard when they slew Him, God has justly rejected them, and given to the Gentiles outside the vineyard 
the fruits of its cultivation. This is in accordance with what Jeremiah says, "The Lord hath rejected and cast 
off the nation which does these things; for the children of Judah have done evil in my sight, saith the Lord. "(4) 
And again in like manner does Jeremiah speak: "I set watchmen over you; hearken to the sound of the 
trumpet; and they said, We will not hearken. Therefore have the Gentiles heard, and they who feed the 
flocks in them. "(5) It is therefore one and the same Father who planted the vineyard, who led forth the 
people, who sent the prophets, who sent His own Son, and who gave the vineyard to those other 
husbandmen that render the fruits in their season. 

3. And therefore did the Lord say to His disciples, to make us become good workmen: "Take heed to 
yourselves, and watch continually upon every occasion, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with 
surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and that day shall come upon you unawares; for as a 
snare shall it come upon all dwelling upon the face of the earth. "(6) "Let your loins, therefore, be girded 
about, and your lights burning, and ye like to men who wait for their lord, when he shall return from the 
wedding. "(7) "For as it was in the days of Noe, they did eat and drink, they bought and sold, they married 
and were given in marriage, and they knew not, until Noe entered into the ark, and the flood came and 
destroyed them all; as also it was in the days of Lot, they did eat and drink, they bought and sold, they 
planted and builded, until the time that Lot went out of Sodom; it rained fire from heaven, and destroyed them 
all: so shall it also be at the coming of the Son of man. "(8) "Watch ye therefore, for ye know not in what day 
your Lord shall come. "(9) [In these passages] He declares one and the same Lord, who in the times of 
Noah brought the deluge because of mews disobedience, and who also in the days of Lot rained fire from 
heaven because of the multitude of sinners among the Sodomites, and who, on account of this same 
disobedience and similar sins, will bring on the day of judgment at the end of time (in novissimo); on which 
day He declares that it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah than for that city and house which 
shall not receive the word of His apostles. "And thou, Capernaum," He said, "is it that thou shalt be exalted 
to heaven?(1) Thou shalt go down to hell. For if the mighty works which have been done in thee had been 
done in Sodore, it would have remained unto this day. Verily I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable for 
Sodom in the day of judgment than for you. "(2) 

4. Since the Son of God is always one and the same, He gives to those who believe on Him a well of 
water(3) [springing up] to eternal life, but He causes the unfruitful fig-tree immediately to dry up; and in the 
days of Noah He justly brought on the deluge for the purpose of extinguishing that most infamous race of 
men then existent, who could not bring forth fruit to God, since the angels that sinned had commingled with 
them, and [acted as He did] in order that He might put a check upon the sins of these men, but [that at the 
same time] He might preserve the archetype, (4) the formation of Adam. And it was He who rained fire and 
brimstone from heaven, in the days of Lot, upon Sodom and Gomorrah, "an example of the righteous 
judgment of God, "(5) that all may know, "that every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit shall be cut down, 
and cast into the fire. "(6) And it is He who uses [the words], that it will be more tolerable for Sodom in the 
general judgment than for those who beheld His wonders, and did not believe on Him, nor receive His 
doctrine? For as He gave by His advent a greater privilege to those who believed on Him, and who do His 
will, so also did He point out that those who did not believe on Him should have a more severe punishment 
in the judgment; thus extending equal justice to all, and being to exact more from those to whom He gives 
the more; the more, however, not because He reveals the knowledge of another Father, as I have shown so 
fully and so repeatedly, but because He has, by means of His advent, poured upon the human race the 
greater gift of paternal grace. 

5. If, however, what I have stated be insufficient to convince any one that the prophets were sent from one 
and the same Father, from whom also our Lord was sent, let such a one, opening the mouth of his heart, and 
calling upon the Master, Christ Jesus the Lord, listen to Him when He says, "The kingdom of heaven is like 
unto a king who made a marriage for his son, and he sent forth his servants to call them who were bidden to 
the marriage." And when they would not obey, He goes on to say, "Again he sent other servants, saying, 
Tell them that are bidden, Come ye, I have prepared my dinner; my oxen and all the fallings are killed, and 
everything is ready; come unto the wedding. But they made light of it, and went their way, some to their farm, 

and others to their merchandize; but the remnant took his servants, and some they treated despitefully, while 
others they slew. But when the king heard this, he was wroth, and sent his armies and destroyed these 
murderers, and burned up their city, and said to his servants, The wedding is indeed ready, but they which 
were bidden were not worthy. Go out therefore into the highways, and as many as ye shall find, gather in to 
the marriage. So the servants went out, and collected together as many as they found, bad and good, and 
the wedding was furnished with guests. But when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man not 
having on a wedding garment; and he said unto him, Friend, how earnest thou hither, not having on a 
wedding garment? But he was speechless. Then said the king to his servants, Take him away, hand and 
foot, and cast him into outer darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. For many are called, 
but few are chosen. "(8) Now, by these words of His, does the Lord clearly show all [these points, viz.,] that 
there is one King and Lord, the Father of all, of whom He had previously said, "Neither shalt thou swear by 
Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King;"(9) and that He had from the beginning prepared the marriage 
for His Son, and used, with the utmost kindness, to call, by the instrumentality of His servants, the men of the 
former dispensation to the wedding feast; and when they would not obey, He still invited them by sending 
out other servants, yet that even then they did not obey Him, but even stoned and slew those who brought 
them the message of invitation. He accordingly sent forth His armies and destroyed them, and burned down 
their city; but He called together from all the highways, that is, from all nations, [guests] to the marriage feast 
of His Son, as also He says by Jeremiah: "I have sent also unto you my servants the prophets to say, 
Return ye now, every man, from his very evil way, and amend your doings. "(1) And again He says by the 
same prophet: "I have also sent unto you my servants the prophets throughout the day and before the light; 
yet they did not obey me, nor incline their ears unto me. And thou shall speak this word to them. This is a 
people that obeyeth not the voice of the Lord, nor receiveth correction; faith has perished from their 
mouth. "(2) The Lord, therefore, who has called us everywhere by the apostles, is He who called those of old 
by the prophets, as appears by the words of the Lord; and although they preached to various nations, the 
prophets were not from one God, and the apostles from another; but, [proceeding] from one and the same, 
some of them announced the Lord, others preached the Father, and others again foretold the advent of the 
Son of God, while yet others declared Him as already present to those who then were afar off. 
6. Still further did He also make it manifest, that we ought, after our calling, to be also adorned with works of 
righteousness, so that the Spirit of God may rest upon us; for this is the wedding garment, of which also the 
apostle speaks, "Not for that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up 
by immortality. "(3) But those who have indeed been called to God's supper, yet have not received the Holy 
Spirit, because of their wicked conduct "shall be," He declares, "cast into outer darkness. "(4) He thus 
clearly shows that the very same King who gathered from all quarters the faithful to the marriage of His Son, 
and who grants them the incorruptible banquet, [also] orders that man to be cast into outer darkness who 
has not on a wedding garment, that is, one who despises it. For as in the former covenant, "with many of 
them was He not well pleased;"(5) so also is it the case here, that "many are called, but few chosen. "(6) It is 
not, then, one God who judges, and another Father who calls us together to salvation; nor one, forsooth, who 
confers eternal light, but another who orders those who have not on the wedding garment to be sent into 
outer darkness. But it is one and the same God, the Father of our Lord, from whom also the prophets had 
their mission, who does indeed, through His infinite kindness, call the unworthy; but He examines those who 
are called, [to ascertain] if they have on the garment fit and proper for the marriage of His Son, because 
nothing unbecoming or evil pleases Him. This is in accordance with what the Lord said to the man who had 
been healed: "Behold, thou art made whole; sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee. "(7) For he who 
is good, and righteous, and pure, and spotless, will endure nothing evil, nor unjust, nor detestable in His 
wedding chamber. This is the Father of our Lord, by whose providence all things consist, and all are 
administered by His command; and He confers His free gifts upon those who should [receive them]; but the 
most righteous Retributor metes out [punishment] according to their deserts, most deservedly, to the 
ungrateful and to those that are insensible of His kindness; and therefore does He say, "He sent His armies, 
and destroyed those murderers, and burned up their city. "(8) He says here, "His armies," because all men 
are the property of God. For "the earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof; the world, and all that dwell 
therein. "(9) Wherefore also the Apostle Paul says in the Epistle to the Romans, "For there is no power but of 
God; the powers that be are ordained of God. Whosoever resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of 
God; and they that resist shall receive unto themselves condemnation. For rulers are not for a terror to a 
good work, but to an evil. Wilt thou then not be afraid of the power? Do that which is good, and thou shalt 
have praise of the same; for he is the minister of God to thee for good. But if thou do that which is evil, be 
afraid; for he beareth not the sword in vain: for he is the minister of God, the avenger for wrath upon him that 
doeth evil. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. For this 
cause pay ye tribute also; for they are God's ministers, attending continually upon this very thing. "(10) Both 
the Lord, then, and the apostles announce as the one only God the Father, Him who gave the law, who sent 
the prophets, who made all things; and therefore does, He say, "He sent His armies," because every man, 

inasmuch as he is a man, is His workmanship, although he may be ignorant of his God. For He gives 
existence to all; He, "who maketh His sun to rise upon the evil and the good, and sendeth rain upon the just 
and unjust."(11) 

7. And not alone by what has been stated, but also by the parable of the two sons, the younger of whom 
consumed his substance by living luxuriously with harlots, did the Lord teach one and the same Father, who 
did not even allow a kid to his elder son; but for him who had been lost, [namely] his younger son, he 
ordered the fatted calf to be killed, and he gave him the best robe. (12) Also by the parable of the workmen 
who were sent into the vineyard at different periods of the day, one and the same God is declared(1) as 
having called some in the beginning, when the world was first created; but others afterwards, and others 
during the intermediate period, others after a long lapse of time, and others again in the end of lime; so that 
there are many workmen in their generations, but only one householder who calls them together. For there is 
but one vineyard, since there is also but one righteousness, and one dispensator, for there is one Spirit of 
God who arranges all things; and in like manner is there one hire, for they all received a penny each man, 
having [stamped upon it] the royal image and superscription, the knowledge of the Son of God, which is 
immortality. And therefore He began by giving the hire to those [who were engaged] last, because in the 
last times, when 'the Lord was revealed He presented Himself to all [as their reward]. 

8. Then, in the case of the publican, who ex celled the Pharisee in prayer, [we find] that it was not because 
he worshipped another Father that he received testimony from the Lord that he was justified rather [than the 
other]; but because with great humility, apart from all boasting and pride, he made confession to the same 
God. (2) The parable of the two sons also: those who are sent into the vineyard, of whom one indeed 
opposed his father, but afterwards repented, when repentance profited him nothing; the other, however, 
promised to go, at once assuring his father, but he did not go (for "every man is a liar;"(3) "to will is present 
with him, but he finds not means to perform"(4)),-[this parable, I say], points out one and the same Father. 
Then, again, this truth was clearly shown forth by the parable of the fig-tree, of which the Lord says, "Behold, 
now these three years I come seeking fruit on this fig-tree, but I find none"(5) (pointing onwards, by the 
prophets, to His advent, by whom He came from time to time, seeking the fruit of righteousness from them, 
which he did not find), and also by the circumstance that, for the reason already mentioned, the fig-tree 
should be hewn down. And, without using a parable, the Lord said to Jerusalem, 'O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 
thou that killest the prophets, and stonest those that are sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy 
children together, as a hen gathereth her chickens trader her wings, and ye would not! Behold, your house 
shall be left unto you desolate. "(6) For that which had been said in the parable, "Behold, for three years I 
come seeking fruit," and in clear terms, again, [where He says]," How often would I have gathered thy 
children together," shall be [found] a falsehood, if we do not understand His advent, which is [announced] 
by the prophets-if, in fact, He came to them but once, and then for the first time. But since He who chose the 
patriarchs and those [who lived under the first covenant], is the same Word of God who did both visit them 
through the prophetic Spirit, and us also who have been called together from all quarters by His advent; in 
addition to what has been already said, He truly declared, "Many shall come from the east and from the 
west, and shall recline with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven. But the children of 
the kingdom shall go into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. "(7) If, then, those 
who do believe in Him through the preaching of His apostles throughout the east and west shall recline with 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven, partaking with them of the [heavenly] banquet, one 
and the same God is set forth as He who did indeed choose the patriarchs, visited also the people, and 
called the Gentiles. 

CHAP. XXX VI I. --MEN ARE POSSESSED OF FREE WILL, AND ENDOWED WITH THE 
FACULTY OF MAKING A CHOICE. IT IS NOT TRUE, THEREFORE, THAT SOME ARE BY 
NATURE GOOD, AND OTHERS BAD. 

1 . This expression [of our Lord], "How often would I have gathered thy children together, and thou wouldest 
not, "(8) set forth the ancient law of human liberty, because God made man a free [agent] from the beginning, 
possessing his own power, even as he does his own soul, to obey the behests (ad utendum sententia) of 
God voluntarily, and not by compulsion of God. For there is no coercion with God, but a good will [towards 
us] is present with Him continually. And therefore does He give good counsel to all. And in man, as well as 
in angels, He has placed the power of choice (for angels are rational beings), so that those who had 
yielded obedience might justly possess what is good, given indeed by God, but preserved by themselves. 
On the other hand, they who have not obeyed shall, with justice, be not found in possession of the good, and 
shall receive condign punishment: for God did kindly bestow on them what was good; but they themselves 
did not diligently keep it, nor deem it something precious, but poured contempt upon His super-eminent 
goodness. Rejecting therefore the good, and as it were spuing it out, they shall all deservedly incur the just 
judgment of God, which also the Apostle Paul testifies in his Epistle to the Romans, where he says, "But dost 

thou despise the riches of His goodness, and patience, and long-suffering, being ignorant that the 
goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance? But according to thy hardness and impenitent heart, thou 
treasurestto thyself wrath against the day of wrath, and the revelation of the righteous judgment of God." "But 
glory and honour," he says, "to every one that doeth good."(1) God therefore has given that which is good, 
as the apostle tells us in this Epistle, and they who work it shall receive glory and honour, because they 
have done that which is good when they had it in their power not to do it; but those who do it not shall receive 
the just judgment of God, because they did not work good when they had it in their power so to do. 

2. But if some had been made by nature bad, and others good, these latter would not be deserving of 
praise for being good, for such were they created; nor would the former be reprehensible, for thus they were 
made [originally]. But since all men are of the same nature, able both to hold fast and to do what is good; 
and, on the other hand, having also the power to cast it from them and not to do it,-some do justly receive 
praise even among men who are under the control of good laws (and much more from God), and obtain 
deserved testimony of their choice of good in general, and of persevering therein; but the others are 
blamed, and receive a just condemnation, because of their rejection of what is fair and good. And therefore 
the prophets used to exhort men to what was good, to act justly and to work righteousness, as I have so 
largely demonstrated, because it is in our power so to do, and because by excessive negligence we might 
become forgetful, and thus stand in need of that good counsel which the good God has given us to know by 
means of the prophets. 

3. For this reason the Lord also said, "Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good 
deeds, and glorify your Father who is in heaven. "(2) And, "Take heed to yourselves, lest perchance your 
hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and worldly cares. "(3) And, "Let your loins be 
girded about, and your lamps burning, and ye like unto men that wait for their Lord, when He returns from the 
wedding, that when He cometh and knocketh, they may open to Him. Blessed is that servant whom his Lord, 
when He cometh, shall find so doing. "(4) And again, "The servant who knows his Lord's will, and does it not, 
shall be beaten with many stripes. "(5) And, "Why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I 
say?"(6) And again, "But if the servant say in his heart, The Lord delayeth, and begin to beat his 
fellow-servants, and to eat, and drink, and to be drunken, his Lord will come in a day on which he does not 
expect Him, and shall cut him in sunder, and appoint his portion with the hypocrites. "(7) All such passages 
demonstrate the independent will(8) of man, and at the same time the counsel which God conveys to him, by 
which He exhorts us to submit ourselves to Him, and seeks to turn us away from [the sin of] unbelief against 
Him, without, however, in any way coercing us. 

4. No doubt, if any one is unwilling to follow the Gospel itself, it is in his power [to reject it], but it is not 
expedient. For it is in man's power to disobey God, and to forfeit what is good; but [such conduct] brings no 
small amount of injury and mischief. And on this account Paul says, "All things are lawful to me, but all things 
are not expedient;"(9) referring both to the liberty of man, in which respect "all things are lawful," God 
exercising no compulsion in regard to him; and [by the expression] "not expedient" pointing out that we 
"should not use our liberty as a cloak of maliciousness, .(10) for this is not expedient. And again he says, 
"Speak ye every man truth with his neighbour."(1 1) And, "Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your 
mouth, neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor scurrility, which are not convenient, but rather giving of 
thanks. "(12) And, "For ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord; walk honestly as 
children of the light, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in anger and 
jealousy. And such were some of you; but ye have been washed, but ye have been sanctified in the name 
of our Lord."(1 3) If then it were not in our power to do or not to do these things, what reason had the apostle, 
and much more the Lord Himself, to give us counsel to do some things, and to abstain from others? But 
because man is possessed of free will from the beginning, and God is possessed of free will, in whose 
likeness man was created, advice is always given to him to keep fast the good, which thing is done by 
means of obedience to God. 

5. And not merely in works, but also in faith, has God preserved the will of man free and under his own 
control, saying, "According to thy faith be it unto thee; "(1) thus showing that there is a faith specially 
belonging to man, since he has an opinion specially his own. And again, "All things are possible to him that 
believeth;"(2) and, "Go thy way; and as thou hast believed, so be it done unto thee. "(3) Now all such 
expressions demonstrate that man is in his own power with respect to faith. And for this reason, "he that 
believeth in Him has eternal life while he who believeth not the Son hath not eternal life, but the wrath of God 
shall remain upon him. "(4) In the same manner therefore the Lord, both showing His own goodness, and 
indicating that man is in his own free will and his own power, said to Jerusalem, "How often have I wished to 
gather thy children together, as a hen [gathereth] her chickens under her wings, and ye would not! 
Wherefore your house shall be left unto you desolate. "(5) 

6. Those, again, who maintain the opposite to these ['conclusions], do themselves present the Lord as 
destitute of power, as if, forsooth, He were unable to accomplish what He willed; or, on the other hand, as 
being ignorant that they were by nature "material," as these men express it, and such as cannot receive His 

immortality. "But He should not," say they, "have created angels of such a nature that they were capable of 
transgression, nor men who immediately proved ungrateful towards Him; for they were made rational 
beings, endowed with the power of examining and judging, and were not [formed] as things irrational or of a 
[merely] animal nature, which can do nothing of their own will, but are drawn by necessity and compulsion to 
what is good, in which things there is one mind and one usage, working mechanically in one groove 
(inflexibiles el sine judicio), who are incapable of being anything else except just what they had been 
created." But upon this supposition, neither would what is good be grateful to them, nor communion with God 
be precious, nor would the good be very much to be sought after, which would present itself without their own 
proper endeavour, care, or study, but would be implanted of its own accord and without their concern. Thus 
it would come to pass, that their being good would be of no consequence, because they were so by nature 
rather than by will, and are possessors of good spontaneously, not by choice; and for this reason they 
would not understand this fact, that good is a comely thing, nor would they take pleasure in it. For how can 
those who are ignorant of good enjoy it? Or what credit is it to those who have not aimed at it? And what 
crown is it to those who have not followed in pursuit of it, like those victorious in the contest? 
7. On this account, too, did the Lord assert that the kingdom of heaven was the portion of "the violent;" and 
He says, "The violent take it by force;"(6) that is, those who by strength and earnest striving axe on the watch 
to snatch it away on the moment. On this account also Paul the Apostle says to the Corinthians, "Know ye 
not, that they who run in a racecourse, do all indeed run, but one receiveth the prize? So run, that ye may 
obtain. Every one also who engages in the contest is temperate in all things: now these men ida it] that they 
may obtain a corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible. But I so run, not as uncertainty; I fight, not as One 
beating the air; but I make my body livid, and bring it into subjection, lest by any means, when preaching to 
others, I may myself be rendered a castaway. "(7) This able wrestler, therefore, exhorts us to the struggle for 
immortality, that we may be crowned, and may deem the crown precious, namely, that which is acquired by 
our struggle, but which does not encircle us of its own accord (sed non ultra coalitam). And the harder we 
strive, so much is it the more valuable; while so much the more valuable it is, so much the more should we 
esteem it. And indeed those things axe not esteemed so highly which come spontaneously, as those which 
are reached by much anxious care. Since, then, this power has been conferred upon us, both the Lord has 
taught and the apostle has enjoined us the more to love God, that we may reach this [prize] for ourselves by 
striving after it. For otherwise, no doubt, this our good would be [virtually] irrational, because not the result of 
trial. Moreover, the faculty of seeing would not appear to be so desirable, unless we had known what a loss 
it were to be devoid of sight; and health, too, is rendered all the more estimable by an acquaintance with 
disease; light, also, by contrasting it with darkness; and life with death. Just in the same way is the heavenly 
kingdom honourable to those who have known the earthly one. But in proportion as it is more honourable, 
so much the more do we prize it; and if we have prized it more, we shall be the more glorious in the 
presence of God. The Lord has therefore endured all these things on our behalf, in order that we, having 
been instructed by means of them all, may be in all respects circumspect for the time to come, and that, 
having been rationally taught to love God, we may continue in His perfect love: for God has displayed 
long-suffering in the case of man's apostasy; while man has been instructed by means of it, as also the 
prophet says, "Thine own apostasy shall heal thee;"(8) God thus determining all things beforehand for the 
bringing of man to perfection, for his edification, and for the revelation of His dispensations, that goodness 
may both be made apparent, and righteousness perfected, and that the Church may be fashioned after the 
image of His Son, and that man may finally be brought to maturity at some future time, becoming ripe 
through such privileges to see and comprehend God.(1) 

CHAP. XXXVIII. -WHY MAN WAS NOT MADE PERFECT FROM THE BEGINNING. 

1 . If, however, any one say, "What then? Could not God have exhibited man as perfect from beginning?" let 
him know that, inasmuch as God is indeed always the same and unbegotten as respects Himself, all things 
are possible to Him. But created things must be inferior to Him who created them, from the very fact of their 
later origin; for it was not possible for things recently created to have been uncreated. But inasmuch as they 
are not uncreated, for this very reason do they come short of the perfect. Because, as these things are of 
later date, so are they infantile; so are they unaccustomed to, and unexercised in, perfect discipline. For as it 
certainly is in the power of a mother to give strong food to her infant, [but she does not do so], as the child is 
not yet able to receive more substantial nourishment; so also it was possible for God Himself to have made 
man perfect from the first, but man could not receive this [perfection], being as yet an infant. And for this 
cause our Lord in these last times, when He had summed up all things into Himself, came to us, not as He 
might have come, but as we were capable of beholding Him. He might easily have come to us in His 
immortal glory, but in that case we could never have endured the greatness of the glory; and therefore it was 
that He, who was the perfect bread of the Father, offered Himself to us as milk, [because we were] as 
infants. He did this when He appeared as a man, that we, being nourished, as it were, from the breast of His 

flesh, and having, by such a course of milk nourishment, become accustomed to eat and drink the Word of 
God, may be able also to contain in ourselves the Bread of immortality, which is the Spirit of the Father. 

2. And on this account does Paul declare to the Corinthians, "I have fed you with milk, not with meat, for 
hitherto ye were not able to bear it. "(2) That is, ye have indeed learned the advent of our Lord as a man; 
nevertheless, because of your infirmity, the Spirit of the Father has not as yet rested upon you. "For when 
envying and strife," he says, "and dissensions are among you, are ye not carnal, and walk as men?"(3) 
That is, that the Spirit of the Father was not yet with them, on account of their imperfection and shortcomings 
of their walk in life. As, therefore, the apostle had the power to give them strong meat-for those upon whom 
the apostles laid hands received the Holy Spirit, who is the food of life [eternal]-but they were not capable 
of receiving it, because they had the sentient faculties of the soul still feeble and undisciplined in the 
practice of things pertaining to God; so, in like manner, God had power at the beginning to grant perfection 
to man; but as the latter was only recently created, he could not possibly have received it, or even if he had 
received it, could he have contained it, or containing it, could he have retained it. It was for this reason that 
the Son of God, although He was perfect, passed through the state of infancy in common with the rest of 
mankind, partaking of it thus not for His own benefit, but for that of the infantile stage of man's existence, in 
order that man might be able to receive Him. There was nothing, therefore, impossible to and deficient in 
God, [implied in the fact] that man was not an uncreated being; but this merely applied to him who was lately 
created, [namely] man. 

3. With God there are simultaneously exhibited power, wisdom, and goodness. His power and goodness 
[appear] in this, that of His own will He called into being and fashioned things having no previous existence; 
His wisdom [is shown] in His having made created things parts of one harmonious and consistent whole; 
and those things which, through His super-eminent kindness, receive growth and a long period of existence, 
do reflect the glory of the uncreated One, of that God who bestows what is good ungrudgingly. For from the 
very fact of these things having been created, [it follows] that they are not uncreated; but by their continuing 
in being throughout a long course of ages, they shall receive a faculty of the Uncreated, through the 
gratuitous bestowal of eternal existence upon them by God. And thus in all things God has the 
pre-eminence, who alone is uncreated, the first of all things, and the primary cause of the existence of all, 
while all other things remain under God's subjection. But being in subjection to God is continuance in 
immortality, and immortality is the glory of the uncreated One. By this arrangement, therefore, and these 
harmonies, and a sequence of this nature, man, a created and organized being, is rendered after the image 
and likeness of the uncreated God, -the Father planning everything well and giving His commands, the Son 
carrying these into execution and performing the work of creating, and the Spirit nourishing and increasing 
[what is made], but man making progress day by day, and ascending towards the perfect, that is, 
approximating to the uncreated One. For the Uncreated is perfect, that is, God. Now it was necessary that 
man should in the first instance be created; and having been created, should receive growth; and having 
received growth, should be strengthened; and having been strengthened, should abound; and having 
abounded, should recover [from the disease of sin]; and having recovered, should be glorified; and being 
glorified, should see his Lord. For God is He who is yet to be seen, and the beholding of God is productive 
of immortality, but immortality renders one nigh unto God. 

4. Irrational, therefore, in every respect, are they who await not the time of increase, but ascribe to God the 
infirmity of their nature. Such persons know neither God nor themselves, being insatiable and ungrateful, 
unwilling to be at the outset what they have also been created-men subject to passions; but go beyond the 
law of the human race, and before that they become men, they wish to be even now like God their Creator, 
and they who are more destitute of reason than dumb animals [insist] that there is no distinction between the 
uncreated God and man, a creature of to-day. For these, [the dumb animals], bring no charge against God 
for not having made them men; but each one, just as he has been created, gives thanks that he has been 
created. For we cast blame upon Him, because we have not been made gods from the beginning, but at 
first merely men, then at length gods; although God has adopted this course out of His pure benevolence, 
that no one may impute to Him invidiousness or grudgingness. He declares, "I have said, Ye are gods; and 
ye are all sons of the Highest."(1) But since we could not sustain the power of divinity, He adds, "But ye shall 
die like men," setting forth both truths-the kindness of His free gift, and our weakness, and also that we were 
possessed of power over ourselves. For after His great kindness He graciously conferred good [upon us], 
and made men like to Himself, [that is] in their own power; while at the same time by His prescience He 
knew the infirmity of human beings, and the consequences which would flow from it; but through [His] love 
and [His] power, He shall overcome the substance of created nature. (2) For it was necessary, at first, that 
nature should be exhibited; then, after that, that what was mortal should be conquered and swallowed up by 
immortality, and the corruptible by incorruptibility, and that man should be made after the image and 
likeness of God, having received the knowledge of good and evil. 

CHAP. XXXIX. -MAN IS ENDOWED WITH THE FACULTY OF DISTINGUISHING GOOD AND 

EVIL; SO THAT, WITHOUT COMPULSION, HE HAS THE POWER, BY HIS OWN WILL AND 
CHOICE, TO PERFORM GOD'S COMMANDMENTS, BY DOING WHICH HE AVOIDS THE 
EVILS PREPARED FOR THE REBELLIOUS. 

1 . Man has received the knowledge of good and evil. It is good to obey God, and to believe in Him, and to 
keep His commandment, and this is the life of man; as not to obey God is evil, and this is his death. Since 
God, therefore, gave [to man] such mental power (magnanimitatem) man knew both the good of obedience 
and the evil of disobedience, that the eye of the mind, receiving experience of both, may with judgment 
make choice of the better things; and that he may never become indolent or neglectful of God's command; 
and learning by experience that it is an evil thing which deprives him of life, that is, disobedience to God, 
may never attempt it at all, but that, knowing that what preserves his life, namely, obedience to God, is good, 
he may diligently keep it with all earnestness. Wherefore he has also had a twofold experience, possessing 
knowledge of both kinds, that with discipline he may make choice of the better things. But how, if he had no 
knowledge of the contrary, could he have had instruction in that which is good? For there is thus a surer and 
an undoubted comprehension of matters submitted to us than the mere surmise arising from an opinion 
regarding them. For just as the tongue receives experience of sweet and bitter by means of tasting, and the 
eye discriminates between black and white by means of vision, and the ear recognises the distinctions of 
sounds by hearing; so also does the mind, receiving through the experience of both the knowledge of what 
is good, become more tenacious of its preservation, by acting in obedience to God: in the first place, 
casting away, by means of repentance, disobedience, as being something disagreeable and nauseous; 
and afterwards coming to understand what it really is, that it is contrary to goodness and sweetness, so that 
the mind may never even attempt to taste disobedience to God. But if any one do shun the knowledge of 
both these kinds of things, and the twofold perception of knowledge, he unawares divests himself of the 
character of a human being. 

2. How, then, shall he be a God, who has not as yet been made a man? Or how can he be perfect who was 
but lately created? How, again, can he be immortal, who in his mortal nature did not obey his Maker? For it 
must be that thou, at the outset, shouldest hold the rank of a man, and then afterwards partake of the glory of 
God. For thou dost not make God, but God thee. If, then, thou art God's workmanship, await the hand of thy 
Maker which creates everything in due time; in due time as far as thou art concerned, whose creation is 
being carried out.(1) Offer to Him thy heart in a soft and tractable state, and preserve the form in which the 
Creator has fashioned thee, having moisture in thyself, lest, by becoming hardened, thou lose the 
impressions of His fingers. But by preserving the framework thou shalt ascend to that which is perfect, for the 
moist clay which is in thee is hidden [there] by the workmanship of God. His hand fashioned thy substance; 
He will cover thee over [too] within and without with pure gold and silver, and He will adorn thee to such a 
degree, that even "the King Himself shall have pleasure in thy beauty. "(2) But if thou, being obstinately 
hardened, dost reject the operation of His skill, and show thyself ungrateful towards Him, because thou weft 
created a [mere] man, by becoming thus ungrateful to God, thou hast at once lost both His workmanship 
and life. For creation is an attribute of the goodness of God but to be created is that of human nature. If then, 
thou shalt deliver up to Him what is thine that is, faith towards Him and subjection, thou shalt receive His 
handiwork, and shall be a perfect work of God. 

3. If, however, thou wilt not believe in Him, and wilt flee from His hands, the cause of imperfection shall be in 
thee who didst not obey, but not in Him who called [thee]. For He commissioned [messengers] to call 
people to the marriage, but they who did not obey Him deprived themselves of the royal supper.(3) The skill 
of God, therefore, is not defective, for He has power of the stones to raise up children to Abraham;(4) but the 
man who does not obtain it is the cause to himself of his own imperfection. Nor, [in like manner], does the 
light fail because of those who have blinded themselves; but while it remains the same as ever, those who 
are [thus] blinded are involved in darkness through, their own fault. The light does never enslave any one 
by necessity; nor, again, does God exercise compulsion upon any one unwilling to accept the exercise of 
His skill. Those persons, therefore, who have apostatized from the light given by the Father, and 
transgressed the law of liberty, have done so through their own fault, since they have been created free 
agents, and possessed of power over themselves. 

4. But God, foreknowing all things, prepared fit habitations for both, kindly conferring that light which they 
desire on those who seek after the light of incorruption, and resort to it; but for the despisers and mockers 
who avoid and turn themselves away from this light, and who do, as it were, blind themselves, He has 
prepared darkness suitable to persons who oppose the light, and He has inflicted an appropriate 
punishment upon those who try to avoid being subject to Him. Submission to God is eternal rest, so that they 
who shun the light have a place worthy of their flight; and those who fly from eternal rest, have a habitation in 
accordance with their fleeing. Now, since all good things are with God, they who by their own determination 
fly from God, do defraud themselves of all good things; and having been [thus] defrauded of all good things 
with respect to God, they shall consequently fall under the just judgment of God. For those persons who 

shun rest shall justly incur punishment, and those who avoid the light shall justly dwell in darkness. For as in 
the case of this temporal light, those who shun it do deliver themselves over to darkness, so that they do 
themselves become the cause to themselves that they are destitute of light, and do inhabit darkness; and, 
as I have already observed, the light is not the cause of such an [unhappy.] condition of existence to them; 
so those who fly from the eternal light of God, which contains in itself all good things, are themselves the 
cause to themselves of their inhabiting eternal darkness, destitute of all good things, having become to 
themselves the cause of [their consignment to] an abode of that 

CHAP. XL. -ONE AND THE SAME GOD THE FATHER INFLICTS PUNISHMENT ON THE 
REPROBATE, AND BESTOWS REWARDS ON THE ELECT. 

1 . It is therefore one and the same God the Father who has prepared good things with Himself for those who 
desire His fellowship, and who remain in subjection to Him; and who has the eternal fire for the ringleader of 
the apostasy, the devil, and those who revolted with him, into which [fire] the Lord(5) has declared those men 
shall be sent who have been set apart by themselves on His left hand. And this is what has been spoken by 
the prophet, "I am a jealous God, making peace, and creating evil things;"(6) thus making peace and 
friendship with those who repent and turn to Him, and bringing [them to] unity, but preparing for the 
impenitent, those who shun the light, eternal fire and outer darkness, which are evils indeed to those 
persons who fall into them. 

2. If, however, it were truly one Father who confers rest, and another God who has prepared the fire, their 
sons would have been equally different [one from the other]; one, indeed, sending [men] into the Father's 
kingdom, but the other into eternal fire. But inasmuch as one and the same Lord has pointed out that the 
whole human race shall be divided at the judgment, "as a shepherd divideth the sheep from the goats, "(1) 
and that to some He will say, "Come, ye blessed of My Father, receive the kingdom which has been 
prepared for you, "(2) but to others, "Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, which My Father has 
prepared for the devil and his angels, "(3) one and the same Father is manifestly declared [in this passage], 
"making peace and creating evil things," preparing fit things for both; as also there is one Judge sending 
both into a fit place, as the Lord sets forth in the parable of the tares and the wheat, where He says, "As 
therefore the tares are gathered together, and burned in the fire, so shall it be at the end of the world. The 
Son of man shall send His angels, and they shall gather from His kingdom everything that offendeth, and 
those who work iniquity, and shall send them into a furnace of fire: there shall be weeping and gnashing of 
teeth. Then shall the just shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father."(4) The Father, therefore, who 
has prepared the kingdom for the righteous, into which the Son has received those worthy of it, is He who 
has also prepared the furnace of fire, into which these angels commissioned by the Son of man shall send 
those persons who deserve it, according to God's command. 

3. The Lord, indeed, sowed good seed in His own field;(5) and He says, "The field is the world." But while 
men slept, the enemy came, and "sowed tares in the midst of the wheat, and went his way. "(6) Hence we 
learn that this was the apostate angel and the enemy, because he was envious of God's workmanship, and 
took in hand to render this [workmanship] an enmity with God. For this cause also God has banished from 
His presence him who did of his own accord stealthily sow the tares, that is, him who brought about the 
transgression;(7) but He took compassion upon man, who, through want of care no doubt, but still wickedly 
[on the part of another], became involved in disobedience; and He turned the enmity by which [the devil] 
had designed to make [man] the enemy of God, against the author of it, by removing His own anger from 
man, turning it in another direction, and sending it instead upon the serpent. As also the Scripture tells us that 
God said to the serpent, "And I will place enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and 
her seed. He(8) shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. "(9) And the Lord summed up in Himself 
this enmity, when He was made man from a woman, and trod upon his [the serpent's] head, as I have 
pointed out in the preceding book. 

CHAP. XLI. -THOSE PERSONS WHO DO NOr BELIEVE IN GOD, BUT WHO ARE 
DISOBEDIENT, ARE ANGELS AND SONS OF THE DEVIL, NOT INDEED BY NATURE, BUT 
BY IMITATION. CLOSE OF THIS BOOK, AND SCOPE OF THE SUCCEEDING ONE. 

1. Inasmuch as the Lord has said that there are certain angels, [viz. those] of the devil, for whom eternal fire 
is prepared; and as, again, He declares with regard to the tares, "The tares are the children of the wicked 
one, "(10) it must be affirmed that He has ascribed all who are of the apostasy to him who is the ringleader of 
this transgression. But He made neither angels nor men so by nature. For we do not find that the devil 
created anything whatsoever, since indeed he is himself a creature of God, like the other angels. For God 
made all things, as also David says with regard to all things of the kind: "For He spake the word, and they 
were made; He commanded, and they were created. "(1 1) 

2. Since, therefore, all things were made by God, and since the devil has become the cause of apostasy to 
himself and others, justly does the Scripture always term those who remain in a state of apostasy "sons of 
the devil" and "angels of the wicked one" (maligni). For [the word] "son," as one before me has observed, 
has a twofold meaning: one [is a son] in the order of nature, because he was born a son; the other, in that he 
was made so, is reputed a son, although there be a difference between being born so and being made so. 
For the first is indeed born from the person referred to; but the second is made so by him, whether as 
respects his creation or by the teaching of his doctrine. For when any person has been taught from the 
mouth of another, he is termed the son of him who instructs him, and the latter [is called] his father. According 
to nature, then -that is, according to creation, so to speak-we are all sons of God, because we have all 
been created by God. But with respect to obedience and doctrine we are not all the sons of God: those only 
are so who believe in Him and do His will. And those who do not believe, and do not obey His will, are sons 
and angels of the devil, because they do the works of the devil. And that such is the case He has declared 
in Isaiah: "I have begotten and brought up children, but they have rebelled against Me."(1) And again, where 
He says that these children are aliens: "Strange children have lied unto Me. "(2) According to nature, then, 
they are [His] children, because they have been so created; but with regard to their works, they are not His 
children. 

3. For as, among men, those sons who disobey their fathers, being disinherited, are still their sons in the 
course of nature, but by law are disinherited, for they do not become the heirs of their natural parents; so in 
the same way is it with God, -those who do not obey Him being disinherited by Him, have ceased to be His 
sons. Wherefore they cannot receive His inheritance: as David says, "Sinners are alienated from the womb; 
their anger is after the likeness of a serpent. "(3) And therefore did the Lord term those whom He knew to be 
the offspring of men "a generation of vipers;"(4) because after the manner of these animals they go about in 
subtilty, and injure others. For He said, "Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees."(5) 
Speaking of Herod, too, He says, "Go ye and tell that fox, "(6) aiming at his wicked cunning and deceit. 
Wherefore the prophet David says, "Man, being placed in honour, is made like unto cattle. "(7) And again 
Jeremiah says, "They are become like horses, furious about females; each one neighed after his 
neighbour's wife. "(8) And Isaiah, when preaching in Judea, and reasoning with Israel, termed them "rulers of 
Sodom" and "people of Gomorrah;"(9) intimating that they were like the Sodomites in wickedness, and that 
the same description of sins was rife among them, calling them by the same name, because of the similarity 
of their conduct. And inasmuch as they were not by nature so created by God, but had power also to act 
rightly, the same person said to them, giving them good counsel, "Wash ye, make you clean; take away 
iniquity from your souls before mine eyes; cease from your iniquities. "(10) Thus, no doubt, since they had 
transgressed and sinned in the same manner, so did they receive the same reproof as did the Sodomites. 
But when they should be converted and come to repentance, and cease from evil, they should have power 
to become the sons of God, and to receive the inheritance of immortality which is given by Him. For this 
reason, therefore, He has termed those "angels of the devil," and "children of the wicked one, "(11) who give 
heed to the devil, and do his works. But these are, at the same time, all created by the one and the same 
God. When, however, they believe and are subject to God, and go on and keep His doctrine, they are the 
sons of God; but when they have apostatized and fallen into transgression, they are ascribed to their chief, 
the devil-to him who first became the cause of apostasy to himself, and afterwards to others. 

4. Inasmuch as the words of the Lord are numerous, while they all proclaim one and the same Father, the 
Creator of this world, it was incumbent also upon me, for their own sake, to refute by many [arguments] those 
who are involved in many errors, if by any means, when they are confuted by many [proofs], they may be 
converted to the truth and saved. But it is necessary to subjoin to this composition, in what follows, also the 
doctrine of Paul after the words of the Lord, to examine the opinion of this man, and expound the apostle, 
and to explain whatsoever [passages] have received other interpretations from the heretics, who have 
altogether misunderstood what Paul has spoken, and to point out the folly of their mad opinions; and to 
demonstrate from that same Paul, from whose [writings] they press questions upon us, that they are indeed 
utterers of falsehood, but that the apostle was a preacher of the truth, and that he taught all things agreeable 
to the preaching of the truth; [to the effect that] it was one God the Father who spake with Abraham, who gave 
the law, who sent the prophets beforehand, who in the last times sent His Son, and conferred salvation upon 
His own handiwork-that is, the substance of flesh. Arranging, then, in another book, the rest of the words of 
the Lord, which He taught concerning the Father not by parables, but by expressions taken in their obvious 
meaning (sed simpliciter ipsis dictionibus), and the exposition of the Epistles of the blessed apostle, I shall, 
with God's aid, furnish thee with the complete work of the exposure and refutation of knowledge, falsely so 
called; thus practising myself and thee in [these] five books for presenting opposition to all heretics. 

BOOKV. 

PREFACE. 

IN the four preceding books, my very dear friend, which I put forth to thee, all the heretics have been 
exposed, and their doctrines brought to light, and these men refuted who have devised irreligious opinions. 
[I have accomplished this by adducing] something from the doctrine peculiar to each of these men, which 
they have left in their writings, as well as by using arguments of a more general nature, and applicable to 
them all.(1) Then I have pointed out the truth, and shown the preaching of the Church, which the prophets 
proclaimed (as I have already demonstrated), but which Christ brought to perfection, and the apostles have 
handed down, from whom the Church, receiving [these truths], and throughout all the world alone preserving 
them in their integrity (bene), has transmitted them to her sons. Then also-having disposed of all questions 
which the heretics propose to us, and having explained the doctrine of the apostles, and clearly set forth 
many of those things which were said and done by the Lord in parables-l shall endeavour, in this the fifth 
book of the entire work which treats of the exposure and refutation of knowledge falsely so called, to exhibit 
proofs from the rest of the Lord's doctrine and the apostolical epistles: [thus] complying with thy demand, as 
thou didst request of me (since indeed I have been assigned a place in the ministry of the word); and, 
labouring by every means in my power to furnish thee with large assistance against the contradictions of the 
heretics, as also to reclaim the wanderers and convert them to the Church of God, to confirm at the same 
time the minds of the neophytes, that they may preserve stedfast the faith which they have received, 
guarded by the Church in its integrity, in order that they be in no way perverted by those who endeavour to 
teach them false doctrines, and lead them away from the truth. It will be incumbent upon thee, however, and 
all who may happen to read this writing, to peruse with great attention what I have already said, that thou 
mayest obtain a knowledge of the subjects against which I am contending. For it is thus that thou wilt both 
controvert them in a legitimate manner, and wilt be prepared to receive the proofs brought forward against 
them, casting away their doctrines as filth by means of the celestial faith; but following the only true and 
stedfast Teacher, the Word of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, who did, through His transcendent love, become 
what we are, that He might bring us to be even what He is Himself. 

CHAP. I. -CHRIST ALONE IS ABLE TO TEACH DIVINE THINGS, AND TO REDEEM US: HE, 
THE SAME, TOOK FLESH OF THE VIRGIN MARY, NOT MERELY IN APPEARANCE, BUT 
ACTUALLY, BY THE OPERATION OF THE HOLY SPIRIT, IN ORDER TO RENOVATE US. 
STRICTURES ON THE CONCEITS OF VALENTINUS AND EBION. 

1 . FOR in no other way could we have learned the things of God, unless our Master, existing as the Word, 
had become man. For no other being had the power of revealing to us the things of the Father, except His 
own proper Word. For what other person "knew the mind of the Lord," or who else "has become His 
counsellor?"(2) Again, we could have learned in no other way than by seeing our Teacher, and hearing His 
voice with our own ears, that, having become imitators of His works as well as doers of His words, we may 
have communion with Him, receiving increase from the perfect One, and from Him who is prior to all 
creation. We-who were but lately created by the only best and good Being, by Him also who has the gift of 
immortality, having been formed after His likeness (predestinated, according to the prescience of the 
Father, that we, who had as yet no existence, might come into being), and made the first-fruits of 
creation(1)-have received, in the times known beforehand, [the blessings of salvation] according to the 
ministration of the Word, who is perfect in all things, as the mighty Word, and very man, who, redeeming us 
by His own blood in a manner consonant to reason, gave Himself as a redemption for those who had been 
led into captivity. And since the apostasy tyrannized over us unjustly, and, though we were by nature the 
property of the omnipotent God, alienated us contrary to nature, rendering us its own disciples, the Word of 
God, powerful in all things, and not defective with regard to His own justice, did righteously turn against that 
apostasy, and redeem from it His own property, not by violent means, as the [apostasy] had obtained 

dominion over us at the beginning, when it insatiably snatched away what was not its own, but by means of 
persuasion, as became a God of counsel, who does not use violent means to obtain what He desires; so 
that neither should justice be infringed upon, nor the ancient handiwork of God go to destruction. Since the 
Lord thus has redeemed us through His own blood, giving His soul for our souls, and His flesh for our 
flesh, (2) and has also poured out the Spirit of the Father for the union and communion of God and man, 
imparting indeed God to men by means of the Spirit, and, on the other hand, attaching man to God by His 
own incarnation, and bestowing upon us at His coming immortality durably and truly, by means of 
communion with God,-all the doctrines of the heretics fall to ruin. 

2. Vain indeed are those who allege that He appeared in mere seeming. For these things were not done in 
appearance only, but in actual reality. But if He did appear as a man, when He was not a man, neither could 
the Holy Spirit have rested upon Him,-an occurrence which did actually take place-as the Spirit is invisible; 
nor, [in that case], was there any degree of truth in Him, for He was not that which He seemed to be. But I 
have already remarked that Abraham and the other prophets beheld Him after a prophetical manner, 
foretelling in vision what should come to pass. If, then, such a being has now appeared in outward 
semblance different from what he was in reality, there has been a certain prophetical vision made to men; 
and another advent of His must be looked forward to, in which He shall be such as He has now been seen 
in a prophetic manner. And I have proved already, that it is the same thing to say that He appeared merely 
to outward seeming, and [to affirm] that He received nothing from Mary. For He would not have been one 
truly possessing flesh and blood, by which He redeemed us, unless He had summed up in Himself the 
ancient formation of Adam. Vain therefore are the disciples of Valentinus who put forth this opinion, in order 
that they my exclude the flesh from salvation, and cast aside what God has fashioned. 

3. Vain also are the Ebionites, who do not receive by faith into their soul the union of God and man, but who 
remain in the old leaven of [the natural] birth, and who do not choose to understand that the Holy Ghost 
came upon Mary, and the power of the Most High did overshadow her:(3) wherefore also what was 
generated is a holy thing, and the Son of the Most High God the Father of all, who effected the incarnation of 
this being, and showed forth a new [kind of] generation; that as by the former generation we inherited death, 
so by this new generation we might inherit life. Therefore do these men reject the commixture of the 
heavenly wine, (4) and wish it to be water of the world only, not receiving God so as to have union with Him, 
but they remain in that Adam who had been conquered and was expelled from Paradise: not considering 
that as, at the beginning of our formation in Adam, that breath of life which proceeded from God, having been 
united to what had been fashioned, animated the man, and manifested him as a being endowed with 
reason; so also, in [the times of] the end, the Word of the Father and the Spirit of God, having become united 
with the ancient substance of Adam's formation, rendered man living and perfect, receptive of the perfect 
Father, in order that as in the natural [Adam] we all were dead, so in the spiritual we may all be made 

alive. (5) For never at any time did Adam escape the harms(6) of God, to whom the Father speaking, said, 
"Let Us make man in Our image, after Our likeness." And for this reason in the last times (fine), not by the will 
of the flesh, nor by the will of man, but by the good pleasure of the Father,(7) His hands formed a living man, 
in order that Adam might be created [again] after the image and likeness of God. 

CHAP. II. -WHEN CHRIST VISITED US IN HIS GRACE, HE DID NOT COME TO WHAT DID 
NOT BELONG TO HIM: ALSO, BY SHEDDING HIS TRUE BLOOD FOR US, AND EXHIBITING 
TO US HIS TRUE FLESH IN THE EUCHARIST, HE CONFERRED UPON OUR FLESH THE 
CAPACITY OF SALVATION. 

1 . And vain likewise are those who say that God came to those things which did not belong to Him, as if 
covetous of another's property; in order that He might deliver up that man who had been created by another, 
to that God who had neither made nor formed anything, but who also was deprived from the beginning of His 
own proper formation of men. The advent, therefore, of Him whom these men represent as coming to the 
things of others, was not righteous; nor did He truly redeem us by His own blood, if He did not really become 
man, restoring to His own handiwork what was said [of it] in the beginning, that man was made after the 
image and likeness of God; not snatching away by stratagem the property of another, but taking 
possession of His own in a righteous and gracious manner. As far as concerned the apostasy, indeed, He 
redeems us righteously from it by His own blood; but as regards us who have been redeemed, [He does 
this] graciously. For we have given nothing to Him previously, nor does He desire anything from us, as if He 
stood in need of it; but we do stand in need of fellowship with Him. And for this reason it was that He 
graciously poured Himself out, that He might gather us into the bosom of the Father. 

2. But vain in every respect are they who despise the entire dispensation of God, and disallow the salvation 
of the flesh, and treat with contempt its regeneration, maintaining that it is not capable of incorruption. But if 
this indeed do not attain salvation, then neither did the Lord redeem us with His blood, nor is the cup of the 

Eucharist the communion of His blood, nor the bread which we break the communion of His body.(1) For 
blood can only come from veins and flesh, and whatsoever else makes up the substance of man, such as 
the Word of God was actually made. By His own blood he redeemed us, as also His apostle declares, "In 
whom we have redemption through His blood, even the remission of sins. "(2) And as we are His members, 
we are also nourished by means of the creation (and He Himself grants the creation to us, for He causes 
His sun to rise, and sends rain when He wills(3)). He has acknowledged the cup (which is a part of the 
creation) as His own blood, from which He bedews our blood; and the bread (also a part of the creation) He 
has established as His own body, from which He gives increase to our bodies. (4) 
3. When, therefore, the mingled cup and the manufactured bread receives the Word of God, and the 
Eucharist of the blood and the body of Christ is made, (5) from which things the substance of our flesh is 
increased and supported, how can they affirm that the flesh is incapable of receiving the gift of God, which is 
life eternal, which [flesh] is nourished from the body and blood of the Lord, and is a member of Him?-even 
as the blessed Paul declares in his Epistle to the Ephesians, that "we are members of His body, of His 
flesh, and of His bones. "(6) He does not speak these words of some spiritual and invisible man, for a spirit 
has not bones nor flesh;(7) but [he refers to] that dispensation [by which the Lord became] an actual man, 
consisting of flesh, and nerves, and bones,-that [flesh] which is nourished by the cup which is His blood, 
and receives increase from the bread which is His body. And just as a cutting from the vine planted in the 
ground fructifies in its season, or as a corn of wheat falling into the earth and becoming decomposed, rises 
with manifold increase by the Spirit of God, who contains all things, and then, through the wisdom of God, 
serves for the use of men, and having received the Word of God, becomes the Eucharist, which is the body 
and blood of Christ; so also our bodies, being nourished by it, and deposited in the earth, and suffering 
decomposition there, shall rise at their appointed time, the Word of God granting them resurrection to the 
glory of God, even the Father, who freely gives to this mortal immortality, and to this corruptible 
incorruption,(8) because the strength of God is made perfect in weakness, (9) in order that we may never 
become puffed up, as if we had life from ourselves, and exalted against God, our minds becoming 
ungrateful; but learning by experience that we possess eternal duration from the excelling power of this 
Being, not from our own nature, we may neither undervalue that glory which surrounds God as He is, nor be 
ignorant of our own nature, but that we may know what God can effect, and what benefits man receives, and 
thus never wander from the true comprehension of things as they are, that is, both with regard to God and 
with regard to man. And might it not be the case, perhaps, as I have already observed, that for this purpose 
God permitted our resolution into the common dust of mortality, (10) that we, being instructed by every mode, 
may be accurate in all things for the future, being ignorant neither of God nor of ourselves? 

CHAP. III. -HE POWER AND GLORY OF GOD SHINE FORTH IN THE WEAKNESS OF 
HUMAN FLESH, AS HE WILL RENDER OUR BODY A PARTICIPATOR OF THE 
RESURRECTION AND OF IMMORTALITY, ALTHOUGH HE HAS FORMED IT FROM THE 
DUST OF THE EARTH; HE WILL ALSO BESTOW UPON IT THE ENJOYMENT OF 
IMMORTALITY, JUST AS HE GRANTS IT THIS SHORT LIFE IN COMMON WITH THE 
SOUL. 

1 . The Apostle Paul has, moreover, in the most lucid manner, pointed out that man has been delivered over 
to his own infirmity, lest, being uplifted, he might fall away from the truth. Thus he says in the second [Epistle] 
to the Corinthians: "And lest I should be lifted up by the sublimity of the revelations, there was given unto me 
a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me. And upon this I besought the Lord three times, that it 
might depart from me. But he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee; for strength is made perfect in 
weakness. Gladly therefore shall I rather glory in infirmities, that the power of Christ may dwell in me."(1) 
What, therefore? (as some may exclaim:) did the Lord wish, in that case, that His apostles should thus 
undergo buffering, and that he should endure such infirmity? Even so it was; the word says it. For strength is 
made perfect in weakness, rendering him a better man who by means of his infirmity becomes acquainted 
with the power of God. For how could a man have learned that he is himself an infirm being, and mortal by 
nature, but that God is immortal and powerful, unless he had learned by experience what is in both? For 
there is nothing evil in learning one's infirmities by endurance; yea, rather, it has even the beneficial effect of 
preventing him from forming an undue opinion of his own nature (non aberrare in natura sua). But the being 
lifted up against God, and taking His glory to one's self, rendering man ungrateful, has brought much evil 
upon him. [And thus, I say, man must learn both things by experience], that he may not be destitute of truth 
and love either towards himself or his Creator.(2) But the experience of both confers upon him the true 
knowledge as to God and man, and increases his love towards God. Now, where there exists an increase 
of love, there a greater glory is wrought out by the power of God for those who love Him. 

2. Those men, therefore, set aside the power of God, and do not consider what the word declares, when 

they dwell upon the infirmity of the flesh, but do not take into consideration the power of Him who raises it up 
from the dead. For if He does not vivify what is mortal, and does not bring back the corruptible to 
incorruption, He is not a God of power. But that He is powerful in all these respects, we ought to perceive 
from our origin, inasmuch as God, taking dust from the earth, formed man. And surely it is much more difficult 
and incredible, from non-existent bones, and nerves, and veins, and the rest of man's organization, to bring 
it about that all this should be, and to make man an animated and rational creature, than to re-integrate 
again that which had been created and then afterwards decomposed into earth (for the reasons already 
mentioned), having thus passed into those [elements] from which man, who had no previous existence, was 
formed. For He who in the beginning caused him to have being who as yet was not, just when He pleased, 
shall much more reinstate again those who had a former existence, when it is His will [that they should 
inherit] the life granted by Him. And that flesh shall also be found fit for and capable of receiving the power of 
God, which at the beginning received the skilful touches of God; so that one part became the eye for seeing; 
another, the ear for hearing; another, the hand for feeling and working; another, the sinews stretched out 
everywhere, and holding the limbs together; another, arteries and veins, passages for the blood and the 
air;(3) another, the various internal organs; another, the blood, which is the bond of union between soul and 
body. But why go [on in this strain]? Numbers would fail to express the multiplicity of parts in the human 
frame, which was made in no other way than by the great wisdom of God. But those things which partake of 
the skill and wisdom of God, do also partake of His power. 

3. The flesh, therefore, is not destitute [of participation] in the constructive wisdom and power of God. But if 
the power of Him who is the bestower of life is made perfect in weakness-that is, in the flesh-let them inform 
us, when they maintain the incapacity of flesh to receive the life granted by God, whether they do say these 
things as being living men at present, and partakers of life, or acknowledge that, having no part in life 
whatever, they are at the present moment dead men. And if they really are dead men, how is it that they 
move about, and speak, and perform those other functions which are not the actions of the dead, but of the 
living? But if they are now alive, and if their whole body partakes of life, how can they venture the assertion 
that the flesh is not qualified to be a partaker of life, when they do confess that they have life at the present 
moment? It is just as if anybody were to take up a sponge full of water, or a torch on fire, and to declare that 
the sponge could not possibly partake of the water, or the torch of the fire. In this very manner do those men, 
by alleging that they are alive and bear life about in their members, contradict themselves afterwards, when 
they represent these members as not being capable of [receiving] life. But if the present temporal life, which 
is of such an inferior nature to eternal life, can nevertheless effect so much as to quicken our mortal 
members, why should not eternal life, being much more powerful than this, vivify the flesh, which has already 
held converse with, and been accustomed to sustain, life? For that the flesh can really partake of life, is 
shown from the fact of it; being alive; for it lives on, as long as it is God's purpose that it should do so. It is 
manifest, too, that God has the power to confer life upon it, inasmuch as He grants life to us who are in 
existence. And, therefore, since the Lord has power to infuse life into what He has fashioned, and since the 
flesh is capable of being quickened, what remains to prevent its participating in incorruption, which is a 
blissful and never-ending life granted by God? 

CHAP. IV. --THOSE PERSONS ARE DECEIVED WHO FEIGN ANOTHER GOD THE FATHER 
BESIDES THE CREATOR OF THE WORLD; FOR HE MUST HAVE BEEN FEEBLE AND 
USELESS, OR ELSE MALIGNANT AND FULL OF ENVY, IF HE BE EITHER UNABLE OR 
UNWILLING TO EXTEND EXTERNAL LIFE TO OUR BODIES. 

1 . Those persons who feign the existence of another Father beyond the Creator, and who term him the good 
God, do deceive themselves; for they introduce him as a feeble, worthless, and negligent being, not to say 
malign and full of envy, inasmuch as they affirm that our bodies are not quickened by him. For when they say 
of things which it is manifest to all do remain immortal, such as the spirit and the soul, and such other things, 
that they are quickened by the Father, but that another thing [viz. the body] which is quickened in no different 
manner than by God granting [life] to it, is abandoned by life, -[they must either confess] that this proves their 
Father to be weak and powerless, or else envious and malignant. For since the Creator does even here 
quicken our mortal bodies, and promises them resurrection by the prophets, as I have pointed out; who [in 
that case] is shown to be more powerful, stronger, or truly good? Whether is it the Creator who vivifies the 
whole man, or is it their Father, falsely so called? He feigns to be the quickener of those things which are 
immortal by nature, to which things life is always present by their very nature; but he does not benevolently 
quicken those things which required his assistance, that they might live, but leaves them carelessly to fall 
under the power of death. Whether is it the case, then, that their Father does not bestow life upon them when 
he has the power of so doing, or is it that he does not possess the power? If, on the one hand, it is because 
he cannot, he is, upon that supposition, not a powerful being, nor is he more perfect than the Creator; for the 

Creator grants, as we must perceive, what He is unable to afford. But if, on the other hand, [it be that he does 
not grant this] when he has the power of so doing, then he is proved to be not a good, but an envious and 
malignant Father. 

2. If, again, they refer to any cause on account of which their Father does not impart life to bodies, then that 
cause must necessarily appear superior to the Father, since it restrains Him from the exercise of His 
benevolence; and His benevolence will thus be proved weak, on account of that cause which they bring 
forward. Now every one must perceive that bodies are capable of receiving life. For they live to the extent 
that God pleases that they should live; and that being so, the [heretics] cannot maintain that [these bodies] 
are utterly incapable of receiving life. If, therefore, on account of necessity and any other cause, those 
[bodies] which are capable of participating in life are not vivified, their Father shall be the slave of necessity 
and that cause, and not therefore a free agent, having His will under His own control. 

CHAP. V.--THE PROLONGED LIFE OF THE ANCIENTS, THE TRANSLATION OF ELIJAH 
AND OF ENOCH IN THEIR OWN BODIES, AS WELL AS THE PRESERVATION OF JONAH, 
OF SHADRACH, MESHACH, AND ABEDNEGO, IN THE MIDST OF EXTREME PERIL, ARE 
CLEAR DEMONSTRATIONS THAT GOD CAN RAISE UP OUR BODIES TO LIFE ETERNAL. 

1 . [In order to learn] that bodies did continue in existence for a lengthened period, as long as it was God's 
good pleasure that they should flourish, let [these heretics] read the Scriptures, and they will find that our 
predecessors advanced beyond seven hundred, eight hundred, and nine hundred years of age; and that 
their bodies kept pace with the protracted length of their days, and participated in life as long as God willed 
that they should live. But why do I refer to these men? For Enoch, when he pleased God, was translated in 
the same body in which he did please Him, thus pointing out by anticipation the translation of the just. Elijah, 
too, was caught up [when he was yet] in the substance of the [natural] form; thus exhibiting in prophecy the 
assumption of those who are spiritual, and that nothing stood in the way of their body being translated and 
caught up. For by means of the very same hands through which they were moulded at the beginning, did 
they receive this translation and assumption. For in Adam the hands of God had become accustomed to set 
in order, to rule, and to sustain His own workmanship, and to bring it and place it where they pleased. 
Where, then, was the first man placed? In paradise certainly, as the Scripture declares "And God planted a 
garden [paradisum] eastward in Eden, and there He placed the man whom He had formed. "(1) And then 
afterwards when [man] proved disobedient, he was cast out thence into this world. Wherefore also the 
elders who were disciples of the apostles tell us that those who were translated were transferred to that 
place (for paradise has been prepared for righteous men, such as have the Spirit; in which place also Paul 
the apostle, when he was caught up, heard words which are unspeakable as regards us in our present 
condition(2)), and that there shall they who have been translated remain until the consummation [of all 
things], as a prelude to immortality. 

2. If, however, any one imagine it impossible that men should survive for such a length of time, and that Elias 
was not caught up in the flesh, but that his flesh was consumed in the fiery chariot, let him consider that 
Jonah, when he had been cast into the deep, and swallowed down into the whale's belly, was by the 
command of God again thrown out safe upon the land. (3) And then, again, when Ananias, Azarias, and 
Misael were cast into the furnace of fire sevenfold heated, they sustained no harm whatever, neither was the 
smell of fire perceived upon them. As, therefore, the hand of God was present with them, working out 
marvellous things in their case-[things] impossible [to be accomplished] by man's nature-what wonder 
was it, if also in the case of those who were translated it performed something wonderful, working in 
obedience to the will of God, even the Father? Now this is the Son of God, as the Scripture represents 
Nebuchadnezzar the king as having said, "Did not we cast three men bound into the furnace? and, lo, I do 
see four walking in the midst of the fire, and the fourth is like the Son of God. "(4) Neither the nature of any 
created thing, therefore, nor the weakness of the flesh, can prevail against the will of God. For God is not 
subject to created things, but created things to God; and all things yield obedience to His will. Wherefore 
also the Lord declares, "The things which are impossible with men, are possible with God. "(5) As, therefore, 
it might seem to the men of the present day, who are ignorant of God's appointment, to be a thing incredible 
and impossible that any man could live for such a number of years, yet those who were before us did live [to 
such an age], and those who were translated do live as an earnest of the future length of days; and [as it 
might also appear impossible] that from the whale's belly and from the fiery furnace men issued forth unhurt, 
yet they nevertheless did so, led forth as it were by the hand of God, for the purpose of declaring His power: 
so also now, although some, not knowing the power and promise of God, may oppose their own salvation, 
deeming it impossible for God, who raises up the dead; to have power to confer upon them eternal duration, 
yet the scepticism of men of this stamp shall not render the faithfulness of God of none effect. 

CHAP. VI. --GOD WILL BESTOW SALVATION UPON THE WHOLE NATURE OF MAN, 
CONSISTING OF BODY AND SOUL IN CLOSE UNION, SINCE THE WORD TOOK IT UPON 
HIM, AND ADORNED WITH THE GIFTS OF THE HOLY SPIRIT, OF WHOM OUR BODIES 
ARE, AND ARE TERMED, THE TEMPLES. 

1 . Now God shall be glorified in His handiwork, fitting it so as to be conformable to, and modelled after, His 
own Son. For by the hands of the Father, that is, by the Son and the Holy Spirit, man, and not [merely] a part 
of man, was made in the likeness of God. Now the soul and the spirit are certainly a part of the man, but 
certainly not the man; for the perfect man consists in the commingling and the union of the soul receiving the 
spirit of the Father, and the admixture of that fleshly nature which was moulded after the image of God. For 
this reason does the apostle declare, "We speak wisdom among them that are perfect,"(6) terming those 
persons "perfect" who have received the Spirit of God, and who through the Spirit of God do speak in all 
languages, as he used Himself also to speak. In like manner we do also hear many brethren in the Church, 
who possess prophetic gifts, and who through the Spirit speak all kinds of languages, and bring to light for 
the general benefit the hidden things of men, and declare the mysteries of God, whom also the apostle 
terms "spiritual," they being spiritual because they partake of the Spirit, and not because their flesh has 
been stripped off and taken away, and because they have become purely spiritual. For if any one take 
away the substance of flesh, that is, of the handiwork [of God], and understand that which is purely spiritual, 
such then would not be a spiritual man but would be the spirit of a man, or the Spirit of God. But when the 
spirit here blended with the soul is united to [God's] handiwork, the man is rendered spiritual and perfect 
because of the outpouring of the Spirit, and this is he who was made in the image and likeness of God. But if 
the Spirit be wanting to the soul, he who is such is indeed of an animal nature, and being left carnal, shall be 
an imperfect being, possessing indeed the image [of God] in his formation (in plasmate), but not receiving 
the similitude through the Spirit; and thus is this being imperfect. Thus also, if any one take away the image 
and set aside the handiwork, he cannot then understand this as being a man, but as either some part of a 
man, as I have already said, or as something else than a man. For that flesh which has been moulded is not 
a perfect man in itself, but the body of a man, and part of a man. Neither is the soul itself, considered apart 
by itself, the man; but it is the soul of a man, and part of a man. Neither is the spirit a man, for it is called the 
spirit, and not a man; but the commingling and union of all these constitutes the perfect man. And for this 
cause does the apostle, explaining himself, make it clear that the saved man is a complete man as well as 
a spiritual man; saying thus in the first Epistle to the Thessalonians, "Now the God of peace sanctify you 
perfect (perfectos); and may your spirit, and soul, and body be preserved whole without complaint to the 
coming of the Lord Jesus Christ."(1) Now what was his object in praying that these three-that is, soul, body, 
and spirit- might be preserved to the coming of the Lord, unless he was aware of the [future] reintegration 
and union of the three, and [that they should be heirs of] one and the same salvation? For this cause also he 
declares that those are "the perfect" who present unto the Lord the three [component parts] without offence. 
Those, then, are the perfect who have had the Spirit of God remaining in them, and have preserved their 
souls and bodies blameless, holding fast the faith of God, that is, that faith which is [directed] towards God, 
and maintaining righteous dealings with respect to their neighbours. 

2. Whence also he says, that this handiwork is "the temple of God," thus declaring: "Know ye not that ye are 
the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? If any man, therefore, will defile the temple of 
God, him will God destroy: for the temple of God is holy, which [temple] ye are. "(2) Here he manifestly 
declares the body to be the temple in which the Spirit dwells. As also the Lord speaks in reference to 
Himself, "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up. He spake this, however," it is said, "of the 
temple of His body. "(3) And not only does he (the apostle) acknowledge our bodies to be a temple, but 
even the temple of Christ, saying thus to the Corinthians, "Know ye not that your bodies are members of 
Christ? Shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot?"(4) He speaks 
these things, not in reference to some other spiritual man; for a being of such a nature could have nothing to 
do with an harlot: but he declares "our body," that is, the flesh which continues in sanctity and purity, to be 
"the members of Christ;" but that when it becomes one with an harlot, it becomes the members of an harlot. 
And for this reason he said, "If any man defile the temple of God, him will God destroy." How then is it not the 
utmost blasphemy to allege, that the temple of God, in which the Spirit of the Father dwells, and the 
members of Christ, do not partake of salvation, but are reduced to perdition? Also, that our bodies are 
raised not from their own substance, but by the power of God, he says to the Corinthians, "Now the body is 
not for fornication, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body. But God hath both raised up the Lord, and shall 
raise us up by His own power."(5) 

CHAP. VII. --INASMUCH AS CHRIST DID RISE IN OUR FLESH, IT FOLLOWS THAT WE 
SHALL BE ALSO RAISED IN THE SAME; SINCE THE RESURRECTION PROMISED TO US 

SHOULD NOT BE REFERRED TO SPIRITS NATURALLY IMMORTAL, BUT TO BODIES IN 
THEMSELVES MORTAL. 

1 . In the same manner, therefore, as Christ did rise in the substance of flesh, and pointed out to His disciples 
the mark of the nails and the opening in His side(6) (now these are the tokens of that flesh which rose from 
the dead), so "shall He also," it is said, "raise us up by His own power."(7) And again to the Romans he 
says, "But if the Spirit of Him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, He that raised up Christ from 
the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies. "(8) What, then, are mortal bodies? Can they be souls? Nay, 
for souls are incorporeal when put in comparison with mortal bodies; for God "breathed into the face of man 
the breath of life, and man became a living soul." Now the breath of life is an incorporeal thing. And certainly 
they cannot maintain that the very breath of life is mortal. Therefore David says, "My soul also shall live to 
Him,"(1) just as if its substance were immortal. Neither, on the other hand, can they say that the spirit is the 
mortal body. What therefore is there left to which we may apply the term "mortal body," unless it be the thing 
that was moulded, that is, the flesh, of which it is also said that God will vivify it? For this it is which dies and is 
decomposed, but not the soul or the spirit. For to die is to lose vital power, and to become henceforth 
breathless, inanimate, and devoid of motion, and to melt away into those [component parts] from which also 
it derived the commencement of [its] substance. But this event happens neither to the soul, for it is the breath 
of life; nor to the spirit, for the spirit is simple and not composite, so that it cannot be decomposed, and is 
itself the life of those who receive it. We must therefore conclude that it is in reference to the flesh that death 
is mentioned; which [flesh], after the soul's departure, becomes breathless and inanimate, and is 
decomposed gradually into the earth from which it was taken. This, then, is what is mortal. And it is this of 
which he also says," He shall also quicken your mortal bodies." And therefore in reference to it he says, in 
the first [Epistle] to the Corinthians: "So also is the resurrection of the dead: it is sown in corruption, it rises in 
incorruption."(2) For he declares, "That which thou sowest cannot be quickened, unless first it die. "(3) 

2. But what is that which, like a grain of wheat, is sown in the earth and decays, unless it be the bodies which 
are laid in the earth, into which seeds are also cast? And for this reason he said, "It is sown in dishonour, it 
rises in glory. "(4) For what is more ignoble than dead flesh? Or, on the other hand, what is more glorious than 
the same when it arises and partakes of incorruption? "It is sown in weakness, it is raised in power:"(5) in its 
own weakness certainly, because since it is earth it goes to earth; but [it is quickened] by the power of God, 
who raises it from the dead. "It is sown an animal body, it rises a spiritual body. "(6) He has taught, beyond 
all doubt, that such language was not used by him, either with reference to the soul or to the spirit, but to 
bodies that have become corpses. For these are animal bodies, that is, [bodies] which partake of life, which 
when they have lost, they succumb to death; then, rising through the Spirit's instrumentality, they become 
spiritual bodies, so that by the Spirit they possess a perpetual life. "For now," he says, "we know in part, and 
we prophesy in part, but then face to face. "(7) And this it is which has been said also by Peter: "Whom 
having not seen, ye love; in whom now also, not seeing, ye believe; and believing, ye shall rejoice with joy 
unspeakable. "(8) For our face shall see the face of the Lord? and shall rejoice with joy unspeakable,-that is 
to say, when it shall behold its own Delight. 

CHAP. VIM. --THE GIFTS OF THE HOLY SPIRIT WHICH WE RECEIVE PREPARE US FOR 
INCORRUPTION, RENDER US SPIRITUAL, AND SEPARATE US FROM CARNAL MEN. 
THESE TWO CLASSES ARE SIGNIFIED BY THE CLEAN AND UNCLEAN ANIMALS IN THE 
LEGAL DISPENSATION. 

1 . But we do now receive a certain portion of His Spirit, tending towards perfection, and preparing us for 
incorruption, being little by little accustomed to receive and bear God; which also the apostle terms "an 
earnest," that is, a part of the honour which has been promised us by God, where he says in the Epistle to 
the Ephesians, "In which ye also, having heard the word of truth, the Gospel of your salvation, believing in 
which we have been sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance. "(10) This 
earnest, therefore, thus dwelling in us, renders us spiritual even now, and the mortal is swallowed up by 
immortality. (1 1) "For ye," he declares, "are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell 
in you. "(12) This, however does not take place by a casting away of the flesh, but by the impartation of the 
Spirit. For those to whom he was writing were not without flesh, but they were those who had received the 
Spirit of God, "by which we cry, Abba, Father."(13) If therefore, at the present time, having the earnest, we do 
cry, "Abba, Father," what shall it be when, on rising again, we behold Him face to face; when all the 
members shall burst out into a continuous hymn of triumph, glorifying Him who raised them from the dead, 
and gave the gift of eternal life? For if the earnest, gathering man into itself, does even now cause him to cry, 
"Abba, Father," what shall the complete grace of the Spirit effect, which shall be given to men by God? It will 
render us like unto Him, and accomplish the will(1 4) of the Father; for it shall make man after the image and 

likeness of God. 

2. Those persons, then, who possess the earnest of the Spirit, and who are not enslaved by the lusts of the 
flesh, but are subject to the Spirit, and who in all things walk according to the light of reason, does the 
apostle properly term "spiritual," because the Spirit of God dwells in them. Now, spiritual men shall not be 
incorporeal spirits; but our substance, that is, the union of flesh and spirit, receiving the Spirit of God, makes 
up the spiritual man. But those who do indeed reject the Spirit's counsel, and are the slaves of fleshly lusts, 
and lead lives contrary to reason, and who, without restraint, plunge headlong into their own desires, having 
no longing after the Divine Spirit, do live after the manner of swine and of dogs; these men, [I say], does the 
apostle very properly term "carnal," because they have no thought of anything else except carnal things. 

3. For the same reason, too, do the prophets compare them to irrational animals, on account of the 
irrationality of their conduct, saying, "They have become as horses raging for the females; each one of them 
neighing after his neighbour's wife."(1) And again, "Man, when he was in honour, was made like unto 
cattle. "(2) This denotes that, for his own fault, he is likened to cattle, by rivalling their irrational life. And we 
also, as the custom is, do designate men of this stamp as cattle and irrational beasts. 

4. Now the law has figuratively predicted all these, delineating man by the [various] animals:(3) whatsoever 
of these, says [the Scripture], have a double hoof and ruminate, it proclaims as clean; but whatsoever of 
them do not possess one or other of these [properties], it sets aside b themselves as unclean. Who then 
are the clean? Those who make their way by faith steadily towards the Father and the Son; for this is 
denoted by the steadiness of those which divide the hoof; and they meditate day and night upon the words 
of God, (4) that they may be adorned with good works: for this is the meaning of the ruminants. The unclean, 
however, are those which do neither divide the hoof nor ruminate; that is, those persons who have neither 
faith in God, nor do meditate on His words: and such is the abomination of the Gentiles. But as to those 
animals which do indeed chew the cud, but have not the double hoof, and are themselves unclean, we have 
in them a figurative description of the Jews, who certainly have the words of God in their mouth, but who do 
not fix their rooted stedfastness in the Father and in the Son; wherefore they are an unstable generation. For 
those animals which have the hoof all in one piece easily slip; but those which have it divided are more 
sure-footed, their cleft hoofs succeeding each other as they advance, and the one hoof supporting the other. 
In like manner, too, those are unclean which have the double hoof but do not ruminate: this is plainly an 
indication of all heretics, and of those who do not meditate on the words of God, neither are adorned with 
works of righteousness; to whom also the Lord says, "Why call ye Me Lord, Lord, and do not the things 
which I say to you?"(5) For men of this stamp do indeed say that they believe in the Father and the Son, but 
they never meditate as they should upon the things of God, neither are they adorned with works of 
righteousness; but, as I have already observed, they have adopted the lives of swine and of dogs, giving 
themselves over to filthiness, to gluttony, and recklessness of all sorts. Justly, therefore, did the apostle call 
all such "carnal" and "animal, "(6)-[all those, namely], who through their own unbelief and luxury do not 
receive the Divine Spirit, and in their various phases east out from themselves the life-giving Word, and 
walk stupidly after their own lusts: the prophets, too, spake of them as beasts of burden and wild beasts; 
custom likewise has viewed them in the light of cattle and irrational creatures; and the law has pronounced 
them unclean. 

CHAP. IX. --SHOWING HOW THAT PASSAGE OF THE APOSTLE WHICH THE HERETICS 
PERVERT, SHOULD BE UNDERSTOOD;VIZ., "FLESH AND BLOOD SHALL NOT POSSESS 
THE KINGDOM OF GOD." 

1 . Among the other [truths] proclaimed by the apostle, there is also this one, "That flesh and blood cannot 
inherit the kingdom of God. "(7) This is [the passage] which is adduced by all the heretics in support of their 
folly, with an attempt to annoy us, and to point out that the handiwork of God is not saved. They do not take 
this fact into consideration, that there are three things out of which, as I have shown, the complete man is 
composed-flesh, soul, and spirit. One of these does indeed preserve and fashion [the man]-this is the 
spirit; while as to another it is united and formed-that is the flesh; then [comes] that which is between these 
two-that is the soul, which sometimes indeed, when it follows the spirit, is raised up by it, but sometimes it 
sympathizes with the flesh, and falls into carnal lusts. Those then, as many as they be, who have not that 
which saves and forms [us] into life [eternal], shall be, and shall be called, [mere] flesh and blood; for these 
are they who have not the Spirit of God in themselves. Wherefore men of this stamp are spoken of by the 
Lord as "dead;" for, says He, "Let the dead bury their dead,"(1) because they have not the Spirit which 
quickens man. 

2. On the other hand, as many as fear God and trust in His Son's advent, and who through faith do establish 
the Spirit of God in their hearts,-such men as these shall be properly called both "pure," and "spiritual," and 
"those living to God," because they possess the Spirit of the Father, who purifies man, and raises him up to 

the life of God. For as the Lord has testified that "the flesh is weak," so [does He also say] that "the spirit is 
willing. "(2) For this latter is capable of working out its own suggestions. If, therefore, any one admix the ready 
inclination of the Spirit to be, as it were, a stimulus to the infirmity of the flesh, it inevitably follows that what is 
strong will prevail over the weak, so that the weakness of the flesh will be absorbed by the strength of the 
Spirit; and that the man in whom this takes place cannot in that case be carnal, but Spiritual, because of the 
fellowship of the Spirit. Thus it is, therefore, that the martyrs bear their witness, and despise death, not after 
the infirmity of the flesh, but because of the readiness of the Spirit. For when the infirmity of the flesh is 
absorbed, it exhibits the Spirit as powerful; and again, when the Spirit absorbs the weakness [of the flesh], it 
possesses the flesh as an inheritance in itself, and from both of these is formed a living man,-living, indeed, 
because he partakes of the Spirit, but man, because of the substance of flesh. 

3. The flesh, therefore, when destitute of the Spirit of God, is dead, not having life, and cannot possess the 
kingdom of God: [it is as] irrational blood, like water poured out upon the ground. And therefore he says, "As 
is the earthy, such are they that are earthy. "(3) But where the Spirit of the Father is, there is a living man; 
[there is] the rational blood preserved by God for the avenging [of those that shed it]; [there is] the flesh 
possessed by the Spirit, forgetful indeed of what belongs to it, and adopting the quality of the Spirit, being 
made conformable to the Word of God. And on this account he (the apostle) declares, "As we have borne 
the image of him who is of the earth, we shall also bear the image of Him who is from heaven. "(4) What, 
therefore, is the earthly? That which was fashioned. And what is the heavenly? The Spirit. As therefore he 
says, when we were destitute of the celestial Spirit, we walked in former times in the oldness of the flesh, not 
obeying God; so now let us, receiving the Spirit, walk in newness of life, obeying God. Inasmuch, therefore, 
as without the Spirit of God we cannot be saved, the apostle exhorts us through faith and chaste 
conversation to preserve the Spirit of God, lest, having become non-participators of the Divine Spirit, we 
lose the kingdom of heaven; and he exclaims, that flesh in itself, and blood, cannot possess the kingdom 
God. 

4. If, however, we must speak strictly, [we would say that] the flesh does not inherit, but is inherited; as also 
the Lord declares, "Blessed are the meek, for they shall possess the earth by inheritance;"(5) as if in the 
[future] kingdom, the earth, from whence exists the substance Of our flesh, is to be possessed by 
inheritance. This is the reason for His wishing the temple (i.e., the flesh) to be clean, that the Spirit of God 
may take delight therein, as a bridegroom with a bride. As, therefore, the bride cannot [be said] to wed, but 
to be wedded, when the bridegroom comes and takes her, so also the flesh cannot by itself possess the 
kingdom of God by inheritance; but it can be taken for an inheritance into the kingdom of God. For a living 
person inherits the goods of the deceased; and it is one thing to inherit, another to be inherited. The former 
rules, and exercises power over, and orders the things inherited at his will; but the latter things are in a state 
of subjection, are under order, and are ruled over by him who has obtained the inheritance. What, therefore, 
is it that lives? The Spirit of God, doubtless. What, again, are the possessions of the deceased? The 
various parts of the man, surely, which rot in the earth. But these are inherited by the Spirit when they are 
translated into the kingdom of heaven. For this cause, too, did Christ die. that the Gospel covenant being 
manifested and known to the whole world, might in the first place set free His slaves; and then afterwards, as 
I have already shown, might constitute them heirs of His property, when the Spirit possesses them by 
inheritance. For he who lives inherits, but the flesh is inherited. In order that we may not lose life by losing that 
Spirit which possesses us, the apostle, exhorting us to the communion of the Spirit, has said, according to 
reason, in those words already quoted, "That flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God." Just as if 
he were to say, "Do not err; for unless the Word of God dwell with, and the Spirit of the Father be in you, and if 
ye shall live frivolously and carelessly as if ye were this only, viz., mere flesh and blood, ye cannot inherit 
the kingdom of God." 

CHAP. X.--BY A COMPARISON DRAWN FROM THE WILD OLIVE-TREE, WHOSE QUALITY 
BUT NOT WHOSE NATURE IS CHANGED BY GRAFTING, HE PROVES MORE IMPORTANT 
THINGS; HE POINTS OUT ALSO THAT MAN WITHOUT THE SPIRIT IS NOT CAPABLE OF 
BRINGING FORTH FRUIT, OR OF INHERITING THE KINGDOM OF GOD. 

1 . This truth, therefore, [he declares], in order that we may not reject the engrafting of the Spirit while 
pampering the flesh. "But thou, being a wild olive-tree," he says, "hast been grafted into the good olive-tree, 
and been made a partaker of the fatness of the olive-tree." As, therefore, when the wild olive has been 
engrafted, if it remain in its former condition, viz., a wild olive, it is "cut off, and cast into the fire;"(2) but if it 
takes kindly to the graft, and is changed into the good olive-tree, it becomes a fruit-bearing olive, planted, 
as it were, in a king's park (paradiso): so likewise men, if they do truly progress by faith towards better 
things, and receive the Spirit of God, and bring forth the fruit thereof, shall be spiritual, as being planted in the 
paradise of God. But if they cast out the Spirit, and remain in their former condition, desirous of being of the 

flesh rather than of the Spirit, then it is very justly said with regard to men of this stamp, "That flesh and blood 
shall not inherit the kingdom of God;"(3) just as if any one were to say that the wild olive is not received into 
the paradise of God. Admirably therefore does the apostle exhibit our nature, and God's universal 
appointment, in his discourse about flesh and blood and the wild olive. For as the good olive, if neglected 
for a certain time, if left to grow wild and to run to i wood, does itself become a wild olive; or again, if the wild 
olive be carefully tended and grafted, it naturally reverts to its former fruit-bearing condition: so men also, 
when they become careless, and bring forth for fruit the lusts of the flesh like woody produce, are rendered, 
by their own fault, unfruitful in righteousness. For when men sleep, the enemy sows the material of tares;(4) 
and for this cause did the Lord command His disciples to be on the watch. (5) And again, those persons who 
are not bringing forth the fruits of righteousness, and are, as it were, covered over and lost among brambles, 
if they use diligence, and receive the word of God as a graft,(6) arrive at the pristine nature of man-that 
which was created after the image and likeness of God. 

2. But as the engrafted wild olive does not certainly lose the substance of its wood, but changes the quality 
of its fruit, and receives another name, being now not a wild olive, but a fruit-bearing olive, and is called so; 
so also, when man is grafted in by faith and receives the Spirit of God, he certainly does not lose the 
substance of flesh, but changes the quality of the fruit [brought forth, i.e.,] of his works, and receives another 
name, (7) showing that he has become changed for the better, being now not [mere] flesh and blood, but a 
spiritual man, and is called such. Then, again, as the wild olive, if it be not grafted in, remains useless to its 
lord because of its woody quality, and is cut down as a tree bearing no fruit, and cast into the fire; so also 
man, if he does not receive through faith the engrafting of the Spirit, remains in his old condition, and being 
[mere] flesh and blood, he cannot inherit the kingdom of God. Rightly therefore does the apostle declare, 
"Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God;"(8) and, "Those who are in the flesh cannot please 
God:"(9) not repudiating [by these words] the substance of flesh, but showing that into it the Spirit must be 
infused. (10) And for this reason, he says, "This mortal must put on immortality, and this corruptible must put 
on incorruption."(11) And again he declares, "But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit 
of God dwell in you. "(12) He sets this forth still more plainly, where he says, "The body indeed is dead, 
because of sin; but the Spirit is life, because of righteousness. But if the Spirit of Him who raised up Jesus 
from the dead dwell in you, He that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies, 
because of His Spirit dwelling in you."(1 3) And again he says, in the Epistle to the Romans, "For if ye live 
after the flesh, ye shall die. "(14) [Now by these words] he does not prohibit them from living their lives in the 
flesh, for he was himself in the flesh when he wrote to them; but he cuts away the lusts of the flesh, those 
which bring death upon a man. And for this reason he says in continuation, "But if ye through the Spirit do 
mortify the works of the flesh, ye shall live. For whosoever are led by the Spirit of God, these are the sons of 
God." 

CHAP. XI. -TREATS UPON THE ACTIONS OF CARNAL AND OF SPIRITUAL PERSONS; 
ALSO, THAT THE SPIRITUAL CLEANSING IS NOT TO BE REFERRED TO THE 
SUBSTANCE OF OUR BODIES, BUT TO THE MANNER OF OUR FORMER LIFE. 

1 . [The apostle], foreseeing the wicked speeches of unbelievers, has particularized the works which he 
terms carnal; and he explains himself, lest any room for doubt be left to those who do dishonestly pervert his 
meaning, thus saying in the Epistle to the Galatians: "Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are 
adulteries, fornications, uncleanness, luxuriousness, idolatries, witchcrafts, (1) hatreds, contentions 
jealousies, wraths, emulations, animosities, irritable speeches, dissensions, heresies, envyings, 
drunkenness, carousings, and such like; of which I warn you, as also I have warned you, that they who do 
such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God. "(2) Thus does he point out to his hearers in a more explicit 
manner what it is [he means when he declares], "Flesh and blood shall not inherit the kingdom of God." For 
they who do these things, since they do indeed walk after the flesh, have not the power of living unto God. 
And then, again, he proceeds to tell us the spiritual actions which vivify a man, that is, the engrafting of the 
Spirit; thus saying, "But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, goodness, benignity, faith, 
meekness, continence, chastity: against these there is no law. "(3) As, therefore, he who has gone forward to 
the better things, and has brought forth the fruit of the Spirit, is saved altogether because of the communion 
of the Spirit; so also he who has continued in the aforesaid works of the flesh, being truly reckoned as 
carnal, because he did not receive the Spirit of God, shall not have power to inherit the kingdom of heaven. 
As, again, the same apostle testifies, saying to the Corinthians, "Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not 
inherit the kingdom of God? Do not err," he says: "neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor 
effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor revilers, nor rapacious 
persons, shall inherit the kingdom of God. And these ye indeed have been; but ye have been washed, but 
ye have been sanctified, but ye have been justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and in the Spirit of 

our God. "(4) He shows in the clearest manner through what things it is that man goes to destruction, if he has 
continued to live after the flesh; and then, on the other hand, [he points out] through what things he is saved. 
Now he says that the things which save are the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Spirit of our God. 
2. Since, therefore, in that passage he recounts those works of the flesh which are without the Spirit, which 
bring death [upon their doers], he exclaimed at the end of his Epistle, in accordance with what he had 
already declared, "And as we have borne the image of him who is of the earth, we shall also bear the image 
of Him who is from heaven. For this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of 
God. "(5) Now this which he says, "as we have borne the image of him who is of the earth," is analogous to 
what has been declared, "And such indeed ye were; but ye have been washed, but ye have been 
sanctified, but ye have been justified in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in the Spirit of our God." 
When, therefore, did we bear the image of him who is of the earth? Doubtless it was when those actions 
spoken of as "works of the flesh" used to be wrought in us. And then, again, when [do we bear] the image of 
the heavenly? Doubtless when he says, "Ye have been washed," believing in the name of the Lord, and 
receiving His Spirit. Now we have washed away, not the substance of our body, nor the image of our 
[primary] formation, but the former vain conversation. In these members, therefore, in which we were going to 
destruction by working the works of corruption, in these very members are we made alive by working the 
works of the Spirit. 

CHAP. XII. --OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN LIFE AND DEATH; OF THE BREATH OF LIFE 
AND THE VIVIFYING SPIRIT: ALSO HOW IT IS THAT THE SUBSTANCE OF FLESH 
REVIVES WHICH ONCE WAS DEAD. 

1 . For as the flesh is capable of corruption, so is it also of incorruption; and as it is of death, so is it also of 
life. These two do mutually give way to each other; and both cannot remain in the same place, but one is 
driven out by the other, and the presence of the one destroys that of the other. If, then, when death takes 
possession of a man, it drives life away from him, and proves him to be dead, much more does life, when it 
has obtained power over the man, drive out death, and restore him as living unto God. For if death brings 
mortality, why should not life, when it comes, vivify man? Just as Esaias the prophet says, "Death devoured 
when it had prevailed. "(6) And again, "God has wiped away every tear from every face." Thus that former 
life is expelled, because it was not given by the Spirit, but by the breath. 

2. For the breath of life, which also rendered man an animated being, is one thing, and the vivifying Spirit 
another, which also caused him to become spiritual. And for this reason Isaiah said, "Thus saith the LORD, 
who made heaven and established it, who founded the earth and the things therein, and gave breath to the 
people upon it, and Spirit to those walking upon it;"(1) thus telling us that breath is indeed given in common 
to all people upon earth, but that the Spirit is theirs alone who tread down earthly desires. And therefore 
Isaiah himself, distinguishing the things already mentioned, again exclaims, "For the Spirit shall go forth from 
Me, and I have made every breath. "(2) Thus does he attribute the Spirit as peculiar to God which in the last 
times He pours forth upon the human race by the adoption of sons; but [he shows] that breath was common 
throughout the creation, and points it out as something created. Now what has been made is a different thing 
from him who makes it. The breath, then, is temporal, but the Spirit eternal. The breath, too, increases [in 
strength] for a short period, and continues for a certain time; after that it takes its departure, leaving its former 
abode destitute of breath. But when the Spirit pervades the man within and without, inasmuch as it continues 
there, it never leaves him. "But that is not first which is spiritual," says the apostle, speaking this as if with 
reference to us human beings; "but that is first which is animal, afterwards that which is spiritual, "(3) in 
accordance with reason. For there had been a necessity that, in the first place, a human being should be 
fashioned, and that what was fashioned should receive the soul; afterwards that it should thus receive the 
communion of the Spirit. Wherefore also "the first Adam was made" by the Lord "a living soul, the second 
Adam a quickening spirit."(4) As, then, he who was made a living soul forfeited life when he turned aside to 
what was evil, so, on the other hand, the same individual, when he reverts to what is good, and receives the 
quickening Spirit, shall find life. 

3. For it is not one thing which dies and another which is quickened, as neither is it one thing Which is lost 
and another which is found, but the Lord came seeking for that same sheep which had been lost. What was 
it, then, which was dead? Undoubtedly it was the substance of the flesh; the same, too, which had lost the 
breath of life, and had become breathless and dead. This same, therefore, was what the Lord came to 
quicken, that as in Adam we do all die, as being of an animal nature, in Christ we may all live, as being 
spiritual, not laying aside God's handiwork, but the lusts of the flesh, and receiving the Holy Spirit; as the 
apostle says in the Epistle to the Colossians: "Mortify, therefore, your members which are upon the earth." 
And what these are he himself explains: "Fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence; 
and covetousness, which is idolatry. "(5) The laying aside of these is what the apostle preaches; and he 

declares that those who do such things, as being merely flesh and blood, cannot inherit the kingdom of 
heaven. For their soul, tending towards what is worse, and descending to earthly lusts, has become a 
partaker in the same designation which belongs to these [lusts, viz., "earthly"], which, when the apostle 
commands us to lay aside, he says in the same Epistle, "Cast ye off the old man with his deeds. "(6) But 
when he said this, he does not remove away the ancient formation [of man]; for in that case it would be 
incumbent on us to rid ourselves of its company by committing suicide. 

4. But the apostle himself also, being one who had been formed in a womb, and had issued thence, wrote to 
us, and confessed in his Epistle to the Philippians that "to live in the flesh was the fruit of [his] work;"(7) thus 
expressing himself. Now the final result of the work of the Spirit is the salvation of the flesh. (8) For what other 
visible fruit is there of the invisible Spirit, than the rendering of the flesh mature and capable of incorruption? If 
then [he says], "To live in the flesh, this is the result of labour to me," he did not surely contemn the 
substance of flesh in that passage where he said, "Put ye off the old man with his works;"(9) but he points out 
that we should lay aside our former conversation, that which waxes old and becomes corrupt; and for this 
reason he goes on to say, "And put ye on the new man, that which is renewed in knowledge, after the image 
of Him who created him." In this, therefore, that he says, "which is renewed in knowledge," he demonstrates 
that he, the selfsame man who was in ignorance in times past, that is, in ignorance of God, is renewed by 
that knowledge which has respect to Him. For the knowledge of God renews man. And when he says, "after 
the image of the Creator," he sets forth the recapitulation of the same man, who was at the beginning made 
after the likeness of God. 

5. And that he, the apostle, was the very same person who had been born from the womb, that is, of the 
ancient substance of flesh, he does himself declare in the Epistle to the Galatians: "But when it pleased 
God, who separated me from my mother's womb, and called me by His grace, to reveal His Son in me, that 
I might preach Him among the Gentiles," (10) it was not, as I have already observed, one person who had 
been born from the womb, and another who preached the Gospel of the Son of God; but that same 
individual who formerly was ignorant, and used to persecute the Church, when the revelation was made to 
him from heaven, and the Lord conferred with him, as I have pointed out in the third book,(1) preached the 
Gospel of Jesus Christ the Son of God, who was crucified under Pontius Pilate, his former ignorance being 
driven out by his subsequent knowledge: just as the blind men whom the Lord healed did certainly lose their 
blindness, but received the substance of their eyes perfect, and obtained the power of vision in the very 
same eyes with which they formerly did not see; the darkness being merely driven away by the power of 
vision, while the substance of the eyes was retained, in order that, by means of those eyes through which 
they had not seen, exercising again the visual power, they might give thanks to Him who had restored them 
again to sight. And thus, also, he whose withered hand was healed, and all who were healed generally, did 
not change those parts of their bodies which had at their birth come forth from the womb, but simply obtained 
these anew in a healthy condition. 

6. For the Maker of all things, the Word of God, who did also from the beginning form man, when He found 
His handiwork impaired by wickedness, performed upon it all kinds of healing. At one time [He did so], as 
regards each separate member, as it is found in His own handiwork; and at another time He did once for all 
restore man sound and whole in all points, preparing him perfect for Himself unto the resurrection. For what 
was His object in healing [different] portions of the flesh, and restoring them to their original condition, if 
those parts which had been healed by Him were not in a position to obtain salvation? For if it was [merely] a 
temporary benefit which He conferred, He granted nothing of importance to those who were the subjects of 
His healing. Or how can they maintain that the flesh is incapable of receiving the life which flows from Him, 
when it received healing from Him? For life is brought about through healing, and incorruption through life. 
He, therefore, who confers healing, the same does also confer life; and He [who gives] life, also surrounds 
His own handiwork with incorruption. 

CHAP. XIII. -IN THE DEAD WHO WERE RAISED BY CHRIST WE POSSESS THE HIGHEST 
PROOF OF THE RESURRECTION; AND OUR HEARTS ARE SHOWN TO BE CAPABLE OF 
LIFE ETERNAL, BECAUSE THEY CAN NOW RECEIVE THE SPIRIT OF GOD. 

1 . Let our opponents-that is, they who speak against their own salvation-inform us [as to this point]: The 
deceased daughter of the high priest;(2) the widow's dead son, who was being carded out [to burial] near 
the gate [of the city];(3) and Lazarus, who had lain four days in the tomb,(4)-in what bodies did they rise 
again? In those same, no doubt, in which they had also died. For if it were not in the very same, then certainly 
those same individuals who had died did not rise again. For [the Scripture] says, "The Lord took the hand of 
the dead man, and said to him, Young man, I say unto thee, Arise. And the dead man sat up, and He 
commanded that something should be given him to eat; and He delivered him to his mother."(5) Again, He 
called Lazarus "with a loud voice, saying, Lazarus, come forth; and he that was dead came forth bound with 

bandages, feet and hands." This was symbolical of that man who had been bound in sins. And therefore the 
Lord said, "Loose him, and let him depart." As, therefore, those who were healed were made whole in those 
members which had in times past been afflicted; and the dead rose in the identical bodies, their limbs and 
bodies receiving health, and that life which was granted by the Lord, who prefigures eternal things by 
temporal, and shows that it is He who is Himself able to extend both healing and life to His handiwork, that 
His words concerning its [future] resurrection may also be believed; so also at the end, when the Lord utters 
His voice "by the last trumpet, "(6) the dead shall be raised, as He Himself declares: "The hour shall come, 
in which all the dead which are in the tombs shall hear the voice of the Son of man, and shall come forth; 
those that have done good to the resurrection of life, and those that have done evil to the resurrection of 
judgment."(7) 

2. Vain, therefore, and truly miserable, are those who do not choose to see what is so manifest and clear, 
but shun the light of truth, blinding themselves like the tragic OEdipus. And as those who are not practised in 
wrestling, when they contend with others, laying hold with a determined grasp of some part of [their 
opponent's] body, really fall by means of that which they grasp, yet when they fall, imagine that they are 
gaining the victory, because they have obstinately kept their hold upon that part which they seized at the 
outset, and besides falling, become subjects of ridicule; so is it with respect to that [favourite] expression of 
the heretics: "Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God;" while taking two expressions of Paul's, 
without having perceived the apostle's meaning, or examined critically the force of the terms, but keeping 
fast hold of the mere expressions by themselves, they die in consequence of their influence 
(<greek>periautas</greek>), overturning as far as in them lies the entire dispensation of God. 

3. For thus they will allege that this passage refers to the flesh strictly so called, and not to fleshly works, as I 
have pointed out, so representing the apostle as contradicting himself. For immediately following, in the 
same Epistle, he says conclusively, speaking thus in reference to the flesh: "For this corruptible must put on 
incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality. So, when this mortal shall have put on immortality, then 
shall be brought to pass the saying which is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. O death, where is thy 
sting? O death, where is thy victory?"(1) Now these words shall be appropriately said at the time when this 
mortal and corruptible flesh, which is subject to death, which also is pressed down by a certain dominion of 
death, rising up into life, shall put on incorruption and immortality. For then, indeed, shall death be truly 
vanquished, when that flesh which is held down by it shall go forth from under its dominion. And again, to the 
Philippians he says: "But our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord 
Jesus, who shall transfigure the body of our humiliation conformable to the body of His glory, even as He is 
able (ita ut possit) according to the working of His own power."(2) What, then, is this "body of humiliation" 
which the Lord shall transfigure, [so as to be] conformed to "the body of His glory?" Plainly it is this body 
composed of flesh, which is indeed humbled when it falls into the earth. Now its transformation [takes place 
thus], that while it is mortal and corruptible, it becomes immortal and incorruptible, not after its own proper 
substance, but after the mighty working of the Lord, who is able to invest the mortal with immortality, and the 
corruptible with incorruption. And therefore he says, (3) "that mortality may be swallowed up of life. He who 
has perfected us for this very thing is God, who also has given unto us the earnest of the Spirit."(4) He uses 
these words most manifestly in reference to the flesh; for the soul is not mortal, neither is the spirit. Now, what 
is mortal shall be swallowed up of life, when the flesh is dead no longer, but remains living and incorruptible, 
hymning the praises of God, who has perfected us for this very thing. In order, therefore, that we may be 
perfected for this, aptly does he say to the Corinthians, "Glorify God in your body. "(5) Now God is He who 
gives rise to immortality. 

4. That he uses these words with respect to the body of flesh, and to none other, he declares to the 
Corinthians manifestly, indubitably, and free from all ambiguity: "Always bearing about in our body the dying 
of Jesus, (6) that also the life of Jesus Christ might be manifested in our body. For if we who live are 
delivered unto death for Jesus' sake, it is that the life of Jesus may also be manifested in our mortal 

flesh. "(7) And that the Spirit lays hold on the flesh, he says in the same Epistle, "That ye axe the epistle of 
Christ, ministered by us, inscribed not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, not in tables of stone, but in 
the fleshly tables of the heart."(8) If, therefore, in the present time, fleshly hearts are made partakers of the 
Spirit, what is there astonishing if, in the resurrection, they receive that life which is granted by the Spirit? Of 
which resurrection the apostle speaks in the Epistle to the Philippians: "Having been made conformable to 
His death, if by any means I might attain to the resurrection which is from the dead. "(9) In what other mortal 
flesh, therefore, can life be understood as being manifested, unless in that substance which is also put to 
death on account of that confession which is made of God?-as he has himself declared, "If, as a man, I 
have fought with beasts(10) at Ephesus, what advantageth it me if the dead rise not? For if the dead rise not, 
neither has Christ risen. Now, if Christ has not risen, our preaching is vain, and your faith is vain. In that case, 
too, we are found false witnesses for God, since we have testified that He raised up Christ, whom [upon that 
supposition] He did not raise up. (11) For if the dead rise not, neither has Christ risen. But if Christ be not risen, 

your faith is vain, since ye are yet in your sins. Therefore those who have fallen asleep in Christ have 
perished. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are more miserable than all men. But now Christ has 
risen from the dead, the first-fruits of those that sleep; for as by man [came] death, by man also [came] the 
resurrection of the dead."(1) 

5. In all these passages, therefore, as I have already said, these men must either allege that the apostle 
expresses opinions contradicting himself, with respect to that statement, "Flesh and blood cannot inherit the 
kingdom of God;" or, on the other hand, they will be forced to make perverse and crooked interpretations of 
all the passages, so as to overturn and alter the sense of the words. For what sensible thing can they say, if 
they endeavour to interpret otherwise this which he writes: "For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and 
this mortal put on immortality;"(2) and, "That the life of Jesus may be made manifest in our mortal flesh;"(3) 
and all the other passages in which the apostle does manifestly and clearly declare the resurrection and 
incorruption of the flesh? And thus shall they be compelled to put a false interpretation upon passages such 
as these, they who do not choose to understand one correctly. 

CHAP. XIV.-UNLESS THE FLESH WERE TO BE SAVED, THE WORD WOULD NOT HAVE 
TAKEN UPON HIM FLESH OF THE SAME SUBSTANCE AS OURS: FROM THIS IT WOULD 
FOLLOW THAT NEITHER SHOULD WE HAVE BEEN RECONCILED BY HIM. 

1 . And inasmuch as the apostle has not pronounced against the very substance of flesh and blood, that it 
cannot inherit the kingdom of God, the same apostle has everywhere adopted the term "flesh and blood" 
with regard to the Lord Jesus Christ, partly indeed to establish His human nature (for He did Himself speak 
of Himself as the Son of man), and partly that He might confirm the salvation of our flesh. For if the flesh were 
not in a position to be saved, the Word of God would in no wise have become flesh. And if the blood of the 
righteous were not to be inquired after, the Lord would certainly not have had blood [in His composition]. But 
inasmuch as blood cries out (vocalis est) from the beginning [of the world], God said to Cain, when he had 
slain his brother, "The voice of thy brother's blood crieth to Me. "(4) And as their blood will be inquired after, 
He said to those with Noah, "For your blood of your souls will I require, [even] from the hand of all beasts;"(5) 
and again, "Whosoever will shed man's blood, (6) it shall be shed for his blood." In like manner, too, did the 
Lord say to those who should afterwards shed His blood, "All righteous blood shall be required which is 
shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zacharias the son of Barachias, whom 
ye slew between the temple and the altar. Verily I say unto you, All these things shall come upon this 
generation. "(7) He thus points out the recapitulation that should take place in his own person of the effusion 
of blood from the beginning, of all the righteous men and of the prophets, and that by means of Himself there 
should be a requisition of their blood. Now this [blood] could not be required unless it also had the 
capability of being saved; nor would the Lord have summed up these things in Himself, unless He had 
Himself been made flesh and blood after the way of the original formation [of man], saving in his own person 
at the end that which had in the beginning perished in Adam. 

2. But if the Lord became incarnate for any other order of things, and took flesh of any other substance, He 
has not then summed up human nature in His own person, nor in that case can He be termed flesh. For flesh 
has been truly made [to consist in] a transmission of that thing moulded originally from the dust. But if it had 
been necessary for Him to draw the material [of His body] from another substance, the Father would at the 
beginning have moulded the material [of flesh] from a different substance [than from what He actually did]. 
But now the case stands thus, that the Word has saved that which really was [created, viz.,] humanity which 
had perished, effecting by means of Himself that communion which should be held with it, and seeking out 
its salvation. But the thing which had perished possessed flesh and blood. For the Lord, taking dust from the 
earth, moulded man; and it was upon his behalf that all the dispensation of the Lord's advent took place. He 
had Himself, therefore, flesh and blood, recapitulating in Himself not a certain other, but that original 
handiwork of the Father, seeking out that thing which had perished. And for this cause the apostle, in the 
Epistle to the Colossians, says, "And though ye were formerly alienated, and enemies to His knowledge by 
evil works, yet now ye have been reconciled in the body of His flesh, through His death, to present 
yourselves holy and chaste, and without fault in His sight."(8) He says, "Ye have been reconciled in the 
body of His flesh," because the righteous flesh has reconciled that flesh which was being kept under 
bondage in sin, and brought it into friendship with God. 

3. If, then, any one allege that in this respect the flesh of the Lord was different from ours, because it indeed 
did not commit sin, neither was deceit found in His soul, while we, on the other hand, are sinners, he says 
what is the fact. But if he pretends that the, Lord possessed another substance of flesh, the sayings 
respecting reconciliation will not agree with that man. For that thing is reconciled which had formerly been in 
enmity. Now, if the Lord had taken flesh from another substance, He would not, by so doing, have reconciled 
that one to God which had become inimical through transgression. But now, by means of communion with 

Himself, the Lord has reconciled man to God the Father, in reconciling us to Himself by the body of His own 
flesh, and redeeming us by His own blood, as the apostle says to the Ephesians, "In whom we have 
redemption through His blood, the remission of sins;"(1) and again to the same he says, "Ye who formerly 
were far off have been brought near in the blood of Christ;"(2) and again, "Abolishing in His flesh the 
enmities, [even] the law of commandments [contained] in ordinances. "(3) And in every Epistle the apostle 
plainly testifies, that through the flesh of our Lord, and through His blood, we have been saved. 
4. If, therefore, flesh and blood are the things which procure for us life, it has not been declared of flesh and 
blood, in the literal meaning (proprie) of the terms, that they cannot inherit the kingdom of God; but [these 
words apply] to those carnal deeds already mentioned, which, perverting man to sin, deprive him of life. 
And for this reason he says, in the Epistle to the Romans: "Let not sin, therefore, reign in your mortal body, to 
be under its control: neither yield ye your members instruments of unrighteousness unto sin; but yield 
yourselves to God, as being alive from the dead, and your members as instruments of righteousness unto 
God. "(4) In these same members, therefore, in which we used to serve sin, and bring forth fruit unto death, 
does He wish us to [be obedient] unto righteousness, that we may bring forth fruit unto life. Remember, 
therefore, my beloved friend, that thou hast been redeemed by the flesh of our Lord, re-established(5) by 
His blood; and "holding the Head, from which the whole body of the Church, having been fitted together, 
takes increase"(6)-that is, acknowledging the advent in the flesh of the Son of God, and [His] divinity 
(deum), and looking forward with constancy to His human nature(7) (hominem), availing thyself also of these 
proofs drawn from Scripture-thou dost easily overthrow, as I have pointed out, all those notions of the 
heretics which were concocted afterwards. 

CHAP. XV. --PROOFS OF THE RESURRECTION FROM ISAIAH AND EZEKIEL; THE SAME 
GOD WHO CREATED US WILL ALSO RAISE US UP. 

1 . Now, that He who at the beginning created man, did promise him a second birth after his dissolution into 
earth, Esaias thus declares: "The dead shall rise again, and they who are in the tombs shall arise, and they 
who are in the earth shall rejoice. For the dew which is from Thee is health to them. "(8) And again: "I will 
comfort you, and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem: and ye shall see, and your heart shall rejoice, and 
your bones shall flourish as the grass; and the hand of the Lord shall be known to those who worship 

Him. "(9) And Ezekiel speaks as follows: "And the hand of the LORD came upon me, and the LORD led me 
forth in the Spirit, and set me down in the midst of the plain, and this place was full of bones. And He caused 
me to pass by them round about: and, behold, there were many upon the surface of the plain very dry. And 
He said unto me, Son of man, can these bones live ? And I said, Lord, Thou who hast made them dost 
know. And He said unto me, Prophesy upon these bones, and thou shalt say to them, Ye dry bones, hear 
the word of the LORD. Thus saith the LORD to these bones, Behold, I will cause the spirit of life to come 
upon you, and I will lay sinews upon you, and bring up flesh again upon you, and I will stretch skin upon you, 
and will put my Spirit into you, and ye shall live; and ye shall know that I am the LORD. And I prophesied as 
the Lord had commanded me. And it came to pass, when I was prophesying, that, behold, an earthquake, 
and the bones were drawn together, each one to its own articulation: and I beheld, and, lo, the sinews and 
flesh were produced upon them, and the skins rose upon them round about, but there was no breath in them. 
And He said unto me, Prophesy to the breath, son of man, and say to the breath, These things saith the 
LORD, Come from the four winds (spiritibus), and breathe upon these dead, that they may live. So I 
prophesied as the Lord had commanded me, and the breath entered into them; and they did live, and stood 
upon their feet, an exceeding great gathering. "(1 0) And again he says, "Thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will 
set your graves open, and cause you to come out of your graves, and bring you into the land of Israel; and 
ye shall know that I am the LORD, when I shall open your sepulchres, that I may bring my people again out 
of the sepulchres: and I will put my Spirit into you, and ye shall live; and I will place you in your land, and ye 
shall know that I am the LORD. I have said, and I will do, saith the LORD." (1) As we at once perceive that the 
Creator (Demiurgo) is in this passage represented as vivifying our dead bodies, and promising resurrection 
to them, and resuscitation from their sepulchres and tombs, conferring upon them immortality also (He says, 
"For as the tree of life, so shall their days be"(2)), He is shown to be the only God who accomplishes these 
things, and as Himself the good Father, benevolently conferring life upon those who have not life from 
themselves. 

2. And for this reason did the Lord most plainly manifest Himself and the Father to His disciples, lest, 
forsooth, they might seek after another God besides Him who formed man, and who gave him the breath of 
life; and that men might not rise to such a pitch of madness as to feign another Father above the Creator. 
And thus also He healed by a word all the others who were in a weakly condition because of sin; to whom 
also He said, "Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come upon thee:"(3) pointing out 
by this, that, because of the sin of disobedience, infirmities have come upon men. To that man, however, 

who had been blind from his birth, He gave sight, not by means of a word, but by an outward action; doing 
this not without a purpose, or because it so happened, but that He might show forth the hand of God, that 
which at the beginning had moulded man. And therefore, when His disciples asked Him for what cause the 
man had been born blind, whether for his own or his parents' fault, He replied, "Neither hath this man sinned, 
nor his parents, but that the works of God should be made manifest in him. "(4) Now the work of God is the 
fashioning of man. For, as the Scripture says, He made [man] by a kind of process: "And the Lord took day 
from the earth, and formed man. "(5) Wherefore also the Lord spat on the ground and made clay, and 
smeared it upon the eyes, pointing out the original fashioning [of man], how it was effected, and manifesting 
the hand of God to those who can understand by what [hand] man was formed out of the dust. For that which 
the artificer, the Word, had omitted to form in the womb, [viz., the blind man's eyes], He then supplied in 
public, that the works of God might be manifested in him, in order that we might not be seeking out another 
hand by which man was fashioned, nor another Father; knowing that this hand of God which formed us at the 
beginning, and which does form us in the womb, has in the last times sought us out who were lost, winning 
back His own, and taking up the lost sheep upon His shoulders, and with joy restoring it to the fold of life. 

3. Now, that the Word of God forms us in the womb, He says to Jeremiah, "Before I formed thee in the womb, 
I knew thee; and before thou wentest forth from the belly, I sanctified thee, and appointed thee a prophet 
among the nations." (6) And Paul, too, says in like manner, "But when it pleased God, who separated me 
from my mother's womb, that I might declare Him among the nations. "(7) As, therefore, we are by the Word 
formed in the womb, this very same Word formed the visual power in him who had been blind from his birth; 
showing openly who it is that fashions us in secret, since the Word Himself had been made manifest to men: 
and declaring the original formation of Adam, and the manner in which he was created, and by what hand he 
was fashioned, indicating the whole from a part. For the Lord who formed the visual powers is He who made 
the whole man, carrying out the will of the Father. And inasmuch as man, with respect to that formation which, 
was after Adam, having fallen into transgression, needed the layer of regeneration, [the Lord] said to him 
[upon whom He had conferred sight], after He had smeared his eyes with the clay, "Go to Siloam, and 
wash;"(8) thus restoring to him both [his perfect] confirmation, and that regeneration which takes place by 
means of the layer. And for this reason when he was washed he came seeing, that he might both know Him 
who had fashioned him, and that man might learn [to know] Him who has conferred upon him life. 

4. All the followers of Valentinus, therefore, lose their case, when they say that man was not fashioned out of 
this earth, but from a fluid and diffused substance. For, from the earth out of which the Lord formed eyes for 
that man, from the same earth it is evident that man was also fashioned at the beginning. For it were 
incompatible that the eyes should indeed be formed from one source and the rest of the body from another; 
as neither would it be compatible that one [being] fashioned the body, and another the eyes. But He, the 
very same who formed Adam at the beginning, with whom also the Father spake, [saying], "Let Us make 
man after Our image and likeness, "(9) revealing Himself in these last times to men, formed visual organs 
(visionem) for him who had been blind [in that body which he had derived] from Adam. Wherefore also the 
Scripture, pointing out what should come to pass, says, that when Adam had hid himself because of his 
disobedience, the Lord came to him at eventide, called him forth, and said, "Where artthou?"(1) That 
means that in the last times the very same Word of God came to call man, reminding him of his doings, 
living in which he had been hidden from the Lord. For just as at that time God spake to Adam at eventide, 
searching him out; so in the last times, by means of the same voice, searching out his posterity, He has 
visited them. 

CHAP. XVI. --SINCE OUR BODIES RETURN TO THE EARTH, IT FOLLOWS THAT THEY 
HAVE THEIR SUBSTANCE FROM IT; ALSO, BY THE ADVENT OF THE WORD, THE IMAGE 
OF GOD IN US APPEARED IN A CLEARER LIGHT. 

1 . And since Adam was moulded from this earth to which we belong, the Scripture tells us that God said to 
him, "In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread, until thou turnest again to the dust from whence thou 
weft taken. "(2) If then, after death, our bodies return to any other substance, it follows that from it also they 
have their substance. But if it be into this very [earth], it is manifest that it was also from it that man's frame 
was created; as also the Lord clearly showed, when from this very substance He formed eyes for the man 
[to whom He gave sight]. And thus was the hand of God plainly shown forth, by which Adam was fashioned, 
and we too have been formed; and since there is one and the same Father, whose voice from the beginning 
even to the end is present with His handiwork, and the substance from which we were formed is plainly 
declared through the Gospel, we should therefore not seek after another Father besides Him, nor [look for] 
another substance from which we have been formed, besides what was mentioned beforehand, and shown 
forth by the Lord; nor another hand of God besides that which, from the beginning even to the end, forms us 
and prepares us for life, and is present with His handiwork, and perfects it after the image and likeness of 

God. 

2. And then, again, this Word was manifested when the Word of God was made man, assimilating Himself to 
man, and man to Himself, so that by means of his resemblance to the Son, man might become precious to 
the Father. For in times long past, it was said that man was created after the image of God, but it was not 
[actually] shown; for the Word was as yet invisible, after whose image man was created, Wherefore also he 
did easily lose the similitude. When, however, the Word of God became flesh, He confirmed both these: for 
He both showed forth the image truly, since He became Himself what was His image; and He 
re-established the similitude after a sure manner, by assimilating man to the invisible Father through means 
of the visible Word. 

3. And not by the aforesaid things alone has the Lord manifested Himself, but [He has done this] also by 
means of His passion. For doing away with [the effects of] that disobedience of man which had taken place 
at the beginning by the occasion of a tree, "He became obedient unto death, even the death of the 
cross;"(3) rectifying that disobedience which had occurred by reason of a tree, through that obedience 
which was [wrought out] upon the tree [of the cross]. Now He would not have come to do away, by means of 
that same [image], the disobedience which had been incurred towards our Maker if He proclaimed another 
Father. But inasmuch as it was by these things that we disobeyed God, and did not give credit to His word, 
so was it also by these same that He brought in obedience and consent as respects His Word; by which 
things He clearly shows forth God Himself, whom indeed we had offended in the first Adam, when he did not 
perform His commandment. In the second Adam, however, we are reconciled, being made obedient even 
unto death. For we were debtors to none other but to Him whose commandment we had transgressed at the 
beginning. 

CHAP. XVII. --THERE IS BUT ONE LORD AND ONE GOD, THE FATHER AND CREATOR OF 
ALLTHINGS, WHO HAS LOVED US IN CHRIST, GIVEN US COMMANDMENTS, AND 
REMITTED OUR SINS; WHOSE SON AND WORD CHRIST PROVED HIMSELF TO BE, 
WHEN HE FORGAVE OUR SINS. 

1 . Now this being is the Creator (Demiurgus), who is, in respect of His love, the Father; but in respect of His 
power, He is Lord; and in respect of His wisdom, our Maker and Fashioner; by transgressing whose 
commandment we became His enemies. And therefore in the last times the Lord has restored us into 
friendship through His incarnation, having become "the Mediator between God and men;"(4) propitiating 
indeed for us the Father against whom we had sinned, and cancelling (consolatus) our disobedience by His 
own obedience; conferring also upon us the gift of communion with, and subjection to, our Maker. For this 
reason also He has taught us to say in prayer, "And forgive us our debts;"(5) since indeed He is our Father, 
whose debtors we were, having transgressed His commandments. But who is this Being? Is He some 
unknown one, and a Father who gives no commandment to any one? Or is He the God who is proclaimed in 
the Scriptures, to whom we were debtors, having transgressed His commandment? Now the commandment 
was given to man by the Word. For Adam, it is said, "heard the voice of the LORD God."(1) Rightly then 
does His Word say to man, "Thy sins are forgiven thee;"(2) He, the same against whom we had sinned in 
the beginning, grants forgiveness of sins in the end. But if indeed we had disobeyed the command of any 
other, while it was a different being who said, "Thy sins are forgiven thee;"(2) such an one is neither good, 
nor true, nor just. For how can he be good, who does not give from what belongs to himself? Or how can he 
be just, who snatches away the goods of another? And in what way can sins be truly remitted, unless that He 
against whom we have sinned has Himself granted remission "through the bowels of mercy of our God," in 
which "He has visited us"(3) through His Son? 

2. And therefore, when He had healed the man sick of the palsy, [the evangelist] says "The people upon 
seeing it glorified God, who gave such power unto men. "(4) What God, then, did the bystanders glorify? 
Was it indeed that unknown Father invented by the heretics? And how could they glorify him who was 
altogether unknown to them? It is evident, therefore, that the Israelites glorified Him who has been 
proclaimed as God by the law and the prophets, who is also the Father of our Lord; and therefore He taught 
men, by the evidence of their senses through those signs which He accomplished, to give glory to God. If, 
however, He HimSelf had come from another Father, and men glorified a different Father when they beheld 
His miracles, He [in that case] rendered the mungrateful to that Father who had sent the gift of healing. But 
as the only-begotten Son had come for man's salvation from Him who is God, He did both stir up the 
incredulous by the miracles which He was in the habit of working, to give glory to the Father; and to the 
Pharisees, who did not admit the advent of His Son, and who consequently did not believe in the remission 
[of sins] which was conferred by Him, He said, "That ye may know that the Son of man hath power to forgive 
sins. "(5) And when He had said this, He commanded the paralytic man to take up the pallet upon which he 
was lying, and go into his house. By this work of His He confounded the unbelievers, and showed that He is 

Himself the voice of God, by which man received commandments, which he broke, and became a sinner; 
for the paralysis followed as a consequence of sins. 

3. Therefore, by remitting sins, He did indeed heal man, while He also manifested Himself who He was. For 
if no one can forgive sins but God alone, while the Lord remitted them and healed men, it is plain that He 
was Himself the Word of God made the Son of man, receiving from the Father the power of remission of 
sins; since He was man, and since He was God, in order that since as man He suffered for us, so as God 
He might have compassion on us, and forgive us our debts, in which we were made debtors to God our 
Creator. And therefore David said beforehand, "Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose 
sins are covered. Blessed is the man to whom the LORD has not imputed sin;"(6) pointing out thus that 
remission of sins which follows upon His advent, by which "He has destroyed the handwriting" of our debt, 
and "fastened it to the cross;"(7) so that as by means of a tree we were made debtors to God, [so also] by 
means of a tree we may obtain the remission of our debt. 

4. This fact has been strikingly set forth by many others, and especially through means of Elisha the 
prophet. For when his fellow-prophets were hewing wood for the construction of a tabernacle, and when the 
iron [head], shaken loose from the axe, had fallen into the Jordan and could not be found by them, upon 
Elisha's coming to the place, and learning what had happened, he threw some wood into the water. Then, 
when he had done this, the iron part of the axe floated up, and they took up from the surface of the water what 
they had previously lost. (8) By this action the prophet pointed out that the sure word of God, which we had 
negligently lost by means of a tree, and were not in the way of finding again, we should receive anew by the 
dispensation of a tree, [viz., the cross of Christ]. For that the word of God is likened to an axe, John the 
Baptist declares [when he says] in reference to it, "But now also is the axe laid to the root of the trees. "(9) 
Jeremiah also says to the same purport: "The word of God cleaveth the rock as an axe. "(10) This word, 
then, what was hidden from us, did the dispensation of the tree make manifest, as I have already remarked. 
For as we lost it by means of a tree, by means of a tree again was it made manifest to all, showing the 
height, the length, the breadth, the depth in itself; and, as a certain man among our predecessors observed, 
"Through the extension of the hands of a divine person, (11) gathering together the two peoples to one God." 
For these were two hands, because there were two peoples scattered to the ends of the earth; but there was 
one head in the middle, as there is but one God, who is above all, and through all, and in us all. 

CHAP. XVIII. --GOD THE FATHER AND HIS WORD HAVE FORMED ALL CREATED THINGS 
(WHICH THEY USE) BY THEIR OWN POWER AND WISDOM, NOT OUT OF DEFECT OR 
IGNORANCE. THE SON OF GOD, WHO RECEIVED ALL POWER FROM THE FATHER, 
WOULD OTHERWISE NEVER HAVE TAKEN FLESH UPON HIM. 

1 . And such or so important a dispensation He did not bring about by means of the creations of others, but 
by His own; neither by those things which were created out of ignorance and defect, but by those which had 
their substance from the wisdom and power of His Father. For He was neither unrighteous, so that He should 
covet the property of another; nor needy, that He could not by His own means impart life to His own, and 
make use of His own creation for the salvation of man. For indeed the creation could not have sustained 
Him [on the cross], if He had sent forth [simply by commission] what was the fruit of ignorance and defect. 
Now we have repeatedly shown that the incarnate Word of God was suspended upon a tree, and even the 
very heretics do acknowledge that He was crucified. How, then, could the fruit of ignorance and defect 
sustain Him who contains the knowledge of all things, and is true and perfect? Or how could that creation 
which was concealed from the Father, and far removed from Him, have sustained His Word? And if this 
world were made by the angels (it matters not whether we suppose their ignorance or their cognizance of 
the Supreme God), when the Lord declared, "For I am in the Father, and the Father in Me,"(1) how could this 
workmanship of the angels have borne to be burdened at once with the Father and the Son? How, again, 
could that creation which is beyond the Pleroma have contained Him who contains the entire Pleroma? 
Inasmuch, then, as all these things are impossible and incapable of proof, that preaching of the Church is 
alone true [which proclaims] that His own creation bare Him, which subsists by the power, the skill, and the 
wisdom of God; which is sustained, indeed, after an invisible manner by the Father, but, on the contrary, after 
a visible manner it bore His Word: and this is the true [Word]. 

2. For the Father bears the creation and His own Word simultaneously, and the Word borne by the Father 
grants the Spirit to all as the Father wills. (2) To some He gives after the manner of creation what is made;(3) 
but to others [He gives] after the manner of adoption, that is, what is from God, namely generation. And thus 
one God the Father is declared, who is above all, and through all, and in all. The Father is indeed above all, 
and He is the Head of Christ; but the Word is through all things, and is Himself the Head of the Church; while 
the Spirit is in us all, and He is the living water,(4) which the Lord grants to those who rightly believe in Him, 
and love Him, and who know that "there is one Father, who is above all, and through all, and in us all. "(5) 

And to these things does John also, the disciple of the Lord, bear witness, when he speaks thus in the 
Gospel: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. This was in 
the beginning with God. All things were made by Him, and without Him was nothing made. "(6) And then he 
said of the Word Himself: "He was in the world, and the world was made by Him, and the world knew Him 
not. To His own things He came, and His own people received Him not. However, as many as did receive 
Him, to these gave He power to become the sons of God, to those that believe in His name. "(7) And again, 
showing the dispensation with regard to His human nature, John said: "And the Word was made flesh, and 
dwelt among us. "(8) And in continuation he says, "And we beheld His glory, the glory as of the 
Only-begotten by the Father, full of grace and truth." He thus plainly points out to those willing to hear, that is, 
to those having ears, that there is one God, the Father over all, and one Word of God, who is through all, by 
whom all things have been made; and that this world belongs to Him, and was made by Him, according to 
the Father's will, and not by angels; nor by apostasy, defect, and ignorance; nor by any power of Prunicus, 
whom certain of them also call "the Mother;" nor by any other maker of the world ignorant of the Father. 
3. For the Creator of the world is truly the Word of God: and this is our Lord, who in the last times was made 
man, existing in this world, and who in an invisible manner contains all things created, and is inherent in the 
entire creation, since the Word of God governs and arranges all things; and therefore He came to His own 
in a visible(1) manner, and was made flesh, and hung upon the tree, that He might sum up all things in 
Himself. "And His own peculiar people did not receive Him," as Moses declared this very thing among the 
people: "And thy life shall be hanging before thine eyes, and thou wilt not believe thy life. "(2) Those 
therefore who did not receive Him did not receive life. "But to as many as received Him, to them gave He 
power to become the sons of God. "(3) For it is He who has power from the Father over all things, since He is 
the Word of God, and very man, communicating with invisible beings after the manner of the intellect, and 
appointing a law observable to the outward senses, that all things should continue each in its own order; 
and He reigns manifestly over things visible and pertaining to men; and brings in just judgment and worthy 
upon all; as David also, clearly pointing to this, says, "Our God shall openly come, and will not keep 
silence. "(4) Then he shows also the judgment which is brought in by Him, saying, "A fire shall burn in His 
sight, and a strong tempest shall rage round about Him. He shall call upon the heaven from above, and the 
earth, to judge His people." 

CHAP. XIX. -A COMPARISON IS INSTITUTED BETWEEN THE DISOBEDIENT AND 
SINNING EVE AND THE VIRGIN MARY, HER PATRONESS. VARIOUS AND DISCORDANT 
HERESIES ARE MENTIONED. 

1 . That the Lord then was manifestly coming to His own things, and was sustaining them by means of that 
creation which is supported by Himself, and was making a recapitulation of that disobedience which had 
occurred in connection with a tree, through the obedience which was [exhibited by Himself when He hung] 
upon a tree, [the effects] also of that deception being done away with, by which that virgin Eve, who was 
already espoused to a man, was unhappily misled, -was happily announced, through means of the truth 
[spoken] by the angel to the Virgin Mary, who was [also espoused] to a man. (5) For just as the former was 
led astray by the word of an angel, so that she fled from God when she had transgressed His word; so did 
the latter, by an angelic communication, receive the glad tidings that she should sustain (portaret) God, 
being obedient to His word. And if the former did disobey God, yet the latter was persuaded to be obedient 
to God, in order that the Virgin Mary might become the patroness(6) (advocata) of the virgin Eve. And thus, 
as the human race fell into bondage to death by means of a virgin, so is it rescued by a virgin; virginal 
disobedience having been balanced in the opposite scale by virginal obedience. For in the same way the 
sin of the first created man (protoplasti) receives amendment by the correction of the First-begotten, and the 
coming of the serpent is conquered by the harmlessness of the dove, those bonds being unloosed by 
which we had been fast bound to death. 

2. The heretics being all unlearned and ignorant of God's arrangements, and not acquainted with that 
dispensation by which He took upon Him human nature (inscii ejus quoe est secundum hominem 
dispensationis), inasmuch as they blind themselves with regard to the truth, do in fact speak against their 
own salvation. Some of them introduce another Father besides the Creator; some, again, say that the world 
and its substance was made by certain angels; certain others [maintain] that it was widely separated by 
Horos(7) from him whom they represent as being the Father-that it sprang forth (floruisse) of itself, and from 
itself was born. Then, again, others [of them assert] that it obtained substance in those things which are 
contained by the Father, from defect and ignorance; others still, despise the advent of the Lord manifest [to 
the senses], for they do not admit His incarnation; while others, ignoring the arrangement [that He should be 
born] of a virgin, main-rain that He was begotten by Joseph. And still further, some affirm that neither their 
soul nor their body can receive eternal life, but merely the inner man. Moreover, they will have it that this 
[inner man] is that which is the understanding (sensum) in them, and which they decree as being the only 
thing to ascend to "the perfect." Others [maintain], as I have said in the first book, that while the soul is saved, 
their body does not participate in the salvation which comes from God; in which [book] I have also set 
forward the hypotheses of all these men, and in the second have pointed out their weakness and 
inconsistency. 

CHAP. XX.--THOSE PASTORS ARE TO BE HEARD TO WHOM THE APOSTLES 
COMMITTED THE CHURCHES, POSSESSING ONE AND THE SAME DOCTRINE OF 
SALVATION; THE HERETICS, ON THE OTHER HAND, ARE TO BE AVOIDED. WE MUST 
THINK SOBERLY WITH REGARD TO THE MYSTERIES OF THE FAITH. 

1 . Now all these [heretics] are of much later date than the bishops to whom the apostles committed the 
Churches; which fact I have in the third book taken all pains to demonstrate. It follows, then, as a matter of 
course, that these heretics aforementioned, since they are blind to the truth, and deviate from the [right] way, 
will walk in various roads; and therefore the footsteps of their doctrine are scattered here and there without 
agreement or connection. But the path of those belonging to the Church circumscribes the whole world, as 
possessing the sure tradition from the apostles, and gives unto us to see that the faith of all is one and the 
same, since all receive one and the same God the Father, and believe in the same dispensation regarding 
the incarnation of the Son of God, and are cognizant of the same gift of the Spirit, and are conversant with the 
same commandments, and preserve the same form of ecclesiastical constitutional) and expect the same 

advent of the Lord, and await the same salvation of the complete man, that is, of the soul and body. And 
undoubtedly the preaching of the Church is true and stedfast, in which one and the same way of salvation is 
shown throughout the whole world. For to her is entrusted the light of God; and therefore the "wisdom" of 
God, by means of which she saves all men, "is declared in [its] going forth; it uttereth [its voice] faithfully in 
the streets, is preached on the tops of the walls, and speaks continually in the gates of the city. "(3) For the 
Church preaches the truth everywhere, and she is the seven-branched candlestick which bears the light of 
Christ. 

2. Those, therefore, who desert the preaching of the Church, call in question the knowledge of the holy 
presbyters, not taking into consideration of how much greater consequence is a religious man, even in a 
private station, than a blasphemous and impudent sophist. (4) Now, such are all the heretics, and those who 
imagine that they have hit upon something more beyond the truth, so that by following those things already 
mentioned, proceeding on their way variously, in harmoniously, and foolishly, not keeping always to the 
same opinions with regard to the same things, as blind men are led by the blind, they shall deservedly fall 
into the ditch of ignorance lying in their path, ever seeking and never finding out the truth. (5) It behoves us, 
therefore, to avoid their doctrines, and to take careful heed lest we suffer any injury from them; but to flee to 
the Church, and be brought up in her bosom, and be nourished with the Lord's Scriptures. For the Church has 
been planted as a garden (paradisus) in this world; therefore says the Spirit of God, "Thou mayest freely eat 
from every tree of the garden, "(6) that is, Eat ye from every Scripture of the Lord; but ye shall not eat with an 
uplifted mind, nor touch any heretical discord. For these men do profess that they have themselves the 
knowledge of good and evil; and they set their own impious minds above the God who made them. They 
therefore form opinions on what is beyond the limits of the understanding. For this cause also the apostle 
says, "Be not wise beyond what it is fitting to be wise, but be wise prudently, "(7) that we be not east forth by 
eating of the "knowledge" of these men (that knowledge which knows more than it should do) from the 
paradise of life. Into this paradise the Lord has introduced those who obey His call, "summing up in Himself 
all things which are in heaven, and which are on earth;"(8) but the things in heaven are spiritual, while those 
on earth constitute the dispensation in human nature (secundum hominem est dispositio). These things, 
therefore, He recapitulated in Himself: by uniting man to the Spirit, and causing the Spirit to dwell in man, He 
is Himself made the head of the Spirit, and gives the Spirit to be the head of man: for through Him (the Spirit) 
we see, and hear, and speak. 

CHAP. XXI. -CHRIST IS THE HEAD OF ALL THINGS ALREADY MENTIONED. IT WAS 
FITTING THAT HE SHOULD BE SENT BYTHE FATHER, THE CREATOR OFALLTHINGS, 
TO ASSUME HUMAN NATURE, AND SHOULD BE TEMPTED BY SATAN, THAT HE MIGHT 
FULFIL THE PROMISES, AND CARRY OFF A GLORIOUS AND PERFECT VICTORY. 

1 . He has therefore, in His work of recapitulation, summed up all things, both waging war against our enemy, 
and crushing him who had at the beginning led us away captives in Adam, and trampled upon his head, as 
thou canst perceive in Genesis that God said to the serpent, "And I will put enmity between thee and the 
woman, and between thy seed and her seed; He shall be on the watch for (observabit(9)) thy head, and thou 
on the watch for His heel. "(10) For from that time, He who should be born of a woman, [namely] from the 
Virgin, after the likeness of Adam, was preached as keeping watch for the head of the serpent. This is the 
seed of which the apostle says in the Epistle to the Galatians, "that the law of works was established until the 
seed should come to whom the promise was made. "(1 1) This fact is exhibited in a still clearer light in the 
same Epistle, where he thus speaks: "But when the fulness of time was come, God sent forth His Son, made 
of a woman. "(1) For indeed the enemy would not have been fairly vanquished, unless it had been a man 
[born] of a woman who conquered him. For it was by means of a woman that he got the advantage over 
man at first, setting himself up as man's opponent. And therefore does the Lord profess Himself to be the 
Son of man, comprising in Himself that original man out of whom the woman was fashioned (ex quo ea quae 
secundum mulierem est plasmatio facta est), in order that, as our species went down to death through a 
vanquished man, so we may ascend to life again through a victorious one; and as through a man death 
received the palm [of victory] against us, so again by a man we may receive the palm against death. 

2. Now the Lord would not have recapitulated in Himself that ancient and primary enmity against the serpent, 
fulfilling the promise of the Creator (Demiurgi), and performing His command, if He had come from another 
Father. But as He is one and the same, who formed us at the beginning, and sent His Son at the end, the 
Lord did perform His command, being made of a woman, by both destroying our adversary, and perfecting 
man after the image and likeness of God. And for this reason He did not draw the means of confounding him 
from any other source than from the words of the law, and made use of the Father's commandment as a help 
towards the destruction and confusion of the apostate angel. Fasting forty days, like Moses and Elias, He 
afterwards hungered, first, in order that we may perceive that He was a real and substantial man-for it 

belongs to a man to suffer hunger when fasting; and secondly, that His opponent might have an opportunity 
of attacking Him. For as at the beginning it was by means of food that [the enemy] persuaded man, although 
not suffering hunger, to transgress God's commandments, so in the end he did not succeed in persuading 
Him that was an hungered to take that food which proceeded from God. For, when tempting Him, he said, "If 
thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread. "(2) But the Lord repulsed him by the 
commandment of the law, saying, "It is written, Man doth not live by bread alone. "(3) As to those words '[of 
His enemy,] "If thou be the Son of God," [the Lord] made no remark; but by thus acknowledging His human 
nature He baffled His adversary, and exhausted the force of his first attack by means of His Father's word. 
The corruption of man, therefore, which occurred in paradise by both [of our first parents] eating, was done 
away with by [the Lord's] want of food in this world. (4) But he, being thus vanquished by the law, 
endeavoured again to make an assault by himself quoting a commandment of the law. For, bringing Him to 
the highest pinnacle of the temple, he said to Him, "If thou art the Son of God, cast thyself down. For it is 
written, That God shall give His angels charge concerning thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee up, 
lest perchance thou dash thy foot against a stone;"(5) thus concealing a falsehood under the guise of 
Scripture, as is done by all the heretics. For that was indeed written, [namely], "That He hath given His 
angels charge concerning Him;" but "east thyself down from hence" no Scripture said in reference to Him: 
this kind of persuasion the devil produced from himself. The Lord therefore confuted him out of the law, when 
He said, "It is written again, Thou shalt not tempt the LORD thy God;"(6) pointing out by the word contained in 
the law that which is the duty of man, that he should not tempt God; and in regard to Himself, since He 
appeared in human form, [declaring] that He would not tempt the LORD his God. (7) The pride of reason, 
therefore, which was in the serpent, was put to nought by the humility found in the man [Christ], and now twice 
was the devil conquered from Scripture, when he was detected as advising things contrary to God's 
commandment, and was shown to be the enemy of God by [the expression of] his thoughts. He then, having 
been thus signally defeated, and then, as it were, concentrating his forces, drawing up in order all his 
available power for falsehood, in the third place "showed Him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of 
them, "(8) saying, as Luke relates, "All these will I give thee, -for they are delivered to me; and to whom I will, I 
give them,-if thou wilt fall down and worship me." The Lord then, exposing him in his true character, says, 
"Depart, Satan; for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shalt thou serve. "(9) He 
both revealed him by this name, and showed [at the same time] who He Himself was. For the Hebrew word 
"Satan" signifies an apostate. And thus, vanquishing him for the third time, He spurned him from Him finally 
as being conquered out of the law; and there was done away with that infringement of God's commandment 
which had occurred in Adam, by means of the precept of the law, which the Son of man observed, who did 
not transgress the commandment of God. 

3. Who, then, is this Lord God to whom Christ bears witness, whom no man shall tempt, whom all should 
worship, and serve Him alone? It is, beyond all manner of doubt, that God who also gave the law. For these 
things had been predicted in the law, and by the words (sententiam) of the law the Lord showed that the law 
does indeed declare the Word of God from the Father; and the apostate angel of God is destroyed by its 
voice, being exposed in his true colours, and vanquished by the Son of man keeping the commandment of 
God. For as in the beginning he enticed man to transgress his Maker's law, and thereby got him into his 
power; yet his power consists in transgression and apostasy, and with these he bound man [to himself]; so 
again, on the other hand, it was necessary that through man himself he should, when conquered, be bound 
with the same chains with which he had bound man, in order that man, being set free, might return to his Lord, 
leaving to him (Satan) those bonds by which he himself had been fettered, that is, sin. For when Satan is 
bound, man is set free; since "none can enter a strong man's house and spoil his goods, unless he first bind 
the strong man himself."(1) The Lord therefore exposes him as speaking contrary to the word of that God 
who made all things, and subdues him by means of the commandment. Now the law is the commandment of 
God. The Man proves him to be a fugitive from and a transgressor of the law, an apostate also from God. 
After [the Man had done this], the Word bound him securely as a fugitive from Himself, and made spoil of his 
goods, -namely, those men whom he held in bondage, and whom he unjustly used for his own purposes. 
And justly indeed is he led captive, who had led men unjustly into bondage; while man, who had been led 
captive in times past, was rescued from the grasp of his possessor, according to the tender mercy of God 
the Father, who had compassion on His own handiwork, and gave to it salvation, restoring it by means of the 
Word-that is, by Christ— in order that men might learn by actual proof that he receives incorruptibility not of 
himself, but by the free gift of God. 

CHAP. XXII. -THE TRUE LORD AND THE ONE GOD IS DECLARED BY THE LAW, AND 
MANIFESTED BY CHRIST HIS SON IN THE GOSPEL; WHOM ALONE WE SHOULD ADORE, 
AND FROM HIM WE MUST LOOK FOR ALL GOOD THINGS, NOT FROM SATAN. 

1 . Thus then does the Lord plainly show that it was the true Lord and the one God who had been set forth by 
the law; for Him whom the law proclaimed as God, the same did Christ point out as the Father, whom also it 
behoves the disciples of Christ alone to serve. By means of the statements of the law, He put our adversary 
to utter confusion; and the law directs us to praise God the Creator (Demiurgum), and to serve Him alone. 
Since this is the case, we must not seek for another Father besides Him, or above Him, since there is one 
God who justifies the circumcision by faith, and the uncircumcision through faith. (2) For if there were any other 
perfect Father above Him, He (Christ) would by no means have overthrown Satan by means of His words 
and commandments. For one ignorance cannot be done away with by means of another ignorance, any 
more than one defect by another defect. If, therefore, the law is due to ignorance and defect, how could the 
statements contained therein bring to nought the ignorance of the devil, and conquer the strong man? For a 
strong man can be conquered neither by an inferior nor by an equal, but by one possessed of greater 
power. But the Word of God is the superior above all, He who is loudly proclaimed in the law: "Hear, O 
Israel, the LORD thy God is one God;" and, "Thou shalt love the LORD thy God with all thy heart;" and, "Him 
shall thou adore, and Him alone shall thou serve. "(3) Then in the Gospel, casting down the apostasy by 
means of these expressions, He did both overcome the strong man by His Father's voice, and He 
acknowledges the commandment of the law to express His own sentiments, when He says, "Thou shall not 
tempt the LORD thy God. "(4) For He did not confound the adversary by the saying of any other, but by that 
belonging to His own Father, and thus overcame the strong man. 

2. He taught by His commandment that we who have been set free should, when hungry, take that food 
which is given by God; and that, when placed in the exalted position of every grace [that can be received], 
we should not, either by trusting to works of righteousness, or when adorned with super-eminent [gifts of] 
ministration, by any means be lifted up with pride, nor should we tempt God, but should feel humility in all 
things, and have ready to hand [this saying], "Thou shall not tempt the LORD thy God. "(5) As also the 
apostle taught, saying, "Minding not high things, but consenting to things of low estate;"(6) that we should 
neither be ensnared with riches, nor mundane glory, nor present fancy, but should know that we must 
"worship the LORD thy God, and serve Him alone," and give no heed to him who falsely promised things 
not his own, when he said, "All these will I give thee, if, falling down, thou wilt worship me." For he himself 
confesses that to adore him, and to do his will, is to fall from the glory of God. And in what thing either 
pleasant or good can that man who has fallen participate? Or what else can such a person hope for or 
expect, except death? For death is next neighbour to him who has fallen. Hence also it follows that he will not 
give what he has promised. For how can he make grants to him who has fallen? Moreover, since God rules 
over men and him too, and without the will of our Father in heaven not even a sparrow falls to the ground, (1) it 
follows that his declaration, "All these things are delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will I give them," 
proceeds from him when puffed up with pride. For the creation is not subjected to his power, since indeed he 
is himself but one among created things. Nor shall he give away the rule over men to men; but both all other 
things, and all human affairs, are arranged according to God the Father's disposal. Besides, the Lord 
declares that "the devil is a liar from the beginning, and the truth is not in him. "(2) If then he be a liar and the 
truth be not in him, he certainly did not speak truth, but a lie, when he said, "For all these things are delivered 
to me, and to whomsoever I will I give them. "(3) 

CHAP. XXIII. -THE DEVIL IS WELL PRACTISED IN FALSEHOOD, BY WHICH ADAM HAVING 
BEEN LED ASTRAY, SINNED ON THE SIXTH DAY OF THE CREATION, IN WHICH DAY 
ALSO HE HAS BEEN RENEWED BY CHRIST. 

1 . He had indeed been already accustomed to lie against God, for the purpose of leading men astray. For 
at the beginning, when God had given to man a variety of things for food, while He commanded him not to 
eat of one tree only, as the Scripture tells us that God said to Adam: "From every tree which is in the garden 
thou shalt eat food; but from the tree of knowledge of good and evil, from this ye shall not eat: for in the day 
that ye shall eat of it, ye shall die by death;"(4) he then, lying against the Lord, tempted man, as the Scripture 
says that the serpent said to the woman: "Has God indeed said this, Ye shall not eat from every tree of the 
garden?"(5) And when she had exposed the falsehood, and simply related the command, as He had said, 
"From every tree of the garden we shall eat; but of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God 
hath said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die:"(6) when he had [thus] learned from the 
woman the command of God, having brought his cunning into play, he finally deceived her by a falsehood, 
saying, "Ye shall not die by death; for God knew that in the day ye shall eat of it your eyes shall be opened, 
and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil. "(7) In the first place, then, in the garden of God he disputed 
about God, as if God was not there, for he was ignorant of the greatness of God; and then, in the next place, 
after he had learned from the woman that God had said that they should die if they tasted the aforesaid tree, 
opening his mouth, he uttered the third falsehood," Ye shall not die by death." But that God was true, and the 

serpent a liar, was proved by the result, death having passed upon them who had eaten. For along with the 
fruit they did also fall under the power of death, because they did eat in disobedience; and disobedience to 
God entails death. Wherefore, as they became forfeit to death, from that [moment] they were handed over to 
it. 

2. Thus, then, in the day that they did eat, in the same did they die, and became death's debtors, since it was 
one day of the creation. For it is said, "There was made in the evening, and there was made in the morning, 
one day." Now in this same day that they did eat, in that also did they die. But according to the cycle and 
progress of the days, after which one is termed first, another second, and another third, if anybody seeks 
diligently to learn upon what day out of the seven it was that Adam died, he will find it by examining the 
dispensation of the Lord. For by summing up in Himself the whole human race from the beginning to the end, 
He has also summed up its death. From this it is clear that the Lord suffered death, in obedience to His 
Father, upon that day on which Adam died while he disobeyed God. Now he died on the same day in which 
he did eat. For God said, "In that day on which ye shall eat of it, ye shall die by death." The Lord, therefore, 
recapitulating in Himself this day, underwent His sufferings upon the day preceding the Sabbath, that is, the 
sixth day of the creation, on which day man was created; thus granting him a second creation by means of 
His passion, which is that [creation] out of death. And there are some, again, who relegate the death of 
Adam to the thousandth year; for since "a day of the Lord is as a thousand years, "(8) he did not overstep the 
thousand years, but died within them, thus bearing out the sentence of his sin. Whether, therefore, with 
respect to disobedience, which is death; whether [we consider] that, on account of that, they were delivered 
over to death, and made debtors to it; whether with respect to [the fact that on] one and the same day on 
which they ate they also died (for it is one day of the creation); whether [we regard this point], that, with 
respect to this cycle of days, they died on the day in which they did also eat, that is, the day] of the 
preparation, which is termed "the pure supper," that is, the sixth day of the feast, which the Lord also 
exhibited when He suffered on that day; or whether [we reflect] that he (Adam) did not overstep the thousand 
years, but died within their limit-it follows that, in regard to all these significations, God is indeed true. For 
they died who tasted of the tree; and the serpent is proved a liar and a murderer, as the Lord said of him: 
"For he is a murderer from the beginning, and the truth is not in him."(1) 

CHAP. XXIV. -OF THE CONSTANT FALSEHOOD OF THE DEVIL, AND OF THE POWERS 
AND GOVERNMENTS OF THE WORLD, WHICH WE OUGHT TO OBEY, INASMUCH AS 
THEY ARE APPOINTED OF GOD, NOT OF THE DEVIL. 

1 . As therefore the devil lied at the beginning, so did he also in the end, when he said, "All these are 
delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will I give them. "(2) For it is not he who has appointed the kingdoms 
of this world, but God; for "the heart of the king is in the hand of God. "(3) And the Word also says by 
Solomon, "By me kings do reign, and princes administer justice. By me chiefs are raised up, and by me 
kings rule the earth. "(4) Paul the apostle also says upon this same subject: "Be ye subject to all the higher 
powers; for there is no power but of God: now those which are have been ordained of God. "(5) And again, in 
reference to them he says, "For he beareth not the sword in vain; for he is the minister of God, the avenger 
for wrath to him who does evil. "(6) Now, that he spake these words, not in regard to angelical powers, nor of 
invisible rulers-as some venture to expound the passage-but of those of actual human authorities, [he 
shows when] he says, "For this cause pay ye tribute also: for they are God's ministers, doing service for this 
very thing. "(7) This also the Lord confirmed, when He did not do what He was tempted to by the devil; but He 
gave directions that tribute should be paid to the tax-gatherers for Himself and Peter;(8) because "they are 
the ministers of God, serving for this very thing." 

2. For since man, by departing from God, reached such a pitch of fury as even to look upon his brother as 
his enemy, and engaged without fear in every kind of restless conduct, and murder, and avarice; God 
imposed upon mankind the fear of man, as they did not acknowledge the fear of God, in order that, being 
subjected to the authority of men, and kept under restraint by their laws, they might attain to some degree of 
justice, and exercise mutual forbearance through dread of the sword suspended full in their view, as the 
apostle says: "For he beareth not the sword in vain; for he is the minister of God, the avenger for wrath upon 
him who does evil." And for this reason too, magistrates themselves, having laws as a clothing of 
righteousness whenever they act in a just and legitimate manner, shall not be called in question for their 
conduct, nor be liable to punishment. But whatsoever they do to the subversion of justice, iniquitously, and 
impiously, and illegally, and tyrannically, in these things shall they also perish; for the just judgment of God 
comes equally upon all, and in no case is defective. Earthly rule, therefore, has been appointed by God for 
the benefit of nations, (9) and not by the devil, who is never at rest at all, nay, who does not love to see even 
nations conducting themselves after a quiet manner, so that under the fear of human rule, men may not eat 
each other up like fishes; but that, by means of the establishment of laws, they may keep down an excess of 

wickedness among the nations. And considered from this point of view, those who exact tribute from us are 
"God's ministers, serving for this very purpose." 

3. As, then, "the powers that be are ordained of God," it is clear that the devil lied when he said, "These are 
delivered unto me; and to whomsoever I will, I give them." For by the law of the same Being as calls men 
into existence are kings also appointed, adapted for those men who are at the time placed under their 
government. Some of these [rulers] are given for the correction and the benefit of their subjects, and for the 
preservation of justice; but others, for the purposes of fear and punishment and rebuke: others, as [the 
subjects] deserve it, are for deception, disgrace, and pride; while the just judgment of God, as I have 
observed already, passes equally upon all. The devil, however, as he is the apostate angel, can only go to 
this length, as he did at the beginning, [namely] to deceive and lead astray the mind of man into disobeying 
the commandments of God, and gradually to darken the hearts of those who would endeavour to serve him, 
to the forgetting of the true God, but to the adoration of himself as God. 

4. Just as if any one, being an apostate, and seizing in a hostile manner another man's territory, should 
harass the inhabitants of it, in order that he might claim for himself the glory of a king among those ignorant of 
his apostasy and robbery; so likewise also the devil, being one among those angels who are placed over 
the spirit of the air, as the Apostle Paul has declared in his Epistle to the Ephesians,(1) becoming envious of 
man, was rendered an apostate from the divine law: for envy is a thing foreign to God. And as his apostasy 
was exposed by man, and man became the [means of] searching out his thoughts (et examinatio 
sententioe ejus, homo factus est), he has set himself to this with greater and greater determination, in 
opposition to man, envying his life, and wishing to involve him in his own apostate power. The Word of God, 
however, the Maker of all things, conquering him by means of human nature, and showing him to be an 
apostate, has, on the contrary, put him under the power of man. For He says, "Behold, I confer upon you the 
power of treading upon serpents and scorpions, and upon all the power of the enemy, "(2) in order that, as 
he obtained dominion over man by apostasy, so again his apostasy might be deprived of power by means 
of man turning back again to God. 

CHAP. XXV.--THE FRAUD, PRIDE, AND TYRANNICAL KINGDOM OF ANTICHRIST, AS 
DESCRIBED BY DANIEL AND PAUL. 

1 . And not only by the particulars already mentioned, but also by means of the events which shall occur in 
the time of Antichrist is it shown that he, being an apostate and a robber, is anxious to be adored as God; 
and that, although a mere slave, he wishes himself to be proclaimed as a king. For he (Antichrist) being 
endued with all the power of the devil, shall come, not as a righteous king, nor as a legitimate king, [i.e., one] 
in subjection to God, but an impious, unjust, and lawless one; as an apostate, iniquitous and murderous; as 
a robber, concentrating in himself [all] satanic apostasy, and setting aside idols to persuade [men] that he 
himself is God, raising up himself as the only idol, having in himself the multifarious errors of the other idols. 
This he does, in order that they who do [now] worship the devil by means of many abominations, may serve 
himself by this one idol, of whom the apostle thus speaks in the second Epistle to the Thessalonians: 
"Unless there shall come a failing away first, and the man of sin shall be revealed, the son of perdition, who 
opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he sitteth in the 
temple of God, showing himself as if he were God." The apostle therefore clearly points out his apostasy, 
and that he is lifted up above all that is called God, or that is worshipped-that is, above every idol— for these 
are indeed so called by men, but are not [really] gods; and that he will endeavour in a tyrannical manner to 
set himself forth as God. 

2. Moreover, he (the apostle) has also pointed out this which I have shown in many ways, that the temple in 
Jerusalem was made by the direction of the true God. For the apostle himself, speaking in his own person, 
distinctly called it the temple of God. Now I have shown in the third book, that no one is termed God by the 
apostles when speaking for themselves, except Him who truly is God, the Father of our Lord, by whose 
directions the temple which is at Jerusalem was constructed for those purposes which I have already 
mentioned; in which [temple] the enemy shall sit, endeavouring to show himself as Christ, as the Lord also 
declares: "But when ye shall see the abomination of desolation, which has been spoken of by Daniel the 
prophet, standing in the holy place (let him that readeth understand), then let those who are in Judea flee into 
the mountains; and he who is upon the house-top, let him not come down to take anything out of his house: 
for there shall then be great hardship, such as has not been from the beginning of the world until now, nor 
ever shall be."(3) 

3. Daniel too, looking forward to the end of the last kingdom, i.e., the ten last kings, amongst whom the 
kingdom of those men shall be partitioned, and upon whom the son of perdition shall come, declares that 
ten horns shall spring from the beast, and that another little horn shall arise in the midst of them, and that 
three of the former shall be rooted up before his face. He says: "And, behold, eyes were in this horn as the 

eyes of a man, and a mouth speaking great things, and his look was more stout than his fellows. I was 
looking, and this horn made war against the saints, and prevailed against them, until the Ancient of days 
came and gave judgment to the saints of the most high God, and the time came, and the saints obtained the 
kingdom. "(4) Then, further on, in the interpretation of the vision, there was said to him: "The fourth beast shall 
be the fourth kingdom upon earth, which shall excel all other kingdoms, and devour the whole earth, and 
tread it down, and cut it in pieces. And its ten horns are ten kings which shall arise; and after them shall arise 
another, who shall surpass in evil deeds all that were before him, and shall overthrow three kings; and he 
shall speak words against the most high God, and wear out the saints of the most high God, and shall 
purpose to change times and laws; and [everything] shall be given into his hand until a time of times and a 
half time, "(1) that is, for three years and six months, during which time, when he comes, he shall reign over 
the earth. Of whom also the Apostle Paul again, speaking in the second [Epistle] to the Thessalonians, and 
at the same time proclaiming the cause of his advent, thus says: "And then shall the wicked one be 
revealed, whom the Lord Jesus shall slay with the spirit of His mouth, and destroy by the presence of His 
coming; whose coming [i.e., the wicked one's] is after the working of Satan, in all power, and signs, and 
portents of lies, and with all deceivableness of wickedness for those who perish; because they did not 
receive the love of the truth, that they might be saved. And therefore God will send them the working of error, 
that they may believe a lie; that they all may be judged who did not believe the truth, but gave consent to 
iniquity,"(2) 

4. The Lord also spoke as follows to those who did not believe in Him: "I have come in my Father's name, 
and ye have not received Me: when another shall come in his own name, him ye will receive, "(3) calling 
Antichrist "the other," because he is alienated from the Lord. This is also the unjust judge, whom the Lord 
mentioned as one "who feared not God, neither regarded man, "(4) to whom the widow fled in her 
forgetfulness of God,-that is, the earthly Jerusalem,-to be avenged of her adversary. Which also he shall 
do in the time of his kingdom: he shall remove his kingdom into that [city], and shall sit in the temple of God, 
leading astray those who worship him, as if he were Christ. To this purpose Daniel says again: "And he shall 
desolate the holy place; and sin has been given for a sacrifice, (5) and righteousness been cast away in the 
earth, and he has been active (fecit), and gone on prosperously. "(6) And the angel Gabriel, when explaining 
his vision, states with regard to this person: "And towards the end of their kingdom a king of a most fierce 
countenance shall arise, one understanding [dark] questions, and exceedingly powerful, full of wonders; 
and he shall corrupt, direct, influence (faciet), and put strong men down, the holy people likewise; and his 
yoke shall be directed as a wreath [round their neck]; deceit shall be in his hand, and he shall be lifted up in 
his heart: he shall also ruin many by deceit, and lead many to perdition, bruising them in his hand like 
eggs. "(7) And then he points out the time that his tyranny shall last, during which the saints shall be put to 
flight, they who offer a pure sacrifice unto God: "And in the midst of the week," he says, "the sacrifice and the 
libation shall be taken away, and the abomination of desolation [shall be brought] into the temple: even unto 
the consummation of the time shall the desolation be complete. "(8) Now three years and six months 
constitute the half-week. 

5. From all these passages are revealed to us, not merely the particulars of the apostasy, and [the doings] 
of him who concentrates in himself every satanic error, but also, that there is one and the same God the 
Father, who was declared by the prophets, but made manifest by Christ. For if what Daniel prophesied 
concerning the end has been confirmed by the Lord, when He said, "When ye shall see the abomination of 
desolation, which has been spoken of by Daniel the prophet"(9) (and the angel Gabriel gave the 
interpretation of the visions to Daniel, and he is the archangel of the Creator (Demiurgi), who also 
proclaimed to Mary the visible coining and the incarnation of Christ), then one and the same God is most 
manifestly pointed out, who sent the prophets, and made promise(10) of the Son, and called us into His 
knowledge. 

CHAP. XXVI. --JOHN AND DANIEL HAVE PREDICTED THE DISSOLUTION AND 
DESOLATION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, WHICH SHALL PRECEDE THE END OF THE 
WORLD AND THE ETERNAL KINGDOM OF CHRIST. THE GNOSTICS ARE REFUTED, 
THOSE TOOLS OF SATAN, WHO INVENT ANOTHER FATHER DIFFERENT FROM THE 
CREATOR. 

1 . In a still clearer light has John, in the Apocalypse, indicated to the Lord's disciples what shall happen in 
the last times, and concerning the ten kings who shall then arise, among whom the empire which now rules 
[the earth] shall be partitioned. He teaches us what the ten horns shall be which were seen by Daniel, telling 
us that thus it had been said to him: "And the ten horns which thou sawest are ten kings, who have received 
no kingdom as yet, but shall receive power as if kings one hour with the beast. These have one mind, and 
give their strength and power to the beast. These shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall 

overcome them, because He is the Lord of lords and the King of kings. "(11) It is manifest, therefore, that of 
these [potentates], he who is to come shall slay three, and subject the remainder to his power, and that he 
shall be himself the eighth among them. And they shall lay Babylon waste, and burn her with fire, and shall 
give their kingdom to the beast, and put the Church to flight. After that they shall be destroyed by the coming 
of our Lord. For that the kingdom must be divided, and thus come to ruin, the Lord [declares when He] says: 
"Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation, and every city or house divided against itself 
shall not stand. "(1) It must be, therefore, that the kingdom, the city, and the house be divided into ten; and for 
this reason He has already foreshadowed the partition and division [which shall take place]. Daniel also 
says particularly, that the end of the fourth kingdom consists in the toes of the image seen by 
Nebuchadnezzar, upon which came the stone cut out without hands; and as he does himself say: "The feet 
were indeed the one part iron, the other part clay, until the stone was cut out without hands, and struck the 
image upon the iron and clay feet, and dashed them into pieces, even to the end. "(2) Then afterwards, when 
interpreting this, he says: "And as thou sawest the feet and the toes, partly indeed of clay, and partly of iron, 
the kingdom shall be divided, and there shall be in it a root of iron, as thou sawest iron mixed with baked 
clay. And the toes were indeed the one part iron, but the other part clay. "(3) The ten toes, therefore, are 
these ten kings, among whom the kingdom shall be partitioned, of whom some indeed shall be strong and 
active, or energetic; others, again, shall be sluggish and useless, and shall not agree; as also Daniel says: 
"Some part of the kingdom shall be strong, and part shall be broken from it. As thou sawest the iron mixed 
with the baked clay, there shall be minglings among the human race, but no cohesion one with the other, just 
as iron cannot be welded on to pottery ware. "(4) And since an end shall take place, he says: "And in the 
days of these kings shall the God of heaven raise up a kingdom which shall never decay, and His kingdom 
shall not be left to another people. It shall break in pieces and shatter all kingdoms, and shall itself be 
exalted for ever. As thou sawest that the stone was cut without hands from the mountain, and brake in pieces 
the baked clay, the iron, the brass, the silver, and the gold, God has pointed out to the king what shall come 
to pass after these things; and the dream is true, and the interpretation trustworthy. "(5) 
2. If therefore the great God showed future things by Daniel, and confirmed them by His Son; and if Christ is 
the stone which is cut out without hands, who shall destroy temporal kingdoms, and introduce an eternal 
one, which is the resurrection of the just; as he declares, "The God of heaven shall raise up a kingdom 
which shall never be destroyed, "-let those thus confuted come to their senses, who reject the Creator 
(Demiurgum), and do not agree that the prophets were sent beforehand from the same Father from whom 
also the Lord came, but who assert that prophecies originated from diverse powers. For those things which 
have been predicted by the Creator alike through all the prophets has Christ fulfilled in the end, ministering 
to His Father's will, and completing His dispensations with regard to the human race. Let those persons, 
therefore, who blaspheme the Creator, either by openly expressed words, such as the disciples of Marcion, 
or by a perversion of the sense [of Scripture], as those of Valentinus and all the Gnostics falsely so called, 
be recognised as agents of Satan by all those who worship God; through whose agency Satan now, and 
not before, has been seen to speak against God, even Him who has prepared eternal fire for every kind of 
apostasy. For he did not venture to blaspheme his Lord openly of himself; as also in the beginning he led 
man astray through the instrumentality of the serpent, concealing himself as it were from God. Truly has 
Justin remarked:(6) That before the Lord's appearance Satan never dared to blaspheme God, inasmuch 
as he did not yet know his own sentence, because it was contained in parables and allegories; but that after 
the Lord's appearance, when he had clearly ascertained from the words of Christ and His apostles that 
eternal fire has been prepared for him as he apostatized from God of his own free-will, and likewise for all 
who unrepentant continue in the apostasy, he now blasphemes, by means of such men, the Lord who brings 
judgment [upon him] as being already condemned, and imputes the guilt of his apostasy to his Maker, not 
to his own voluntary disposition. Just as it is with those who break the laws, when punishment overtakes 
them: they throw the blame upon those who frame the laws, but not upon themselves. In like manner do 
those men, filled with a satanic spirit, bring innumerable accusations against our Creator, who has both 
given to us the spirit of life, and established a law adapted for all; and they will not admit that the judgment of 
God is just. Wherefore also they set about imagining some other Father who neither cares about nor 
exercises a providence over our affairs, nay, one who even approves of all sins. 

CHAP. XXVII. --THE FUTURE JUDGMENT BY CHRIST. COMMUNION WITH AND 
SEPARATION FROM THE DIVINE BEING. THE ETERNAL PUNISHMENT OF 
UNBELIEVERS. 

1. If the Father, then, does not exercise judgment, [it follows] that judgment does not belong to Him, or that 
He consents to all those actions which take place; and if He does not judge, all persons will be equal, and 
accounted in the same condition. The advent of Christ will therefore be without an object, yea, absurd, 

inasmuch as [in that case] He exercises no judicial power. For "He came to divide a man against his father, 
and the daughter against the mother, and the daughter-in-law against the mother-in-law;"(1) and when two 
are in one bed, to take the one, and to leave the other; and of two women grinding at the mill, to take one 
and leave the other:(2) [also] at the time of the end, to order the reapers to collect first the tares together, and 
bind them in bundles, and burn them with unquenchable fire, but to gather up the wheat into the barn;(3) and 
to call the lambs into the kingdom prepared for them, but to send the goats into everlasting fire, which has 
been prepared by His Father for the devil and his angels. (4) And why is this? Has the Word come for the 
ruin and for the resurrection of many? For the ruin, certainly, of those who do not believe Him, to whom also 
He has threatened a greater damnation in the judgment-day than that of Sodom and Gomorrah;(5) but for 
the resurrection of believers, and those who do the will of His Father in heaven. If then the advent of the Son 
comes indeed alike to all, but is for the purpose of judging, and separating the believing from the 
unbelieving, since, as those who believe do His will agreeably to their own choice, and as, [also] agreeably 
to their own choice, the disobedient do not consent to His doctrine; it is manifest that His Father has made all 
in a like condition, each person having a choice of his own, and a free understanding; and that He has 
regard to all things, and exercises a providence over all, "making His sun to rise upon the evil and on the 
good, and sending rain upon the just and unjust."(6) 

2. And to as many as continue in their love towards God, does He grant communion with Him. But 
communion with God is life and light, and the enjoyment of all the benefits which He has in store. But on as 
many as, according to their own choice, depart from God. He inflicts that separation from Himself which they 
have chosen of their own accord. But separation from God is death, and separation from light is darkness; 
and separation from God consists in the loss of all the benefits which He has in store. Those, therefore, who 
cast away by apostasy these forementioned things, being in fact destitute of all good, do experience every 
kind of punishment. God, however, does not punish them immediately of Himself, but that punishment falls 
upon them because they are destitute of all that is good. Now, good things are eternal and without end with 
God, and therefore the loss of these is also eternal and never-ending. It is in this matter just as occurs in the 
case of a flood of light: those who have blinded themselves, or have been blinded by others, are for ever 
deprived of the enjoyment of light. It is not, [however], that the light has inflicted upon them the penalty of 
blindness, but it is that the blindness itself has brought calamity upon them: and therefore the Lord declared, 
"He that believeth in Me is not condemned, "(7) that is, is not separated from God, for he is united to God 
through faith. On the other hand, He says, "He that believeth not is condemned already, because he has not 
believed in the name of the only-begotten Son of God;" that is, he separated himself from God of his own 
accord. "For this is the condemnation, that light is come into this world, and men have loved darkness rather 
than light. For every one who doeth evil hateth the light, and cometh not to the light, lest his deeds should be 
reproved. But he that doeth truth cometh to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that he has 
wrought them in God." 

CHAP. XXVIII. -THE DISTINCTION TO BE MADE BETWEEN THE RIGHTEOUS AND THE 
WICKED. THE FUTURE APOSTASY IN THE TIME OF ANTI-CHRIST, AND THE END OF 
THE WORLD. 

1. Inasmuch, then, as in this world (<greek>aiwni</greek>) some persons betake themselves to the light, 
and by faith unite themselves with God, but others shun the light, and separate themselves from God, the 
Word of God comes preparing a fit habitation for both. For those indeed who are in the light, that they may 
derive enjoyment from it, and from the good things contained in it; but for those in darkness, that they may 
partake in its calamities. And on this account He says, that those upon the right hand are called into the 
kingdom of heaven, but that those on the left He will send into eternal fire for they have deprived themselves 
of all good. 

2. And for this reason the apostle says: "Because they received not the love of God, that they might be 
saved, therefore God shall also send them the operation of error, that they may believe a lie, that they all 
may be judged who have not believed the truth, but consented to unrighteousness. "(1) For when he 
(Antichrist) is come, and of his own accord concentrates in his own person the apostasy, and accomplishes 
whatever he shall do according to his own will and choice, sitting also in the temple of God, so that his 
dupes may adore him as the Christ; wherefore also shall he deservedly "be cast into the lake of fire:"(2) [this 
will happen according to divine appointment], God by His prescience foreseeing all this, and at the proper 
time sending such a man, "that they may believe a lie, that they all may be judged who did not believe the 
truth, but consented to unrighteousness;" whose coming John has thus described in the Apocalypse: "And 
the beast which I had seen was like unto a leopard, and his feet as of a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of 
a lion; and the dragon conferred his own power upon him, and his throne, and great might. And one of his 
heads was as it were slain unto death; and his deadly wound was healed, and all the world wondered after 

the beast. And they worshipped the dragon because he gave power to the beast; and they worshipped the 
beast, saying, Who is like unto this beast, and who is able to make war with him? And there was given unto 
him a mouth speaking great things, and blasphemy and power was given to him during forty and two 
months. And he opened his mouth for blasphemy against God, to blaspheme His name and His tabernacle, 
and those who dwell in heaven. And power was given him over every tribe, and people, and tongue, and 
nation. And all who dwell upon the earth worshipped him, [every one] whose name was not written in the 
book of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. If any one have ears, let him hear. If any one shall 
lead into captivity, he shall go into captivity. If any shall slay with the sword, he must be slain with the sword. 
Here is the endurance and the faith of the saints. "(3) After this he likewise describes his armour-bearer, 
whom he also terms a false prophet: "He spake as a dragon, and exercised all the power of the first beast 
in his sight, and caused the earth, and those that dwell therein, to adore the first beast, whose deadly wound 
was healed. And he shall perform great wonders, so that he can even cause fire to descend from heaven 
upon the earth in the sight of men, and he shall lead the inhabitants of the earth astray. "(4) Let no one 
imagine that he performs these wonders by divine power, but by the working of magic. And we must not be 
surprised if, since the demons and apostate spirits are at his service, he through their means performs 
wonders, by which he leads the inhabitants of the earth astray. John says further: "And he shall order an 
image of the beast to be made, and he shall give breath to the image, so that the image shall speak; and he 
shall cause those to be slain who will not adore it." He says also: "And he will cause a mark [to be put] in the 
forehead and in the fight hand, that no one may be able to buy or sell, unless he who has the mark of the 
name of the beast or the number of his name; and the number is six hundred and sixty-six, "(5) that is, six 
times a hundred, six times ten, and six units. [He gives this] as a summing up of the whole of that apostasy 
which has taken place during six thousand years. 

3. For in as many days as this world was made, in so many thousand years shall it be concluded. And for 
this reason the Scripture says: "Thus the heaven and the earth were finished, and all their adornment. And 
God brought to a conclusion upon the sixth day the works that He had made; and God rested upon the 
seventh day from all His works. "(6) This is an account of the things formerly created, as also it is a prophecy 
of what is to come. For the day of the Lord is as a thousand years;(7) and in six days created things were 
completed: it is evident, therefore, that they will come to an end at the sixth thousand year. 

4. And therefore throughout all time, man, having been moulded at the beginning by the hands of God, that 
is, of the Son and of the Spirit, is made after the image and likeness of God: the chaff, indeed, which is the 
apostasy, being cast away; but the wheat, that is, those who bring forth fruit to God in faith, being gathered 
into the barn. And for this cause tribulation is necessary for those who are saved, that having been after a 
manner broken up, and rendered fine, and sprinkled over by the patience of the Word of God, and set on 
fire [for purification], they may be fitted for the royal banquet. As a certain man of ours said, when he was 
condemned to the wild beasts because of his testimony with respect to God: "I am the wheat of Christ, and 
am ground by the teeth of the wild beasts, that I may be found the pure bread of God. "(8) 

CHAP.XXIX.~ALL THINGS HAVE BEEN CREATED FOR THE SERVICE OF MAN. THE 
DECEITS, WICKEDNESS, AND APOSTATE POWER OF ANTICHRIST. THIS WAS 
PREFIGURED AT THE DELUGE, AS AFTERWARDS BY THE PERSECUTION OF 
SHADRACH, MESHACH, AND ABEDNEGO. 

1 . In the previous books I have set forth the causes for which God permitted these things to be made, and 
have pointed out that all such have been created for the benefit of that human nature which is saved, 
ripening for immortality that which is [possessed] of its own free will and its own power, and preparing and 
rendering it more adapted for eternal subjection to God. And therefore the creation is suited to [the wants of] 
man; for man was not made for its sake, but creation for the sake of man. Those nations however, who did 
not of themselves raise up their eyes unto heaven, nor returned thanks to their Maker, nor wished to behold 
the light of truth, but who were like blind mice concealed in the depths of ignorance, the word justly reckons 
"as waste water from a sink, and as the turning-weight of a balance-in fact, as nothing;"(1) so far useful and 
serviceable to the just, as stubble conduces towards the growth of the wheat, and its straw, by means of 
combustion, serves for working gold. And therefore, when in the end the Church shall be suddenly caught up 
from this, it is said, "There shall be tribulation such as has not been since the beginning, neither shall be. "(2) 
For this is the last contest of the righteous, in which, when they overcome they are crowned with incorruption. 

2. And there is therefore in this beast, when he comes, a recapitulation made of all sorts of iniquity and of 
every deceit, in order that all apostate power, flowing into and being shut up in him, may be sent into the 
furnace of fire. Fittingly, therefore, shall his name possess the number six hundred and sixty-six, since he 
sums up in his own person all the commixture of wickedness which took place previous to the deluge, due 
to the apostasy of the angels. For Noah was six hundred years old when the deluge came upon the earth, 

sweeping away the rebellious world, for the sake of that most infamous generation which lived in the times of 
Noah. And [Antichrist] also sums up every error of devised idols since the flood, together with the slaying of 
the prophets and the cutting off of the just. For that image which was set up by Nebuchadnezzar had indeed 
a height of sixty cubits, while the breadth was six cubits; on account of which Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, 
when they did not worship it, were cast into a furnace of fire, pointing out prophetically, by what happened to 
them, the wrath against the righteous which shall arise towards the [time of the] end. For that image, taken as 
a whole, was a prefiguring of this man's coming, decreeing that he should undoubtedly himself alone be 
worshipped by all men. Thus, then, the six hundred years of Noah, in whose time the deluge occurred 
because of the apostasy, and the number of the cubits of the image for which these just men were sent into 
the fiery furnace, do indicate the number of the name of that man in whom is concentrated the whole 
apostasy of six thousand years, and unrighteousness, and wickedness, and false prophecy, and 
deception; for which things' sake a cataclysm of fire shall also come [upon the earth]. 

CHAP. XXX. -ALTHOUGH CERTAIN AS TO THE NUMBER OF THE NAME OF ANTICHRIST, 
YET WE SHOULD COME TO NO RASH CONCLUSIONS AS TO THE NAME ITSELF, 
BECAUSE THIS NUMBER IS CAPABLE OF BEING FITTED TO MANY NAMES. REASONS 
FOR THIS POINT BEING RESERVED BY THE HOLY SPIRIT. ANTICHRIST'S REIGN AND 
DEATH. 

1. Such, then, being the state of the case, and this number being found in all the most approved and ancient 
copies(3) [of the Apocalypse], and those men who saw John face to face bearing their testimony [to it]; while 
reason also leads us to conclude that the number of the name of the beast, [if reckoned] according to the 
Greek mode of calculation by the [value of] the letters contained in it, will amount to six hundred and sixty 
and six; that is, the number of tens shall be equal to that of the hundreds, and the number of hundreds equal 
to that of the units (for that number which [expresses] the digit six being adhered to throughout, indicates the 
recapitulations of that apostasy, taken in its full extent, which occurred at the beginning, during the 
intermediate periods, and which shall take place at the end),-l do not know how it is that some have erred 
following the ordinary mode of speech, and have vitiated the middle number in the name, deducting the 
amount of fifty from it, so that instead of six decads they will have it that there is but one. [I am inclined to think 
that this occurred through the fault of the copyists, as is wont to happen, since numbers also are expressed 
by letters; so that the Greek letter which expresses the number sixty was easily expanded into the letter lota 
of the Greeks.](4) Others then received this reading without examination; some in their simplicity, and upon 
their own responsibility, making use of this number expressing one decad; while some, in their inexperience, 
have ventured to seek out a name which should contain the erroneous and spurious number. Now, as 
regards those who have done this in simplicity, and without evil intent, we are at liberty to assume that 
pardon will be granted them by God. But as for those who, for the sake of vainglory, lay it down for certain 
that names containing the spurious number are to be accepted, and affirm that this name, hit upon by 
themselves, is that of him who is to come; such persons shall not come forth without loss, because they 
have led into error both themselves and those who confided in them. Now, in the first place, it is loss to 
wander from the truth, and to imagine that as being the case which is not; then again, as there shall be no 
light punishment [inflicted] upon him who either adds or subtracts anything from the Scripture, (1) under that 
such a person must necessarily fall. Moreover, another danger, by no means trifling, shall overtake those 
who falsely presume that they know the name of Antichrist. For if these men assume one [number], when this 
[Antichrist] shall come having another, they will be easily led away by him, as supposing him not to be the 
expected one, who must be guarded against. 

2. These men, therefore, ought to learn [what really is the state of the case], and go back to the true number 
of the name, that they be not reckoned among false prophets. But, knowing the sure number declared by 
Scripture, that is, six hundred sixty and six, let them await, in the first place, the division of the kingdom into 
ten; then, in the next place, when these kings are reigning, and beginning to set their affairs in order, and 
advance their kingdom, [let them learn] to acknowledge that he who shall come claiming the kingdom for 
himself, and shall terrify those men of whom we have been speaking, having a name containing the 
aforesaid number, is truly the abomination of desolation. This, too, the apostle affirms: "When they shall say, 
Peace and safety, then sudden destruction shall come upon them. "(2) And Jeremiah does not merely point 
out his sudden coming, but he even indicates the tribe from which he shall come, where he says, "We shall 
hear the voice of his swift horses from Dan; the whole earth shall be moved by the voice of the neighing of 
his galloping horses: he shall also come and devour the earth, and the fulness thereof, the city also, and 
they that dwell therein. "(3) This, too, is the reason that this tribe is not reckoned in the Apocalypse along with 
those which are saved. (4) 

3. It is therefore more certain, and less hazardous, to await the fulfilment of the prophecy, than to be making 

surmises, and casting about for any names that may present themselves, inasmuch as many names can be 
found possessing the number mentioned; and the same question will, after all, remain unsolved. For if there 
are many names found possessing this number, it will be asked which among them shall the coming man 
bear. It is not through a want of names containing the number of that name that I say this, but on account of 
the fear of God, and zeal for the truth: for the name Evanthas 

(E<greek>U</greek>AN<greek>Q</greek>A<greek>S</greek>) contains the required number, but I make 
no allegation regarding it. Then also Lateinos (<greek>L</greek>ATEINO<greek>S</greek>) has the 
number six hundred and sixty-six; and it is a very probable [solution], this being the name of the last 
kingdom [of the four seen by Daniel]. For the Latins are they who at present bear rule:(5) I will not, however, 
make any boast over this [coincidence]. Teitan too, (TEITAN, the first syllable being written with the two 
Greek vowels <greek>e</greek> and <greek>i</greek>), among all the names which are found among us, 
is rather worthy of credit. For it has in itself the predicted number, and is composed of six letters, each 
syllable containing three letters; and [the word itself] is ancient, and removed from ordinary use; for among 
our kings we find none bearing this name Titan, nor have any of the idols which are worshipped in public 
among the Greeks and barbarians this appellation. Among many persons, too, this name is accounted 
divine, so that even the sun is termed "Titan" by those who do now possess [the rule]. This word, too, 
contains a certain outward appearance of vengeance, and of one inflicting merited punishment because he 
(Antichrist) pretends that he vindicates the oppressed. (6) And besides this, it is an ancient name, one worthy 
of credit, of royal dignity, and still further, a name belonging to a tyrant. Inasmuch, then, as this name "Titan" 
has so much to recommend it, there is a strong degree of probability, that from among the many [names 
suggested], we infer, that perchance he who is to come shall be called "Titan." We will not, however, incur 
the risk of pronouncing positively as to the name of Antichrist; for if it were necessary that his name should 
be distinctly revealed in this present time, it would have been announced by him who beheld the 
apocalyptic vision. For that was seen no very long time since, but almost in our day, towards the end of 
Domitian's reign. 

4. But he indicates the number of the name now, that when this man comes we may avoid him, being aware 
who he is: the name, however, is suppressed, because it is not worthy of being proclaimed by the Holy 
Spirit. For if it had been declared by Him, he (Antichrist) might perhaps continue for a long period. But now 
as "he was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the abyss, and goes into perdition, "(1) as one who has no 
existence; so neither has his name been declared, for the name of that which does not exist is not 
proclaimed. But when this Antichrist shall have devastated all things in this world, he will reign for three years 
and six months, and sit in the temple at Jerusalem; and then the Lord will come from heaven in the clouds, in 
the glory of the Father, sending this man and those who follow him into the lake of fire; but bringing in for the 
righteous the times of the kingdom, that is, the rest, the hallowed seventh day; and restoring to Abraham the 
promised inheritance, in which kingdom the Lord declared, that "many coming from the east and from the 
west should sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. "(2) 

CHAP. XXXI.-THE PRESERVATION OF OUR BODIES IS CONFIRMED BY THE 
RESURRECTION AND ASCENSION OF CHRIST: THE SOULS OF THE SAINTS DURING 
THE INTERMEDIATE PERIOD ARE IN A STATE OF EXPECTATION OF THAT TIME WHEN 
THEY SHALL RECEIVE THEIR PERFECT AND CONSUMMATED GLORY. 

1 . Since, again, some who are reckoned among the orthodox go beyond the pre-arranged plan for the 
exaltation of the just, and are ignorant of the methods by which they are disciplined beforehand for 
incorruption, they thus entertain heretical opinions. For the heretics, despising the handiwork of God, and not 
admitting the salvation of their flesh, while they also treat the promise of God contemptuously, and pass 
beyond God altogether in the sentiments they form, affirm that immediately upon their death they shall pass 
above the heavens and the Demiurge, and go to the Mother (Achamoth) or to that Father whom they have 
feigned. Those persons, therefore, who disallow a resurrection affecting the whole man (universam 
reprobant resurrectionem), and as far as in them lies remove it from the midst [of the Christian scheme], how 
can they be wondered at, if again they know nothing as to the plan of the resurrection? For they do not 
choose to understand, that if these things are as they say, the Lord Himself, in whom they profess to believe, 
did not rise again upon the third day; but immediately upon His expiring on the cross, undoubtedly departed 
on high, leaving His body to the earth. But the case was, that for three days He dwelt in the place where the 
dead were, as the prophet says concerning Him: "And the Lord remembered His dead saints who slept 
formerly in the land of sepulture; and He descended to them, to rescue and save them. "(3) And the Lord 
Himself says, "As Jonas remained three days and three nights in the whale's belly, so shall the Son of man 
be in the heart of the earth. "(4) Then also the apostle says, "But when He ascended, what is it but that He 
also descended into the lower parts of the earth?"(5) This, too, David says when prophesying of Him, "And 

thou hast delivered my soul from the nethermost hell;"(6) and on His rising again the third day, He said to 
Mary, who was the first to see and to worship Him, "Touch Me not, for I have not yet ascended to the Father; 
but go to the disciples, and say unto them, I ascend unto My Father, and unto your Father."(7) 
2. If, then, the Lord observed the law of the dead, that He might become the first-begotten from the dead, and 
tarried until the third day "in the lower parts of the earth;"(8) then afterwards rising in the flesh, so that He even 
showed the print of the nails to His disciples, (9) He thus ascended to the Father;-[if all these things 
occurred, I say], how must these men not be put to confusion, who allege that "the lower parts" refer to this 
world of ours, but that their tuner man, leaving the body here, ascends into the super-celestial place? For as 
the Lord "went away in the midst of the shadow of death, "(10) where the souls of the dead were, yet 
afterwards arose in the body, and after the resurrection was taken up [into heaven], it is manifest that the 
souls of His disciples also, upon whose account the Lord underwent these things, shall go away into the 
invisible place allotted to them by God, and there remain until the resurrection, awaiting that event; then 
receiving their bodies, and rising in their entirety, that is bodily, just as the Lord arose, they shall come thus 
into the presence of God. "For no disciple is above the Master, but every one that is perfect shall be as his 
Master."(1 1) As our Master, therefore, did not at once depart, taking flight [to heaven], but awaited the time of 
His resurrection prescribed by the Father, which had been also shown forth through Jonas, and rising again 
after three days was taken up [to heaven]; so ought we also to await the time of our resurrection prescribed 
by God and foretold by the prophets, and so, rising, be taken up, as many as the Lord shall account worthy 
of this [privilege]. (1) 

CHAP. XXXII. -IN THAT FLESH IN WHICH THE SAINTS HAVE SUFFERED SO MANY 
AFFLICTIONS, THEY SHALL RECEIVE THE FRUITS OF THEIR LABOURS; ESPECIALLY 
SINCE ALL CREATION WAITS FOR THIS, AND GOD PROMISES IT TO ABRAHAM AND HIS 
SEED. 

1. Inasmuch, therefore, as the opinions of certain [orthodox persons] are derived from heretical discourses, 
they are both ignorant of God's dispensations, and of the mystery of the resurrection of the just, and of the 
[earthly] kingdom which is the commencement of incorruption, by means of which kingdom those who shall 
be worthy are accustomed gradually to partake of the divine nature (capere Deum(2)); and it is necessary 
to tell them respecting those things, that it behoves the righteous first to receive the promise of the 
inheritance which God promised to the fathers, and to reign in it, when they rise again to behold God in this 
creation which is renovated, and that the judgment should take place afterwards. For it is just that in that very 
creation in which they toiled or were afflicted, being proved in every way by suffering, they should receive 
the reward of their suffering; and that in the creation in which they were slain because of their love to God, in 
that they should be revived again; and that in the creation in which they endured servitude, in that they 
should reign. For God is rich in all things, and all things are His. It is fitting, therefore, that the creation itself, 
being restored to its primeval condition, should without restraint be under the dominion of the righteous; and 
the apostle has made this plain in the Epistle to the Romans, when he thus speaks: "For the expectation of 
the creature waiteth for the manifestation of the sons of God. For the creature has been subjected to vanity, 
not willingly, but by reason of him who hath subjected the same in hope; since the creature itself shall also 
be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. "(3) 

2. Thus, then, the promise of God, which He gave to Abraham, remains stedfast. For thus He said: "Lift up 
thine eyes, and look from this place where now thou art, towards the north and south, and east and west. For 
all the earth which thou seest, I will give to thee and to thy seed, even for ever."(4) And again He says, 
"Arise, and go through the length and breadth of the land, since I will give it unto thee;"(5) and [yet] he did not 
receive an inheritance in it, not even a footstep, but was always a stranger and a pilgrim therein. (6) And 
upon the death of Sarah his wife, when the Hittites were willing to bestow upon him a place where he might 
bury her, he declined it as a gift, but bought the burying-place (giving for it four hundred talents of silver) from 
Ephron the son of Zohar the Hittite.(7) Thus did he await patiently the promise of God, and was unwilling to 
appear to receive from men, what God had promised to give him, when He said again to him as follows: "I 
will give this land to thy seed, from the river of Egypt even unto the great river Euphrates. "(8) If, then, God 
promised him the inheritance of the land, yet he did not receive it during all the time of his sojourn there, it 
must be, that together with his seed, that is, those who fear God and believe in Him, he shall receive it at the 
resurrection of the just. For his seed is the Church, which receives the adoption to God through the Lord, as 
John the Baptist said: "For God is able from the stones to raise up children to Abraham. "(9) Thus also the 
apostle says in the Epistle to the Galatians: "But ye, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of the 
promise. "(1 0) And again, in the same Epistle, he plainly declares that they who have believed in Christ do 
receive Christ, the promise to Abraham thus saying, "The promises were spoken to Abraham, and to his 
seed. Now He does not say, And of seeds, as if [He spake] of many, but as of one, And to thy seed, which 

is Christ."(1 1) And again, confirming his former words, he says, "Even as Abraham believed God, and it was 
accounted to him for righteousness. Know ye therefore, that they which are of faith are the children of 
Abraham. But the Scripture, fore-seeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, declared to 
Abraham beforehand, That in thee shall all nations be blessed. So then they which are of faith shall be 
blessed with faithful Abraham. "(12) Thus, then, they who are of faith shall be blessed with faithful Abraham, 
and these are the children of Abraham. Now God made promise of the earth to Abraham and his seed; yet 
neither Abraham nor his seed, that is, those who are justified by faith, do now receive any inheritance in it; 
but they shall receive it at the resurrection of the just. For God is true and faithful; and on this account He 
said, "Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth. "(1) 

CHAP. XXXIII. -FURTHER PROOFS OF THE SAME PROPOSITION, DRAWN FROM THE 
PROMISES MADE BY CHRIST, WHEN HE DECLARED THAT HE WOULD DRINK OF THE 
FRUIT OF THE VINE WITH HIS DISCIPLES IN HIS FATHER'S KINGDOM, WHILE AT THE 
SAME TIME HE PROMISED TO REWARD THEM AN HUNDRED-FOLD, AND TO MAKE 
THEM PARTAKE OF BANQUETS. THE BLESSING PRONOUNCED BY JACOB HAD 
POINTED OUT THIS ALREADY, AS PAPIAS AND THE ELDERS HAVE INTERPRETED IT. 

1 . For this reason, when about to undergo His sufferings, that He might declare to Abraham and those with 
him the glad tidings of the inheritance being thrown open, [Christ], after He had given thanks while holding 
the cup, and had drunk of it, and given it to the disciples, said to them: "Drink ye all of it: this is My blood of 
the new covenant, which shall be shed for many for the remission of sins. But I say unto you, I will not drink 
henceforth of the fruit of this vine, until that day when I will drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom."(2) 
Thus, then, He will Himself renew the inheritance of the earth, and will re-organize the mystery of the glory of 
[His] sons; as David says, "He who hath renewed the face of the earth. "(3) He promised to drink of the fruit of 
the vine with His disciples, thus indicating both these points: the inheritance of the earth in which the new fruit 
of the vine is drunk, and the resurrection of His disciples in the flesh. For the new flesh which rises again is 
the same which also received the new cup. And He cannot by any means be understood as drinking of the 
fruit of the vine when settled down with his [disciples] above in a super-celestial place; nor, again, are they 
who drink it devoid of flesh, for to drink of that which flows from the vine pertains to flesh, and not spirit. 

2. And for this reason the Lord declared, "When thou makest a dinner or a supper, do not call thy friends, nor 
thy neighbours, nor thy kinsfolk, lest they ask thee in return, and so repay thee. But call the lame, the blind, 
and the poor, and thou shall be blessed, since they cannot recompense thee, but a recompense shall be 
made thee at the resurrection of the just. "(4) And again He says, "Whosoever shall have left lands, or 
houses, or parents, or brethren, or children because of Me, he shall receive in this world an hundred-fold, 
and in that to come he shall inherit eternal life. "(5) For what are the hundred-fold [rewards] in this word, the 
entertainments given to the poor, and the suppers for which a return is made? These are [to take place] in 
the times of the kingdom, that is, upon the seventh day, which has been sanctified, in which God rested from 
all the works which He created, which is the true Sabbath of the righteous, which they shall not be engaged 
in any earthly occupation; but shall have a table at hand prepared for them by God, supplying them with all 
sorts of dishes. 

3. The blessing of Isaac with which he blessed his younger son Jacob has the same meaning, when he 
says, "Behold, the smell of my son is as the smell of a full field which the Lord has blessed. "(6) But "the field 
is the world. "(7) And therefore he added, "God give to thee of the dew of heaven, and of the fatness of the 
earth, plenty of corn and wine. And let the nations serve thee, and kings bow down to thee; and be thou lord 
over thy brother, and thy father's sons shall bow down to thee: cursed shall be he who shall curse thee, and 
blessed shall be he who shall bless thee. "(8) If any one, then, does not accept these things as referring to 
the appointed kingdom, he must fall into much contradiction and contrariety, as is the case with the Jews, 
who are involved in absolute perplexity. For not only did not the nations in this life serve this Jacob; but even 
after he had received the blessing, he himself going forth [from his home], served his uncle Laban the 
Syrian for twenty years;(9) and not only was he not made lord of his brother, but he did himself bow down 
before his brother Esau, upon his return from Mesopotamia to his father, and offered many gifts to him. (10) 
Moreover, in what way did he inherit much corn and wine here, he who emigrated to Egypt because of the 
famine which possessed the land in which he was dwelling, and became Subject to Pharaoh, who was then 
ruling over Egypt? The predicted blessing, therefore, belongs unquestionably to the times of the kingdom, 
when the righteous shall bear rule upon their rising from the dead;(1 1) when also the creation, having been 
renovated and set free, shall fructify with an abundance of all kinds of food, from the dew of heaven, and 
from the fertility of the earth: as the elders who saw John, the disciple of the Lord, related that they had heard 
from him how the Lord used to teach in regard to these times, and say: The days will come, in which vines 
shall grow, each having ten thousand branches, and in each branch ten thousand twigs, and in each true(1) 

twig ten thousand shoots, and in each one of the shoots ten thousand dusters, and on every one of the 
clusters ten thousand grapes, and every grape when pressed will give five and twenty metretes of wine. 
And when any one of the saints shall lay hold of a cluster,(2) another shall cry out, "I am a better cluster, take 
me; bless the Lord through me." In like manner [the Lord declared] that a grain of wheat would produce ten 
thousand ears, and that every ear should have ten thousand grains, and every grain would yield ten pounds 
(quinque bilibres) of clear, pure, fine flour; and that all other fruit-bearing trees, (3) and seeds and grass, 
would produce in similar proportions (secundum congruentiam iis consequentem); and that all animals 
feeding [only] on the productions of the earth, should [in those days] become peaceful and harmonious 
among each other, and be in perfect subjection to man. 

4. And these things are bone witness to in writing by Papias, the hearer of John, and a companion of 
Polycarp, in his fourth book; for there were five books compiled (<greek>suntetagmena</greek>) by him. (4) 
And he says in addition, "Now these things are credible to believers." And he says that, "when the traitor 
Judas did not give credit to them, and put the question, 'How then can things about to bring forth so 
abundantly be wrought by the Lord?' the Lord declared, 'They who shall come to these [times] shall see.'" 
When prophesying of these times, therefore, Esaias says: "The wolf also shall feed with the lamb, and the 
leopard shall take his rest with the kid; the calf also, and the bull, and the lion shall eat together; and a little 
boy shall lead them. The ox and the bear shall feed together, and their young ones shall agree together; 
and the lion shall eat straw as well as the ox. And the infant boy shall thrust his hand into the asp's den, into 
the nest also of the adder's brood; and they shall do no harm, nor have power to hurt anything in my holy 
mountain." And again he says, in recapitulation, "Wolves and lambs shall then browse together, and the lion 
shall eat straw like the ox, and the serpent earth as if it were bread; and they shall neither hurt nor annoy 
anything in my holy mountain, saith the Lord. "(5) I am quite aware that some persons endeavour to refer 
these words to the case of savage men, both of different nations and various habits, who come to believe, 
and when they have believed, act in harmony with the righteous. But although this is [true] now with regard to 
some men coming from various nations to the harmony of the faith, nevertheless in the resurrection of the 
just [the words shall also apply] to those animals mentioned. For God is non in all things. And it is right that 
when the creation is restored, all the animals should obey and be in subjection to man, and revert to the 
food originally given by God (for they had been originally subjected in obedience to Adam), that is, the 
productions of the earth. But some other occasion, and not the present, is [to be sought] for showing that the 
lion shall [then] feed on straw. And this indicates the large size and rich quality of the fruits. For if that animal, 
the lion, feeds upon straw [at that period], of what a quality must the wheat itself be whose straw shall serve 
as suitable food for lions? 

CHAP. XXXIV.-HE FORTIFIES HIS OPINIONS WITH REGARD TO THE TEMPORAL AND 
EARTHLY KINGDOM OF THE SAINTS AFTER THEIR RESURRECTION, BY THE VARIOUS 
TESTIMONIES OF ISAIAH, EZEKIEL, JEREMIAH, AND DANIEL; ALSO BY THE PARABLE 
OF THE SERVANTS WATCHING, TO WHOM THE LORD PROMISED THAT HE WOULD 
MINISTER. 

1 . Then, too, Isaiah himself has plainly declared that there shall be joy of this nature at the resurrection of the 
just, when he says: "The dead shall rise again; those, too, who are in the tombs shall arise, and those who 
are in the earth shall rejoice. For the dew from Thee is health to them. "(6) And this again Ezekiel also says: 
"Behold, I will open your tombs, and will bring you forth out of your graves; when I will draw my people from 
the sepulchres, and I will put breath in you, and ye shall live; and I will place you on your own land, and ye 
shall know that I am the LORD. "(7) And again the same speaks thus: "These things saith the LORD, I will 
gather Israel from all nations whither they have been driven, and I shall be sanctified in them in the sight of 
the sons of the nations: and they shall dwell in their own land, which I gave to my servant Jacob. And they 
shall dwell in it in peace; and they shall build houses, and plant vineyards, and dwell in hope, when I shall 
cause judgment to fall among all who have dishonoured them, among those who encircle them round about; 
and they shall know that I am the LORD their God, and the God of their fathers. "(8) Now I have shown a short 
time ago that the church is the seed of Abraham; and for this reason, that we may know that He who in the 
New Testament "raises up from the stones children unto Abraham, "(1) is He who will gather, according to 
the Old Testament, those that shall be saved from all the nations, Jeremiah says: "Behold, the days come, 
saith the LORD, that they shall no more say, The LORD liveth, who led the children of Israel from the north, 
and from every region whither they had been driven; He will restore them to their own land which He gave to 
their fathers."(2) 

2. That the whole creation shall, according to God's will, obtain a vast increase, that it may bring forth and 
sustain fruits such [as we have mentioned], Isaiah declares: "And there shall be upon every high mountain, 
and upon every prominent hill, water running everywhere in that day, when many shall perish, when walls 

shall fall. And the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun, seven times that of the day, when He shall 
heal the anguish of His people, and do away with the pain of His stroke. "(3) Now "the pain of the stroke" 
means that inflicted at the beginning upon disobedient man in Adam, that is, death; which [stroke] the Lord 
will heal when He raises us from the dead, and restores the inheritance of the fathers, as Isaiah again says: 
"And thou shall be confident in the LORD, and He will cause thee to pass over the whole earth, and feed 
thee with the inheritance of Jacob thy father."(4) This is what the Lord declared: "Happy are those servants 
whom the Lord when He cometh shall find watching. Verily I say unto you, that He shall gird Himself, and 
make them to sit down [to meat], and will come forth and serve them. And if He shall come in the evening 
watch, and find them so, blessed are they, because He shall make them sit down, and minister to them; or if 
this be in the second, or it be in the third, blessed are they. "(5) Again John also says the very same in the 
Apocalypse: "Blessed and holy is he who has part in the first resurrection. "(6) Then, too, Isaiah has 
declared the time when these events shall occur; he says: "And I said, Lord, how long? Until the cities be 
wasted without inhabitant, and the houses be without men, and the earth be left a desert. And after these 
things the LORD shall remove us men far away (longe nos faciet Deus homines), and those who shall 
remain shall multiply upon the earth. "(7) Then Daniel also says this very thing: "And the kingdom and 
dominion, and the greatness of those under the heaven, is given to the saints of the Most High God, whose 
kingdom is everlasting, and all dominions shall serve and obey Him. "(8) And lest the promise named 
should be understood as referring to this time, it was declared to the prophet: "And come thou, and stand in 
thy lot at the consummation of the days. "(9) 

3. Now, that the promises were not announced to the prophets and the fathers alone, but to the Churches 
united to these from the nations, whom also the Spirit terms "the islands" (both because they are 
established in the midst of turbulence, suffer the storm of blasphemies, exist as a harbour of safety to those 
in peril, and are the refuge of those who love the height [of heaven], and strive to avoid Bythus, that is, the 
depth of error), Jeremiah thus declares: "Hear the word of the LORD, ye nations, and declare it to the isles 
afar off; say ye, that the LORD will scatter Israel, He will gather him, and keep him, as one feeding his flock of 
sheep. For the Lord hath redeemed Jacob, and rescued him from the hand of one stronger than he. And 
they shall come and rejoice m Mount Zion, and shall come to what is good, and into a land of wheat, and 
wine, and fruits, of animals and of sheep; and their soul shall be as a tree bearing fruit, and they shall hunger 
no more. At that time also shall the virgins rejoice in the company of the young men: the old men, too, shall 
be glad, and I will turn their sorrow into joy; and I will make them exult, and will magnify them, and satiate the 
souls of the priests the sons of Levi; and my people shall be satiated with my goodness. "(10) Now, in the 
preceding book(1 1) I have shown that all the disciples of the Lord are Levites and priests, they who used in 
the temple to profane the Sabbath, but are blameless. (12) Promises of such a nature, therefore, do indicate 
in the clearest manner the feasting of that creation in the kingdom of the righteous, which God promises that 
He will Himself serve. 

4. Then again, speaking of Jerusalem, and of Him reigning there, Isaiah declares, "Thus saith the LORD, 
Happy is he who hath seed in Zion, and servants in Jerusalem. Behold, a righteous king shall reign, and 
princes shall rule with judgment"(13) And with regard to the foundation on which it shall be rebuilt, he says: 
"Behold, I will lay in order for thee a carbuncle stone, and sapphire for thy foundations; and I will lay thy 
ramparts with jasper, and thy gates with crystal, and thy wall with choice stones: and all thy children shall be 
taught of God, and great shall be the peace of thy children; and in righteousness shaltthou be built up. "(14) 
And yet again does he say the same thing: "Behold, I make Jerusalem a rejoicing, and my people [a joy]; 
for the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying. Also there shall not be there 
any immature [one], nor an old man who does not fulfil his time: for the youth shall be of a hundred years; 
and the sinner shall die a hundred years old, yet shall be accursed. And they shall build houses, and inhabit 
them themselves; and shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them themselves, and shall drink wine. And 
they shall not build, and others inhabit; neither shall they prepare the vineyard, and others eat. For as the 
days of the tree of life shall be the days of the people in thee; for the works of their hands shall endure. "(1) 

CHAP. XXXV. -HE CONTENDS THAT THESE TESTIMONIES ALREADY ALLEGED CANNOT 
BE UNDERSTOOD ALLEGORICALLY OF CELESTIAL BLESSINGS, BUT THAT THEY SHALL 
HAVE THEIR FULFILMENT AFTER THE COMING OF ANTICHRIST, AND THE 
RESURRECTION, IN THE TERRESTRIAL JERUSALEM. TO THE FORMER PROPHECIES 
HE SUBJOINS OTHERS DRAWN FROM ISAIAH, JEREMIAH, AND THE APOCALYPSE OF 
JOHN. 

1. If, however, any shall endeavour to allegorize [prophecies] of this kind, they shall not be found consistent 
with themselves in all points, and shall be confuted by the teaching of the very expressions [in question]. For 
example: "When the cities" of the Gentiles "shall be desolate, so that they be not inhabited, and the houses 

so that there shall be no men in them and the land shall be left desolate. "(2) "For, behold," says Isaiah, "the 
day of the LORD cometh past remedy, full of fury and wrath, to lay waste the city of the earth, and to root 
sinners out of it."(3) And again he says, "Let him be taken away, that he behold not the glory of God. "(4) And 
when these things are done, he says, "God will remove men far away, and those that are left shall multiply in 
the earth. "(5) "And they shall build houses, and shall inhabit them themselves: and plant vineyards, and eat 
of them themselves. "(6) For all these and other words were unquestionably spoken in reference to the 
resurrection of the just, which takes place after the coming of Antichrist, and the destruction of all nations 
under his rule; in [the times of] which [resurrection] the righteous shall reign in the earth, waxing stronger by 
the sight of the Lord: and through Him they shall become accustomed to partake in the glory of God the 
Father, and shall enjoy in the kingdom intercourse and communion with the holy angels, and union with 
spiritual beings; and [with respect to] those whom the Lord shall find in the flesh, awaiting Him from heaven, 
and who have suffered tribulation, as well as escaped the hands of the Wicked one. For it is in reference to 
them that the prophet says: "And those that are left shall multiply upon the earth," And Jeremiah(7) the 
prophet has pointed out, that as many believers as God has prepared for this purpose, to multiply those left 
upon earth, should both be under the rule of the saints to minister to this Jerusalem, and that [His] kingdom 
shall be in it, saying, "Look around Jerusalem towards the east, and behold the joy which comes to thee 
from God Himself. Behold, thy sons shall come whom thou hast sent forth: they shall come in a band from 
the east even unto the west, by the word of that Holy One, rejoicing in that splendour which is from thy God. O 
Jerusalem, put off thy robe of mourning and of affliction, and put on that beauty of eternal splendour from thy 
God. Gird thyself with the double garment of that righteousness proceeding from thy God; place the mitre of 
eternal glory upon thine head. For God will show thy glory to the whole earth under heaven. For thy name 
shall for ever be called by God Himself, the peace of righteousness and glory to him that worships God. 
Arise, Jerusalem, stand on high, and look towards the east, and behold thy sons from the rising of the sun, 
even to the west, by the Word of that Holy One, rejoicing in the very remembrance of God. For the footmen 
have gone forth from thee, while they were drawn away by the enemy. God shall bring them in to thee, being 
borne with glory as the throne of a kingdom. For God has decreed that every high mountain shall be brought 
low, and the eternal hills, and that the valleys be filled, so that the surface of the earth be rendered smooth, 
that Israel, the glory of God, may walk in safety. The woods, too, shall make shady places, and every 
sweet-smelling tree shall be for Israel itself by the command of God. For God shall go before with joy in the 
light of His splendour, with the pity and righteousness which proceeds from Him." 
2. Now all these things being such as they are, cannot be understood in reference to super-celestial 
matters; "for God," it is said, "will show to the whole earth that is under heaven thy glory." But in the times of 
the kingdom, the earth has been called again by Christ [to its pristine condition], and Jerusalem rebuilt after 
the pattern of the Jerusalem above, of which the prophet Isaiah says, "Behold, I have depicted thy walls 
upon my hands, and thou art always in my sight,"(1) And the apostle, too, writing to the Galatians, says in like 
manner, "But the Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us all. "(2) He does not say this with 
any thought of an erratic AEon, or of any other power which departed from the Pleroma, or of Prunicus, but of 
the Jerusalem which has been delineated on [God's] hands. And in the Apocalypse John saw this new 
[Jerusalem] descending upon the new earth. (3) For after the times of the kingdom, he says, "I saw a great 
white throne, and Him who sat upon it, from whose face the earth fled away, and the heavens; and there was 
no more place for them. "(4) And he sets forth, too, the things connected with the general resurrection and the 
judgment, mentioning "the dead, great and small." "The sea," he says, "gave up the dead which it had in it, 
and death and hell delivered up the dead that they contained; and the books were opened. Moreover," he 
says, "the book of life was opened, and the dead were judged out of those things that were written in the 
books, according to their works; and death and hell were sent into the lake of fire, the second death. "(5) Now 
this is what is called Gehenna, which the Lord styled eternal fire. (6) "And if any one," it is said, "was not found 
written in the book of life, he was sent into the lake of fire. "(7) And after this, he says, "I saw a new heaven 
and a new earth, for the first heaven and earth have passed away; also there was no more sea. And I saw 
the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from heaven, as a bride adorned for her husband." "And I 
heard," it is said, "a great voice from the throne, saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and He 
will dwell with them; and they shall be His people, and God Himself shall be with them as their God. And He 
will wipe away every tear from their eyes; and death shall be no more, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither 
shall there be any more pain, because the former things have passed away. "(8) Isaiah also declares the 
very same: "For there shall be a new heaven and a new earth; and there shall be no remembrance of the 
former, neither shall the heart think about them, but they shall find in it joy and exultation. "(9) Now this is what 
has been said by the apostle: "For the fashion of this world passeth away. "(10) To the same purpose did 
the Lord also declare, "Heaven and earth shall pass away. "(1 1) When these things, therefore, pass away 
above the earth, John, the Lord's disciple, says that the new Jerusalem above shall [then] descend, as a 
bride adorned for her husband; and that this is the tabernacle of God, in which God will dwell with men. Of 

this Jerusalem the former one is an image-that Jerusalem of the former earth in which the righteous are 
disciplined beforehand for incorruption and prepared for salvation. And of this tabernacle Moses received 
the pattern in the mount;(12) and nothing is capable of being allegorized, but all things are stedfast, and true, 
land substantial, having been made by God for righteous men's enjoyment. For as it is God truly who raises 
up man, so also does man truly rise from the dead, and not allegorically, as I have shown repeatedly. And 
as he rises actually, so also shall he be actually disciplined beforehand for incorruption, and shall go 
forwards and flourish in the times of the kingdom, in order that he may be capable of receiving the glory of 
the Father. Then, when all things are made new, he shall truly dwell in the city of God. For it is said, "He that 
sitteth on the throne said, Behold, I make all things new. And the Lord says, Write all this; for these words are 
faithful and true. And He said to me, They are done. "(13) And this is the truth of the matter. 

CHAP. XXXVI. -MEN SHALL BE ACTUALLY RAISED: THE WORLD SHALL NOT BE 
ANNIHILATED; BUT THERE SHALL BE VARIOUS MANSIONS FOR THE SAINTS, 
ACCORDING TO THE RANK ALLOTTED TO EACH INDIVIDUAL. ALL THINGS SHALL BE 
SUBJECT TO GOD THE FATHER, AND SO SHALL HE BE ALL IN ALL. 

1 . For since there are real men, so must there also be a real establishment (plantationem), that they vanish 
not away among non-existent things, but progress among those which have an actual existence. For neither 
is the substance nor the essence of the creation annihilated (for faithful and true is He who has established 
it), but "the fashion of the world passeth away;"(14) that is, those things among which transgression has 
occurred, since man has grown old in them. And therefore this [present] fashion has been formed 
temporary, God foreknowing all things; as I have pointed out in the preceding book,(15) and have also 
shown, as far as was possible, the cause of the creation of this world of temporal things. But when this 
[present] fashion [of things] passes away, and man has been renewed, and flourishes in an incorruptible 
state, so as to preclude the possibility of becoming old, [then] there shall be the new heaven and the new 
earth, in which the new man shall remain [continually], always holding fresh converse with God. And since 
(or, that) these things shall ever continue without end, Isaiah declares, "For as the new heavens and the new 
earth which I do make, continue in my sight, saith the LORD, so shall your seed and your name remain. "(1) 
And as the presbyters say, Then those who are deemed worthy of an abode in heaven shall go there, 
others shall enjoy the delights of paradise, and others shall possess the splendour of the city; for 
everywhere the Saviour(2) shall be seen according as they who see Him shall be worthy. 

2. [They say, moreover], that there is this distinction between the habitation of those who produce an 
hundred-fold, and that of those who produce sixty-fold, and that of those who produce thirty-fold: for the first 
will be taken up into the heavens, the second will dwell in paradise, the last will inhabit the city; and that was 
on this account the Lord declared, "In My Father's house are many mansions. "(3) For all things belong to 
God, who supplies all with a suitable dwelling-place; even as His Word says, that a share is allotted to all 
by the Father, according as each person is or shall be worthy. And this is the couch on which the guests 
shall recline, having been invited to the wedding. (4) The presbyters, the disciples of the apostles, affirm that 
this is the gradation and arrangement of those who are saved, and that they advance through steps of this 
nature; also that they ascend through the Spirit to the Son, and through the Son to the Father, and that in due 
time the Son will yield up His work to the Father, even as it is said by the apostle, "For He must reign till He 
hath put all enemies under His feet. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. "(5) For in the times of 
the kingdom, the righteous man who is upon the earth shall then forget to die. "But when He saith, All things 
shall be subdued unto Him, it is manifest that He is excepted who did put all things under Him. And when all 
things shall be subdued unto Him, then shall the Son also Himself be subject unto Him who put all things 
under Him, that God may be all in all. "(6) 

3. John, therefore, did distinctly foresee the first "resurrection of the just,"(7) and the inheritance in the 
kingdom of the earth; and what the prophets have prophesied concerning it harmonize [with his vision]. For 
the Lord also taught these things, when He promised that He would have the mixed cup new with His 
disciples in the kingdom. The apostle, too, has confessed that the creation shall be free from the bondage 
of corruption, [so as to pass] into the liberty of the sons of God. (8) And in all these things, and by them all, the 
same God the Father is manifested, who fashioned man, and gave promise of the inheritance of the earth to 
the fathers, who brought it (the creature) forth [from bondage] at the resurrection of the just, and fulfils the 
promises for the kingdom of His Son; subsequently bestowing in a paternal manner those things which 
neither the eye has seen, nor the ear has heard, nor has [thought concerning them] arisen within the heart of 
man, (9) For there is the one Son, who accomplished His Father's will; and one human race also in which the 
mysteries of God are wrought, "which the angels desire to look into;"(10) and they are not able to search out 
the wisdom of God, by means of Which His handiwork, confirmed and incorporated with His Son, is brought 
to perfection; that His offspring, the First-begotten Word, should descend to the creature (facturam), that is, to 

what had been moulded (plasma), and that it should be contained by Him; and, on the other hand, the 
creature should contain the Word, and ascend to Him, passing beyond the angels, and be made after the 
image and likeness of God.(1 1)
