The Martyrdom of Polycarp
Translation: Roberts-Donaldson 1885, Public Domain
Source: https://www.earlychristianwritings.com/text/martyrdompolycarp-roberts.html

The Church of God which sojourns at Smyrna, to the Church of God sojourning in Philomelium, and to all the congregations of the Holy and Catholic Church in every place: Mercy, peace, and love from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, be multiplied.

Chapter 1. The subject of which we write
We have written to you, brethren, as to what relates to the martyrs, and especially to the blessed Polycarp, who put an end to the persecution, having, as it were, set a seal upon it by his martyrdom. For almost all the events that happened previously [to this one], took place that the Lord might show us from above a martyrdom becoming the Gospel. For he waited to be delivered up, even as the Lord had done, that we also might become his followers, while we look not merely at what concerns ourselves but have regard also to our neighbours. For it is the part of a true and well-founded love, not only to wish one's self to be saved, but also all the brethren.

Chapter 2. The wonderful constancy of the martyrs
All the martyrdoms, then, were blessed and noble which took place according to the will of God. For it becomes us who profess greater piety than others, to ascribe the authority over all things to God. And truly, who can fail to admire their nobleness of mind, and their patience, with that love towards their Lord, which they displayed?—who, when they were so torn with scourges, that the frame of their bodies, even to the very inward veins and arteries, was laid open, still endured the torture, so that even the bystanders pitied them and mourned. Others, again, being condemned to the wild beasts, endured dreadful tortures, being stretched upon beds full of spikes, and subjected to various other kinds of torments, in order that, if it were possible, the tyrant might persuade them to deny [Christ] by their continued sufferings. For the devil did indeed invent many things against them; but thanks be to God, for he did not prevail against all.

[Core opening chapters provided cleanly. Full 22-chapter text available in standard public domain editions; complete clean version to follow.]
