Origen, Against Celsus, Books I-II
Translation: Roberts-Donaldson 1885 (Ante-Nicene Fathers), Public Domain
Source: https://archive.org/details/EarlyChurchFathers38Volumes

ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS. 

BOOK I. 

PREFACE. 

1 . WHEN false witnesses testified against our Lord and Saviour Jesus Ciirist, He remained silent; and when 
unfounded charges were brought against Him, He returned no answer, believing that His whole life and 
conduct among the Jews were a better refutation than any answer to the false testimony, or than any formal 
defence against the accusations. And I know not, my pious Ambrosius,[1] why you wished me to write a 
reply to the false charges brought by Celsus against the Christians, and to his accusations directed against 
the faith of the Churches in his treatise; as if the facts themselves did not furnish a manifest refutation, and the 
doctrine a better answer than any writing, seeing it both disposes of the false statements, and does not 
leave to the accusations any credibility or validity. Now, with respect to our Lord's silence when false 
witness was borne against Him, it is sufficient at present to quote the words of Matthew, for the testimony of 
Mark is to the same effect. And the words of Matthew are as follow: "And the high priest and the council 
sought false witness against Jesus to put Him to death, but found none, although many false witnesses 
came forward. At last two false witnesses came and said. This fellow said, I am able to destroy the temple 
of God, and after three days to build it up. And the high priest arose, and said to Him, Answerest thou nothing 
to what these witness against thee? But Jesus held His peace. "[2] And that He returned no answer when 
falsely accused, the following is the statement: "And Jesus stood before the governor; and he asked Him, 
saying. Art Thou the King of the Jews? And Jesus said to him. Thou sayest. And when He was accused of 
the chief priests and elders. He answered nothing. Then said Pilate unto Him, Hearest thou not how many 
things they witness against Thee? And He answered him to never a word, insomuch that the governor 
marvelled greatly. "[3] 

2. It was, indeed, matter of surprise to men even of Ordinary intelligence, that one who was accused and 
assailed by false testimony, but who was able to defend Himself, and to show that He was guilty of none of 
the charges (alleged), and who might have enumerated the praiseworthy deeds of His own life, and His 
miracles wrought by divine power, so as to give the judge an opportunity of delivering a more honourable 
judgment regarding Him, should not have done this, but should have disdained such a procedure, and in 
the nobleness of His nature have contemned His accusers. [4] That the judge would, without any hesitation, 
have set Him at liberty if He had offered a defence, is clear from what is related of him when he said, "Which 
of the two do ye wish that I should release unto you, Barabbas or Jesus, who is called Christ?"[5] and from 
what the Scripture adds, "For he knew that for envy they had delivered Him. "[6] Jesus, however, is at all 
times assailed by false witnesses, hand, while wickedness remains in the world, is ever exposed to 
accusation. And yet even now He continues silent before these things, and makes no audible answer, but 
places His defence in the lives of His genuine disciples, which are a pre-eminent testimony, and one that 
rises superior to all false witness, and refutes and overthrows all unfounded accusations and charges. 

3. I venture, then, to say that this "apology" which you require me to compose will somewhat weaken that 
defence (of Christianity) which rests on facts, and that power of Jesus which is manifest to those who are not 
altogether devoid of perception. Notwithstanding, that we may not have the appearance of being reluctant 
to undertake the task which you have enjoined, we have endeavoured, to the best of our ability, to suggest, 
by way of answer to each of the statements advanced by Celsus, what seemed to us adapted to refute 
them, although his arguments have no power to shake the faith of any (true) believer. And forbid, indeed, that 
any one should be found who, after having been a partaker in such a love of God as was (displayed) in 
Christ Jesus, could be shaken in his purpose by the arguments of Celsus, or of any such as he. For Paul, 
when enumerating the innumerable causes which generally separate men from the love of Christ and from 
the love of God in Christ Jesus (to all of which, the love that was in himself rose superior), did not set down 
argument among the grounds of separation. For observe that he says, firstly: "Who shall separate us from 
the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? 
(as it is written. For Thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter.) 
Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through Him that loved us."[1] And secondly, when 
laying down another series of causes which naturally tend to separate those who are not firmly grounded in 
their religion, he says: "For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor 

powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to 
separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. "[2] 

4. Now, truly, it is proper that we should feel elated because afflictions, or those other causes enumerated 
by Paul, do not separate us (from Christ); but not that Paul and the other apostles, and any other resembling 
them, (should entertain that feeling), because they were far exalted above such things when they said, "In all 
these things we are more than conquerors through Him that loved us, "[3] which is a stronger statement than 
that they are simply "conquerors." But if it be proper for apostles to entertain a feeling of elation in not being 
separated from the love of God that is in Christ Jesus our Lord, that feeling will be entertained by them, 
because neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor any of the things that follow, can separate 
them from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. And therefore I do not congratulate that believer 
in Christ whose faith can be shaken by Celsus-who no longer shares the common life of men, but has long 
since departed-or by any apparent plausibility of argument. [4] For I do not know in what rank to place him 
who has need of arguments written in books in answer to the charges of Celsus against the Christians, in 
order to prevent him from being shaken in his faith, and confirm him in it. But nevertheless, since in the 
multitude of those who are considered believers some such persons might be found as would have their 
faith shaken and overthrown by the writings of Celsus, but who might be preserved by a reply to them of 
such a nature as to refute his statements and to exhibit the truth, we have deemed it right to yield to your 
injunction, and to furnish an answer to the treatise which you sent us, but which I do not think that any one, 
although only a short way advanced in philosophy, will allow to be a "True Discourse," as Celsus has 
entitled it. 

5. Paul, indeed, observing that there are in Greek philosophy certain things not to be lightly esteemed, which 
are plausible in the eyes of the many, but which represent falsehood as truth, says with regard to such: 
"Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the 
rudiments of the world, and not after Christ."[5] And seeing that there was a kind of greatness manifest in the 
words of the world's wisdom, he said that the words of the philosophers were "according to the rudiments of 
the world." No man of sense, however, would say that those of Celsus were "according to the rudiments of 
the world." Now those words, which contained some element of deceitfulness, the apostle named "vain 
deceit," probably by way of distinction from a deceit that was not "vain;" and the prophet Jeremiah 
observing this, ventured to say to God," O LORD, Thou hast deceived me, and I was deceived; Thou art 
stronger than I, and hast prevailed. "[6] But in the language of Celsus there seems to me to be no 
deceitfulness at all, not even that which is "vain;" such deceitfulness, viz., as is found in the language of 
those who have founded philosophical sects, and who have been endowed with no ordinary talent for such 
pursuits. And as no one would say that any ordinary error in geometrical demonstrations was intended to 
deceive, or would describe it for the sake of exercise in such matters;[7] so those opinions which are to be 
styled "vain deceit," and the "tradition of men," and "according to the rudiments of the world," must have 
some resemblance to the views of those who have been the founders of philosophical sects, (if such titles 
are to be appropriately applied to them). 

6. After proceeding with this work as far as the place where Celsus introduces the Jew disputing with Jesus, I 
resolved to prefix this preface to the beginning (of the treatise), in order that the reader of our reply to Celsus 
might fall in with it first, and see that this book has been composed not for those who are thorough believers, 
but for such as are either wholly unacquainted with the Christian faith, or for those who, as the apostle terms 
them, are "weak in the faith;" regarding whom he says, "Him that is weak in the faith receive ye."[1] And this 
preface must be my apology for beginning my answer to Celsus on one plan, and carrying it on on another. 
For my first intention was to indicate his principal objections, and then briefly the answers that were returned 
to them, and subsequently to make a systematic treatise of the whole discourse. [2] But afterwards, 
circumstances themselves suggested to me that I should be economical of my time, and that, satisfled with 
what I had already stated at the commencement, I should in the following part grapple closely, to the best of 
my ability, with the charges of Celsus. I have therefore to ask indulgence for those portions which follow the 
preface towards the beginning of the book. And if you are not impressed by the powerful arguments which 
succeed, then, asking similar indulgence also with respect to them, I refer you, if you still desire an 
argumentative solution of the objecflons of Celsus, to those men who are wiser than myself, and who are 
able by words and treatises to overthrow the charges which he brings against us. But better is the man who, 
although meeting with the work of Celsus, needs no answer to it at all, but who despises all its contents, 
since they are contemned, and with good reason, by every believer in Christ, through the Spirit that is in him. 

CHAP. I. 

The first point which Celsus brings forward, in his desire to throw discredit upon Christianity, is, that the 
Christians entered into secret associations with each other contrary to law, saying, that "of associations 
some are public, and that these are in accordance with the laws; others, again, secret, and maintained in 

violation of tiie laws." And his wish is to bring into disrepute what are termed the "love-feasts "[3] of the 
Christians, as if they had their origin in the common danger, and were more binding than any oaths. Since, 
then, he babbles about the public law, alleging that the associations of the Christians are in violation of it, we 
have to reply, that if a man were placed among Scythians, whose laws were unholy, [4] and having no 
opportunity of escape, were compelled to live among them, such an one would with good reason, for the 
sake of the law of truth, which the Scythians would regard as wickedness, [5] enter into associations contrary 
to their laws, with those like-minded with himself; so, if truth is to decide, the laws of the heathens which relate 
to images, and an atheistical polytheism, are "Scythian" laws, or more impious even than these, if there be 
any such. It is not irrational, then, to form associations in opposition to existing laws, if done for the sake of 
the truth. For as those persons would do well who should enter into a secret association in order to put to 
death a tyrant who had seized upon the liberties of a state, so Christians also, when tyrannized over by him 
who is called the devil, and by falsehood, form leagues contrary to the laws of the devil, against his power, 
and for the safety of those others whom they may succeed in persuading to revolt from a government which 
is, as it were, "Scythian," and despotic. 

CHAP. II. 

Celsus next proceeds to say, that the system of doctrine, viz., Judaism, upon which Christianity depends, 
was barbarous in its origin. And with an appearance of fairness, he does not reproach Christianity [6] 
because of its origin among barbarians, but gives the latter credit for their ability in discovering (such) 
doctrines. To this, however, he adds the statement, that the Greeks are more skilful than any others in 
judging, establishing, and reducing to practice the discoveries of barbarous nations. Now this is our answer 
to his allegations, and our defence of the truths contained in Christianity, that if any one were to come from 
the study of Grecian opinions and usages to the Gospel, he would not only decide that its doctrines were 
true, but would by practice establish their truth, and supply whatever seemed wanting, from a Grecian point 
of view, to their demonstration, and thus confirm the truth of Christianity. We have to say, moreover, that the 
Gospel has a demonstration of its own, more divine than any established by Grecian dialectics. And this 
diviner method is called by the apostle the "manifestation of the Spirit and of power:" of "the Spirit," on 
account of the prophecies, which are sufficient to produce faith in any one who reads them, especially in 
those things which relate to Christ; and of "power," because of the signs and wonders which we must believe 
to have been performed, both on many other grounds, and on this, that traces of them are still preserved 
among those who regulate their lives by the precepts of the Gospel. 

CHAP. III. 

After this, Celsus proceeding to speak of the Christians teaching and practising their favourite doctrines in 
secret, and saying that they do this to ,some purpose, seeing they escape the penalty of death which is 
imminent, he compares their dangers with those which were encountered by such men as Socrates for the 
sake of philosophy; and here he might have mentioned Pythagoras as well, and other philosophers. But our 
answer to this is, that in the case of Socrates the Athenians immediately afterwards repented; and no feeling 
of bitterness remained in their minds regarding him, as also happened in the history, of Pythagoras. The 
followers of the latter, indeed, for a considerable time established their schools in that part of Italy called 
Magna Graecia; but in the case of the Christians, the Roman Senate, and the princes of the time, and the 
soldiery, and the people, and the relatives of those who had become converts to the faith, made war upon 
their doctrine, and would have prevented (its progress), overcoming it by a confederacy of so powerful a 
nature, had it not, by the help of God, escaped the danger, and risen above it, so as (finally) to defeat the 
whole world in its conspiracy against it. 

CHAP. IV. 

Let us notice also how he thinks to cast discredit upon our system of morals, [1] alleging that it is only 
common to us with other philosophers, and no venerable or new branch of instruction. In reply to which we 
have to say, that unless all men had naturally impressed upon their minds sound ideas of morality, the 
doctrine of the punishment of sinners would have been excluded by those who bring upon themselves the 
righteous judgments of God. It is not therefore matter of surprise that the same God should have sown in the 
hearts of all men those truths which He taught by the prophets and the Saviour, in order that at the divine 
judgment every man may be without excuse, having the "requirements[2] of the law written upon his 
heart,"-a truth obscurely alluded to by the Bible[3] in what the Greeks regard as a myth, where it represents 
God as having with His own finger written down the commandments, and given them to Moses, and which 
the wickedness of the worshippers of the calf made him break in pieces, as if the flood of wickedness, so to 

speak, had swept them away. But Moses having again hewn tables of stone, i God wrote the 
commandments a second time, and gave them to him; the prophetic word preparing the soul, as it were, 
after the first transgression, for the writing of God a second time. 

CHAP. V. 

Treating of the regulations respecting idolatry as being peculiar to Christianity, Celsus establishes their 
correctness, saying that the Christians do not consider those to be gods that are made with hands. On the 
ground that it is not in conformity with right reason (to suppose) that images, fashioned by the most worthless 
and depraved of workmen, and in many instances also provided by wicked men, can be (regarded as) 
gods. In what follows, however, wishing to show that this is a common opinion, and one not first discovered 
by Christianity, he quotes a saying of Heraclitus to this effect: "That those who draw near to lifeless images, 
as if they were gods, act in a similar manner to those who would enter into conversation with houses." 
Respecting this, then, we have to say, that ideas were implanted in the minds of men like the principles of 
morality, from which not only Heraclitus, but any other Greek or barbarian, might by reflection have deduced 
the same conclusion; for he states that the Persians also were of the same opinion, quoting Herodotus as 
his authority. We also can add to these Zeno of Citium, who in his Polity, says: "And there will be no need to 
build temples, for nothing ought to be regarded as sacred, or of much value, or holy, which is the work of 
builders and of mean men." It is evident, then, with respect to this opinion (as well as others), that there has 
been en-graven upon the hearts of men by the finger of God a sense of the duty that is required. 

CHAP. VI. 

After this, through the influence of some motive which is unknown to me, Celsus asserts that it is by the 
names of certain demons, and by the use of incantations, that the Christians appear to be possessed of 
(miraculous) power; hinting, I suppose, at the practices of those who expel evil spirits by incantations. And 
here he manifestly appears to malign the Gospel. For it is not by incantations that Christians seem to prevail 
(over evil spirits), but by the name of Jesus, accompanied by the announcement of the narratives which 
relate to Him; for the repetition of these has frequently been the means of driving demons out of men, 
especially when those who repeated them did so in a sound and genuinely believing spirit. Such power, 
indeed, does the name of Jesus possess over evil spirits, that there have been instances where it was 
effectual, when it was pronounced even by bad men, which Jesus Himself taught (would be the case), when 
He said: "Many shall say to Me in that day. In Thy name we have cast out devils, and done many wonderful 
works. "[1] Whether Celsus omitted this from intentional malignity, or from ignorance, I do not know. And he 
next proceeds to bring a charge against the Saviour Himself, alleging that it was by means of sorcery that 
He was able to accomplish the wonders which He performed; and that foreseeing that others would attain 
the same knowledge, and do the same things, making a boast of doing them by help of the power of God, 
He excludes such from His kingdom. And his accusation is, that if they are justly excluded, while He Himself 
is guilty of the same practices. He is a wicked man; but if He is not guilty of wickedness in doing such things, 
neither are they who do the same as He. But even if it be impossible to show by what power Jesus wrought 
these miracles, it is clear that Christians employ no spells or incantations, but the simple, name of Jesus, 
and certain other words in which they repose faith, according to the holy Scriptures. 

CHAP. VII. 

Moreover, since he frequently calls the Christian doctrine a secret system (of belief), we must confute him on 
this point also, since almost the entire world is better acquainted with what Christians preach than with the 
favourite opinions of philosophers. For who is ignorant of the statement that Jesus was born of a virgin, and 
that He was crucified, and that His resurrection is an article of faith among many, and that a general 
judgment is announced to come, in which the wicked are to be punished according to their deserts, and the 
righteous to be duly rewarded? And yet the mystery of the resurrection, not being understood, [2] is made a 
subject of ridicule among unbelievers. In these circumstances, to speak of the Christian doctrine as a secret 
system, is altogether absurd. But that there should be certain doctrines, not made known to the multitude, 
which are (revealed) after the exoteric ones have been taught, is not a peculiarity of Christianity alone, but 
also of philosophic systems, in which certain truths are exoteric and others esoteric. Some of the hearers of 
Pythagoras were content with his ipse dixit; while others were taught in secret those doctrines which were not 
deemed fit to be communicated to profane and insufficiently prepared ears. Moreover, all the mysteries that 
are celebrated everywhere throughout Greece and barbarous countries, although held in secret, have no 
discredit thrown upon them, so that it is in vain that he endeavours to calumniate the secret doctrines of 
Christianity, seeing he does not correctly understand its nature. 

CHAP. VIII. 

It is with a certain eloquence, [3] indeed, that he appears to advocate the cause of those who bear witness to 
the truth of Christianity by their death, in the following words: "And I do not maintain that if a man, who has 
adopted a system of good doctrine, is to incur danger from men on that account, he should either 
apostatize, or feign apostasy, or openly deny his opinions." And he condemns those who, while holding the 
Christian views, either pretend that they do not, or deny them, saying that "he who holds a certain opinion 
ought not to feign recantation, or publicly disown it." And here Celsus must be convicted of self-contradiction. 
For from other treatises of his it is ascertained that he was an Epicurean; but here, because he thought that 
he could assail Christianity with better effect by not professing the opinions of Epicurus, he pretends that 
there is a something better in man than the earthly part of his nature, which is akin to God, and says that "they 
in whom this element, viz., the soul, is in a healthy condition, are ever seeking after their kindred nature, 
mean ing God, and are ever desiring to hear something about Him, and to call it to remembrance." Observe 
now the insincerity of his character! Having said a little before, that "the man who had embraced a system of 
good doctrine ought not, even if exposed to danger on that account from men, to disavow it, or pretend that 
he had done so, nor yet openly disown it," he now involves himself in all manner of contradictions. For he 
knew that if he acknowledged himself an Epicurean, he would not obtain any credit when accusing those 
who, in any degree, introduce the doctrine of Providence, and who place a God over the world. And we 
have heard that there were two individuals of the name of Celsus, both of whom were Epicureans; the earlier 
of the two having lived in the time of Nero, but this one in that of Adrian, and later. 

CHAP. IX. 

He next proceeds to recommend, that in adopting opinions we should follow reason and a rational guide, [4] 
since he who assents to opinions without following this course is very liable to be deceived. And he 
compares inconsiderate believers to Metragyrtae, and soothsayers, and Mithrae, and Sabbadians, and to 
anything else that one may fall in with, and to the phantoms of Hecate, or any other demon or demons. For 
as amongst such persons are frequently to be found wicked men, who, taking advantage of the ignorance 
of those who are easily deceived, lead them away whither they will, so also, he says, is the case among 
Christians. And he asserts that certain persons who do not wish either to give or receive a reason for their 
belief, keep repeating, "Do not examine, but believe!" and, "Your faith will save you!" And he alleges that 
such also say, "The wisdom of this life is bad, but that foolishness is a good thing!" To which we have to 
answer, that if it were possible for all to leave the business of life, and devote themselves to philosophy, no 
other method ought to be adopted by any one, but this alone. For in the Christian system also it will be found 
that there is, not to speak at all arrogantly, at least as much of investigation into articles of belief, and of 
explanation of dark sayings, occurring in the prophetical writings, and of the parables in the Gospels, and of 
countless other things, which either were narrated or enacted with a symbolical signification, [1] (as is the 
case with other systems). But since the course alluded to is impossible, partly on account of the necessities 
of life, partly on account of the weakness of men, as only a very few individuals devote themselves 
earnestly to study, [2] what better method could be devised with a view of assisting the multitude, than that 
which was delivered by Jesus to the heathen? And let us inquire, with respect to the great multitude of 
believers, who have washed away the mire of wickedness in which they formerly wallowed, whether it were 
better for them to believe without a reason, and (so) to have become reformed and improved in their habits, 
through the belief that men are chastised for sins, and honoured for good works or not to have allowed 
themselves to be converted on the strength of mere faith, but have waited) until they could give themselves 
to a thorough examination of the (necessary) reasons. For it is manifest that, (on such a plan), all men, with 
very few exceptions, would not obtain this (amelioration of conduct) which they have obtained through a 
simple faith, but would continue to remain in the practice of a wicked life. Now, whatever other evidence can 
be furnished of the fact, that it was not without divine intervention that the philanthropic scheme of Christianity 
was introduced among men, this also must be added. For a pious man will not believe that even a 
physician of the body, who restores the sick to better health, could take up his abode in any city or country 
without divine permission, since no good happens to men without the help of God. And if he who has cured 
the bodies of many, or restored them to better health, does not effect his cures without the help of God, how 
much more He who has healed the souls of many, and has turned them (to virtue), and improved their 
nature, and attached them to God who is over all things, and taught them to refer every action to His good 
pleasure, and to shun all that is displeasing to Him, even to the least of their words or deeds, or even of the 
thoughts of their hearts ? 

CHAP. X. 

In the next place, since our opponents keep repeating those statements about faith, we must say that, 
considering it as a useful thing for the multitude, we admit that we teach those men to believe without 
reasons, who are unable to abandon all other employments, and give themselves to an examination of 
arguments; and our opponents, although they do not acknowledge it, yet practically do the same. For who is 
there that, on betaking himself to the study of philosophy, and throwing himself into the ranks of some sect, 
either by chance, [3] or because he is provided with a teacher of that school, adopts such a course for any 
other reason, except that he believes his particular sect to be superior to any other? For, not waiting to hear 
the arguments of all the other philosophers, and of all the different sects, and the reasons for condemning 
one system and for supporting another, he in this way elects to become a Stoic, e.g., or a Platonist, or a 
Peripatetic, or an Epicurean, or a follower of some other school, and is thus borne, although they will not 
admit it, by a kind of irrational impulse to the practice, say of Stoicism, to the disregard of the others; 
despising either Platonism, as being marked by greater humility than the others; or Peripateticism, as more 
human, and as admitting with more fairness[4] than other systems the blessings of human life. And some 
also, alarmed at first sight[5] about the doctrine of providence, from seeing what happens in the world to the 
vicious and to the virtuous, have rashly concluded that there is no divine providence at all, and have 
adopted the views of Epicurus and Celsus. 

CHAP. XI. 

Since, then, as reason teaches, we must repose faith in some one of those who have been the introducers 
of sects among the Greeks or Barbarians, why should we not rather believe in God who is over all things, 
and in Him who teaches that worship is due to God alone, and that other things are to be passed by, either 
as non-existent, or as existing indeed, and worthy of honour, but not of worship and reverence? And 
respecting these things, he who not only believes, but who contemplates things with the eye of reason, will 
state the demonstrations that occur to him, and which are the result of careful investigation. And why should it 
not be more reasonable, seeing all human things are dependent upon faith, to believe God rather than 
them? For who enters on a voyage, or contracts a marriage, or becomes the father of children, or casts 
seed into the ground, without believing that better things will result from so doing, although the contrary might 
and sometimes does happen? And yet the belief that better things, even agreeably to their wishes, will 
follow, makes all men venture upon uncertain enterprises, which may turn out differently from what they 
expect. And if the hope and belief of a better future be the support of life in every uncertain enterprise, why 
shall not this faith rather be rationally accepted by him who believes on better grounds than he who sails the 
sea, or tills the ground, or marries a wife, or engages in any other human pursuit, in the existence of a God 
who was the Creator of all these things, and in Him who with surpassing wisdom and divine greatness of 
mind dared to make known this doctrine to men in every part of the world, at the cost of great danger, and of 
a death considered infamous, which He underwent for the sake of the human race; having also taught those 
who were persuaded to embrace His doctrine at the first, to proceed, under the peril of every danger, and of 
ever impending death, to all quarters of the world to ensure the salvation of men? 

CHAP. XII. 

In the next place, when Celsus says in express words, "If they would answer me, not as if I were asking for 
information, for I am acquainted with all their opinions, but because I take an equal interest in them all, it 
would be well. And if they will not, but will keep reiterating, as they generally do, 'Do not investigate,' etc., 
they must, he continues, explain to me at least of what nature these things are of which they speak, and 
whence they are derived," etc. Now, with regard to his statement that he "is acquainted with all our 
doctrines," we have to say that this is a boastful and daring assertion; for if he had read the prophets in 
particular, which are full of acknowledged difficulties, and of declarations that are obscure to the multitude, 
and if he had perused the parables of the Gospels, and the other writings of the law and of the Jewish 
history, and the utterances of the apostles, and had read them candidly, with a desire to enter into their 
meaning, he would not have expressed himself with such boldness, nor said that he "was acquainted with 
all their doctrines." Even we ourselves, who have devoted much study to these writings, would not say that 
"we were acquainted with everything," for we have a regard for truth. Not one of us will assert, "I know all the 
doctrines of Epicurus," or will be confident that he knows all those of Plato, in the knowledge of the fact that 
so many differences of opinion exist among the expositors of these systems. For who is so daring as to say 
that he knows all the opinions of the Stoics or of the Peripatetics? Unless, indeed, it should be the case that 
he has heard this boast, "I know them all," from some ignorant and senseless individuals, who do not 
perceive their own ignorance, and should thus imagine, from having had such persons as his teachers, that 
he was acquainted with them all. Such an one appears to me to act very much as a person would do who 

had visited Egypt (wiiere tiie Egyptian savans, learned in tiieir country's literature, are greatly given to 
philosophizing about those things which are regarded among them as divine, but where the vulgar, hearing 
certain myths, the reasons of which they do not understand, are greatly elated because of their fancied 
knowledge), and who should imagine that he is acquainted with the whole circle of Egyptian knowledge, 
after having been a disciple of the ignorant alone, and without having associated with any of the priests, or 
having learned the mysteries of the Egyptians from any other source. And what I have said regarding the 
learned and ignorant among the Egyptians, I might have said also of the Persians; among whom there are 
mysteries, conducted on rational principles by the learned among them, but understood in a symbolical 
sense by the more superficial of the multitude. [1] And the same remark applies to the Syrians, and Indians, 
and to all those who have a literature and a mythology. 

CHAP. XIII. 

But since Celsus has declared it to be a saying of many Christians, that "the wisdom of this life is a bad thing, 
but that foolishness is good," we have to answer that he slanders the Gospel, not giving the words as they 
actually occur in the writings of Paul, where they run as follow: "If any one among you seemeth to be wise in 
this world, let him become a fool, that he may become wise. For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with 
God. "[2] The apostle, therefore, does not say simply that "wisdom is foolishness with God," but "the wisdom 
of this world." And again, not, "If any one among you seemeth to be wise, let him become a fool universally;" 
but, "let him become a fool in this world, that he may become wise." We term, then, "the wisdom of this 
world," every false system of philosophy, which, according to the Scriptures, is brought to nought; and we 
call foolishness good, not without restriction, but when a man becomes foolish as to this world. As if we were 
to say that the Platonist, who believes in the immortality of the soul, and in the doctrine of its 
metempsychosis,, incurs the charge of folly with the Stoics, who discard this opinion; and with the 
Peripatetics, who babble about the subtleties of Plato; and with the Epicureans, who call it superstition to 
introduce a providence, and to place a God over all things. Moreover, that it is in agreement with the spirit of 
Christianity, of much more importance to give our assent to doctrines upon grounds of reason and wisdom 
than on that of faith merely, and that it was only in certain circumstances that the latter course was desired by 
Christianity, in order not to leave men altogether without help, is shown by that genuine disciple of Jesus, 
Paul, when he says: "For after that, in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God 
by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. "[2] Now by these words it is clearly shown that it 
is by the wisdom of God that God ought to be known. But as this result did not follow, it pleased God a 
second time to save them that believe, not by "folly" universally, but by such foolishness as depended on 
preaching. For the preaching of Jesus Christ as crucified is the "foolishness" of preaching, as Paul also 
perceived, when he said, "But we preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumbling-block, and to the Greeks 
foolishness; but to them who are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and wisdom of 
God. "[3] 

CHAP. XIV. 

Celsus, being of opinion that there is to be found among many nations a general relationship of doctrine, 
enumerates all the nations which gave rise to such and such opinions; but for some reason, unknown to me, 
he casts a slight upon the Jews, not including them amongst the others, as having either laboured along with 
them, and arrived at the same conclusions, or as having entertained similar opinions on many subjects. It is 
proper, therefore, to ask him why he gives credence to the histories of Barbarians and Greeks respecting 
the antiquity of those nations of whom he speaks, but stamps the histories of this nation alone as false. For if 
the respective writers related the events which are found in these works in the spirit of truth, why should we 
distrust the prophets of the Jews alone? And if Moses and the prophets have recorded many things in their 
history from a desire to favour their own system, why should we not say the same of the historians of other 
countries? Or, when the Egyptians or their histories speak evil of the Jews, are they to be believed on that 
point; but the Jews, when saying the same things of the Egyptians, and declaring that they had suffered 
great injustice at their hands, and that on this account they had been punished by God, are to be charged 
with falsehood? And this applies not to the Egyptians alone, but to others; for we shall find that there was a 
connection between the Assyrians and the Jews, and that this is recorded in the ancient histories of the 
Assyrians. And so also the Jewish historians (I avoid using the word "prophets," that I may not appear to 
prejudge the case) have related that the Assyrians were enemies of the Jews. Observe at once, then, the 
arbitrary procedure of this individual, who believes the histories of these nations on the ground of their being 
learned, and condemns others as being wholly ignorant. For listen to the statement of Celsus: "There is," he 
says, "an authoritative account from the very beginning, respecting which there is a constant agreement 
among all the most learned nations, and cities, and men." And yet he will not call the Jews a learned nation 

in the same way in wiiicii lie does tiie Egyptians, and Assyrians, and Indians, and Persians, and Odrysians, 
and Samotiiracians, and Eleusinians. 

How mucii more impartial than Celsus is Numenius the Pythagorean, who has given many proofs of being a 
very eloquent man, and who has carefully tested many opinions, and collected together from many sources 
what had the appearance of truth; for, in the first hook of his treatise On the Good, speaking of those nations 
who have adopted the opinion that God is incorporeal, he enumerates the Jews also among those who 
hold this view; not showing any reluctance to use even the language of their prophets in his treatise, and to 
give it a metaphorical signification. It is said, moreover, that Hermippus has recorded in his first book. On 
Lawgivers, that it was from the Jewish people that Pythagoras derived the philosophy which he introduced 
among the Greeks. And there is extant a work by the historian Hecataeus, treating of the Jews, in which so 
high a character is bestowed upon that nation for its learning, that Herennius Philo, in his treatise on the 
Jews, has doubts in the first place, whether it is really the composition of the historian; and says, in the 
second place, that if really his, it is probable that he was carried away by the plausible nature of the Jewish 
history, and so yielded his assent to their system. 

CHAP. XVI. 

I must express my surprise that Celsus should class the Odrysians, and Samothracians, and Eleusinians, 
and Hyperboreans among the most ancient and learned nations, and should not deem the Jews worthy of a 
place among such, either for their learning or their antiquity, although there are many treatises in circulation 
among the Egyptians, and Phoenicians, and Greeks, which testify to their existence as an ancient people, 
but which I have considered it unnecessary to quote. For any one who chooses may read what Florins 
Josephus has recorded in his two books. On the Antiquity, of the Jews, where he brings together a great 
collection of writers, who bear witness to the antiquity of the Jewish people; and there exists the Discourse to 
the Greeks of Tatian the younger,[2] in which with very great learning he enumerates those historians who 
have treated of the antiquity of the Jewish nation and of Moses. It seems, then, to be not from a love of truth, 
but from a spirit of hatred, that Celsus makes these statements, his object being to asperse the origin of 
Christianity, which is connected with Judaism. Nay, he styles the Galactophagi of Homer, and the Druids of 
the Gauls, and the Getae, most learned and ancient tribes, on account of the resemblance between their 
traditions and those of the Jews, although I know not whether any of their histories survive; but the Hebrews 
alone, as far as in him lies, he deprives of the honour both of antiquity and learning. And again, when making 
a list of ancient and learned men who have conferred benefits upon their contemporaries (by their deeds), 
and upon posterity by their writings, he excluded Moses from the number; while of Linus, to whom Celsus 
assigns a foremost place in his list, there exists neither laws nor discourses which produced a change for 
the better among any tribes; whereas a whole nation, dispersed throughout the entire world, obey the laws 
of Moses. Consider, then, whether it is not from open malevolence that he has expelled Moses from his 
catalogue of learned men, while asserting that Linus, and Musaeus, and Orpheus, and Pherecydes, and the 
Persian Zoroaster, and Pythagoras, discussed these topics, and that their opinions were deposited in 
books, and have thus been preserved down to the present time. And it is intentionally also that he has 
omitted to take notice of the myth, embellished chiefly by Orpheus, in which the gods are described as 
affected by human weaknesses and passions. 

CHAP. XVII. 

In what follows, Celsus, assailing the Mosaic history, finds fault with those who give it a tropical and 
allegorical signification. And here one might say to this great man, who inscribed upon his own work the title 
of a True Discourse, "Why, good sir, do you make it a boast to have it recorded that the gods should 
engage in such adventures as are described by your learned poets and philosophers, and be guilty of 
abominable intrigues, and of engaging in wars against their own fathers, and of cutting off their secret parts, 
and should dare to commit and to suffer such enormities; while Moses, who gives no such accounts 
respecting God, nor even regarding the holy angels, and who relates deeds of far less atrocity regarding 
men (for in his writings no one ever ventured to commit such crimes as Kronos did against Uranus, or Zeus 
against his father, or that of the father of men and gods, who had intercourse with his own daughter), should 
be considered as having deceived those who were placed under his laws, and to have led them into 
error?" And here Celsus seems to me to act somewhat as Thrasymachns the Platonic philosopher did, 
when he would not allow Socrates to answer regarding justice, as he wished, but said, "Take care not to say 
that utility is justice, or duty, or anything of that kind." For in like manner Celsus as sails (as he thinks) the 
Mosaic histories, and finds fault with those who understand them allegorically, at the same time bestowing 
also some praise upon those who do so, to the effect that they are more impartial (than those who do not); 
and thus, as it were, he prevents by his cavils those who are able to show the true state of the case from 

offering such a defence as they would wish to offer.[3] 

CHAP. XVIII. 

And challenging a comparison of book with book, I would say, "Come now, good sir, take down the poems 
of Linus, and of Musaeus, and of Orpheus, and the writings of Pherecydes, and carefully compare these with 
the laws of Moses-histories with histories, and ethical discourses with laws and commandments-and see 
which of the two are the better fitted to change the character of the hearer on the very spot, and which to 
harden[1] him in his wickedness; and observe that your series of writers display little concern for those 
readers who are to peruse them at once unaided, [2] but have composed their philosophy (as you term it) for 
those who are able to comprehend its metaphorical and allegorical signification; whereas Moses, like a 
distinguished orator who meditates some figure of Rhetoric, and who carefully introduces in every part 
language of twofold meaning, has done this in his five books: neither affording, in the portion which relates to 
morals, any handle to his Jewish subjects for committing evil; nor yet giving to the few individuals who were 
endowed with greater wisdom, and who were capable of investigating his meaning, a treatise devoid of 
material for speculation. But of your learned poets the very writings would seem no longer to be preserved, 
although they would have been carefully treasured up if the readers had perceived any benefit (likely to be 
derived from them); whereas the works of Moses have stirred up many, who were even aliens to the 
manners of the Jews, to the belief that, as these writings testify, the first who enacted these laws and 
delivered them to Moses, was the God who was the Creator of the world. For it became the Creator of the 
universe, after laying down laws for its government, to confer upon His words a power which might subdue 
all men in every part of the earth. [3] And this I maintain, having as yet entered into no investigation regarding 
Jesus, but still demonstrating that Moses, who is far inferior to the Lord, is, as the Discourse will show, greatly 
superior to your wise poets and philosophers." 

CHAP. XIX. 

After these statements, Celsus, from a secret desire to cast discredit upon the Mosaic account of the 
creation, which teaches that the world is not yet ten thousand years old, but very much under that, while 
concealing his wish, intimates his agreement with those who hold that the world is uncreated. For, 
maintaining that there have been, from all eternity, many conflagrations and many deluges, and that the 
flood which lately took place in the time of Deucalion is comparaflvely modern, he clearly demonstrates to 
those who are able to understand him, that, in his opinion, the world was uncreated. But let this assailant of 
the Christian faith tell us by what arguments he was compelled to accept the statement that there have been 
many conflagraflons and many cataclysms, and that the flood which occurred in the time of Deucalion, and 
the conflagraflon in that of Phaethon, were more recent than any others. And if he should put forward the 
dialogues of Plato (as evidence) on these subjects, we shall say to him that it is allowable for us also to 
believe that there resided in the pure and pious soul of Moses, who ascended above all created things, 
and united himself to the Creator of the universe, and who made known divine things with far greater 
clearness than Plato, or those otherwise men (who lived) among the Greeks and Romans, a spirit which 
was divine. And if he demands of us our reasons for such a belief, let him first give grounds for his own 
unsupported assertions, and then we shall show that this view of ours is the correct one. 

CHAP. XX. 

And yet, against his will, Celsus is entangled into testifying that the world is comparatively modern, and not 
yet ten thousand years old, when he says that the Greeks consider those things as ancient, because, owing 
to the deluges and conflagraflons, they have not beheld or received any memorials of older events. But let 
Celsus have, as his authorities for the myth regarding the conflagraflons and inundaflons, those persons 
who, in his opinion, are the most learned of the Egypflans, traces of whose wisdom are to be found in the 
worship of irraflonal animals, and in arguments which prove that such a worship of God is in conformity with 
reason, and of a secret and mysterious character. The Egypflans, then, when they boastfully give their own 
account of the divinity of animals, are to be considered wise; but if any Jew, who has signified his adherence 
to the law and the lawgiver, refer everything to the Creator of the universe, and the only God, he is, in the 
opinion of Celsus and those like him, deemed inferior to him who degrades the Divinity not only to the level 
of raflonal and mortal animals, but even to that of irraflonal also!-a view which goes far beyond the mythical 
doctrine of transmigration, according to which the soul falls down from the summit of heaven, and enters into 
the body of brute beasts, both tame and savage! And if the Egyptians related fables of this kind, they are 
believed to convey a philosophical meaning by their enigmas and mysteries; but if Moses compose and 
leave behind him histories and laws for an enflre naflon, they are to be considered as empty fables, the 

language of which admits of no allegorical meaning! 

CHAP. XXI. 

The following is the view of Celsus and the Epicureans: "Moses having," he says, "learned the doctrine 
which is to be found existing among wise nations and eloquent men, obtained the reputation of divinity." 
Now, in answer to this we have to say, that it may be allowed him that. Moses did indeed hear a somewhat 
ancient doctrine, and transmitted the same to the Hebrews; that if the doctrine which he heard was false, and 
neither pious nor venerable, and if notwithstanding, he received it and handed it down to those under his 
authority, he is liable to censure; but if, as you assert, he gave his adherence to opinions that were wise and 
true, and educated his people by means of them, what, pray, has he done deserving of condemnation? 
Would, indeed, that not only Epicurus, but Aristotle, whose sentiments regarding providence are not so 
impious (as those of the former), and the Stoics, who assert that God is a body, had heard such a doctrine ! 
Then the world would not have been filled with opinions which either disallow or enfeeble the action of 
providence, or introduce a corrupt corporeal principle, according to which the god of the Stoics is a body, 
with respect to whom they are not afraid to say that he is capable of change, and may be altered and 
transformed in all his parts, and, generally, that he is capable of corruption, if there be any one to corrupt 
him, but that he has the good fortune to escape corruption, because there is none to corrupt. Whereas the 
doctrine of the Jews and Christians, which preserves the immutability and unalterableness of the divine 
nature, is stigmatized as impious, because it does not partake of the profanity of those whose notions of 
God are marked by impiety, but because it says in the supplication addressed to the Divinity, "Thou art the 
same,"[1] it being, moreover, an article of faith that God has said, "I change not. "[2] 

CHAP. XXII. 

After this, Celsus, without condemning circumcision as practised by the Jews, asserts that this usage was 
derived from the Egyptians; thus believing the Egyptians rather than Moses, who says that Abraham was 
the first among men who practised the rite. And it is not Moses alone who mentions the name of Abraham, 
assigning to him great intimacy with God; but many also of those who give themselves to the practice of the 
conjuration of evil spirits, employ in their spells the expression "God of Abraham," pointing out by the very 
name the friendship (that existed) between that just man and God. And yet, while making use of the phrase 
"God of Abraham," they do not know who Abraham is! And the same remark applies to Isaac, and Jacob, 
and Israel; which names, although confessedly Hebrew, are frequently introduced by those Egyptians who 
profess to produce some wonderful result by means of their knowledge. The rite of circumcision, however, 
which began with Abraham, and was discontinued by Jesus, who desired that His disciples should not 
practise it, is not before us for explanation; for the present occasion does not lead us to speak of such 
things, but to make an effort to refute the charges brought against the doctrine of the Jews by Celsus, who 
thinks that he will be able the more easily to establish the falsity of Christianity, if, by assailing its origin in 
Judaism, he can show that the latter also is untrue. 

CHAP. XXIII. 

After this, Celsus next asserts that "Those herdsmen and shepherds who followed Moses as their leader, 
had their minds deluded by vulgar deceits, and so supposed that there was one God." Let him show, then, 
how, after this irrational departure, as he regards it, of the herdsmen and shepherds from the worship of 
many gods, he himself is able to establish the multiplicity of deities that are found amongst the Greeks, or 
among those other nations that are called Barbarian. Let him establish, therefore, the existence of 
Mnemosyne, the mother of the Muses by Zeus; or of Themis, the parent of the Hours; or let him prove that 
the ever naked Graces can have a real, substantial existence. But he will not be able to show, from any 
actions of theirs, that these fictitious representations^] of the Greeks, which have the appearance of being 
invested with bodies, are (really) gods. And why should the fables of the Greeks regarding the gods be true, 
any more than those of the Egyptians for example, who in their language know nothing of a Mnemosyne, 
mother of the nine Muses; nor of a Themis, parent of the Hours; nor of a Euphrosyne, one of the Graces; nor 
of any other of these names? How much more manifest (and how much better than all these inventions!) is it 
that, convinced by what we see, in the admirable order of the world, we should worship the Maker of it as the 
one Author of one effect, and which, as being wholly in harmony with itself, cannot on that account have been 
the work of many makers; and that we should believe that the whole heaven is not held together by the 
movements of many souls, for one is enough, which bears the whole of the non-wandering[4] sphere from 
east to west, and embraces within it all things which the world requires, and which are not self-existing! For all 
are parts of the world, while God is no part of the whole. But God cannot be imperfect, as a part is imperfect. 

And perhaps profounder consideration will show, that as God is not a part, so neither is He properly the 
whole, since the whole is composed of parts; and reason will not allow us to believe that the God who is 
over all is composed of parts, each one of which cannot do what all the other parts, can. 

CHAP. XXIV. 

After this he continues: "These herdsmen and shepherds concluded that there was but one God, named 
either the Highest, or Adonai, or the Heavenly, or Sabaoth, or called by some other of those names which 
they delight to give this world; and they knew nothing beyond that." And in a subsequent part of his work he 
says, that "It makes no difference whether the God who is over all things be called by the name of Zeus, 
which is current among the Greeks, or by that, e.g., which is in use among the Indians or Egyptians," Now, in 
answer to this, we have to remark that this involves a deep and mysterious subject-that, viz., respecting the 
nature of names: it being a question whether, as Aristotle thinks, names were bestowed by arrangement, or, 
as the Stoics hold, by nature; the first words being imitations of things, agreeably to which the names were 
formed, and in conformity with which they introduce certain principles of etymology; or whether, as Epicurus 
teaches (differing in this from the Stoics), names were given by nature,-the first men having uttered certain 
words varying with the circumstances in which they found themselves. If, then, we shall be able to establish, 
in reference to the preceding statement, the nature of powerful names, some of which are used by the 
learned amongst the Egyptians, or by the Magi among the Persians, and by the Indian philosophers called 
Brahmans, or by the Samanaeans, and others in different countries; and shall be able to make out that the 
so-called magic is not, as the followers of Epicurus and Aristotle suppose, an altogether uncertain thing, but 
is, as those skilled in it prove, a consistent system, having words which are known to exceedingly few; then 
we say that the name Sabaoth, and Adonai, and the other names treated with so much reverence among 
the Hebrews, are not applicable to any ordinary created things, but belong to a secret theology which refers 
to the Framer of all things. These names, accordingly, when pronounced with that attendant train of 
circumstances which is appropriate to their nature, are possessed of great power; and other names, again, 
current in the Egyptian tongue, are efficacious against certain demons who can only do certain things; and 
other names in the Persian language have corresponding power over other spirits; and so on in every 
individual nation, for different purposes. And thus it will be found that, of the various demons upon the earth, 
to whom different localities have been assigned, each one bears a name appropriate to the several 
dialects of place and country. He, therefore, who has a nobler idea, however small, of these matters, will be 
careful not to apply differing names to different things; lest he should resemble those who mistakenly apply 
the name of God to lifeless matter, or who drag down the title of "the Good" from the First Cause, or from 
virtue and excellence, and apply it to blind Plutus, and to a healthy and well-proportioned mixture of flesh 
and blood and bones, or to what is considered to be noble birth. [1] 

CHAP. XXV. 

And perhaps there is a danger as great as that which degrades the name of "God," or of "the Good," to 
improper objects, in changing the name of God according to a secret system, and applying those which 
belong to inferior beings to greater, and vice versa. And I do not dwell on this, that when the name of Zeus is 
uttered, there is heard at the same time that of the son of Kronos and Rhea, and the husband of Hera, and 
brother of Poseidon, and father of Athene, and Artemis, who was guilty of incest with his own daughter 
Persephone; or that Apollo immediately suggests the son of Leto and Zeus, and the brother of Artemis, and 
half-brother of Hermes; and so with all the other names invented by these wise men of Celsus, who are the 
parents of these opinions, and the ancient theologians of the Greeks. For what are the grounds for deciding 
that he should on the one hand be properly called Zeus, and yet on the other should not have Kronos for his 
father and Rhea for his mother? And the same argument applies to all the others that are called gods. But 
this charge does not at all apply to those who, for some mysterious reason, refer the word Sabaoth, or 
Adonai, or any of the other names to the (true) God. And when one is able to philosophize about the mystery 
of names, he will find much to say respecting the titles of the angels of God, of whom one is called Michael, 
and another Gabriel, and another Raphael, appropriately to the duties which they discharge in the world, 
according to the will of the God of all things. And a similar philosophy of names applies also to our Jesus, 
whose name has already been seen, in an unmistakeable manner, to have expelled myriads of evil spirits 
from the souls and bodies (of men), so great was the power which it exerted upon those from whom the 
spirits were driven out. And while still upon the subject of names, we have to mention that those who are 
skilled in the use of incantations, relate that the utterance of the same incantation in its proper language can 
accomplish what the spell professes to do; but when translated into any other tongue, it is observed to 
become inefficacious and feeble. And thus it is not the things signified, but the qualities and peculiarities of 
words, which possess a certain power for this or that purpose. And so on such grounds as these we defend 

the conduct of the Christians, when they struggle even to death to avoid calling God by the name of Zeus, or 
to give Him a name from any other language. For they either use the common name-God-indefinitely, or 
with some such addition as that of the "Maker of all things," "the Creator of heaven and earth"-He who sent 
down to the human race those good men, to whose names that of God being added, certain mighty works 
are wrought among men. And much more besides might be said on the subject of names, against those 
who think that we ought to be indifferent as to our use of them. And if the remark of Plato in the Philebus 
should surprise us, when he says, "My fear, O Protagoras, about the names of the gods is no small one," 
seeing Philebus in his discussion with Socrates had called pleasure a "god," how shall we not rather 
approve the piety of the Christians, who apply none of the names used in the mythologies to the Creator of 
the world? And now enough on this subject for the present. 

CHAP. XXVI. 

But let us see the manner in which this Celsus, who professes to know everything, brings a false accusation 
against the Jews, when he alleges that "they worship angels, and are addicted to sorcery, in which Moses 
was their instructor." Now, in what part of the writings of Moses he found the lawgiver laying down the worship 
of angels, let him tell, who professes to know all about Christianity and Judaism; and let him show also how 
sorcery can exist among those who have accepted the Mosaic law, and read the injunction, "Neither seek 
after wizards, to be defiled by them."[1] Moreover, he promises to show afterwards "how it was through 
ignorance that the Jews were deceived and led into error." Now, if he had discovered that the ignorance of 
the Jews regarding Christ was the effect of their not having heard the prophecies about Him, he would show 
with truth how the Jews fell into error. But without any wish whatever that this should appear, he views as 
Jewish errors what are no errors at all. And Celsus having promised to make us acquainted, in a 
subsequent part of his work, with the doctrines of Judaism, proceeds in the first place to speak of our 
Saviour as having been the leader of our generation, in so far as we are Christians, [2] and says that "a few 
years ago he began to teach this doctrine, being regarded by Christians as the Son of God." Now, with 
respect to this point-His prior existence a few years ago-we have to remark as follows. Could it have come 
to pass without divine assistance, that Jesus, desiring during these years to spread abroad His words and 
teaching, should have been so successful, that everywhere throughout the world, not a few persons, Greeks 
as well as Barbarians, learned as well as ignorant, adopted His doctrine, so that they struggled, even to 
death in its defence, rather than deny it, which no one is ever related to have done for any other system? I 
indeed, from no wish to flatter[3] Christianity, but from a desire thoroughly to examine the facts, would say 
that even those who are engaged in the healing of numbers of sick persons, do not attain their object-the 
cure of the body-without divine help; and if one were to succeed in delivering souls from a flood of 
wickedness, and excesses, and acts of injustice, and from a contempt of God, and were to show, as 
evidence of such a result, one hundred persons improved in their natures (let us suppose the number to be 
so large), no one would reasonably say that it was without divine assistance that he had implanted in those 
hundred individuals a doctrine capable of removing so many evils. And if any one, on a candid 
consideration of these things, shall admit that no improvement ever takes place among men without divine 
help, how much more confidently shall he make the same assertion regarding Jesus, when he compares 
the former lives of many converts to His doctrine with their after conduct, and reflects in what acts of 
licentiousness and injustice and covetousness they formerly indulged, until, as Celsus, and they who think 
with him, allege, "they were deceived," and accepted a doctrine which, as these individuals assert, is 
destructive of the life of men; but who, from the time that they adopted it, have become in some way meeker, 
and more religious, and more consistent, so that certain among them, from a desire of exceeding chastity, 
and a wish to worship God with greater purity, abstain even from the permitted indulgences of (lawful) love. 

CHAP. XXVII. 

Any one who examines the subject will see that Jesus attempted and successfully accomplished works 
beyond the reach of human power. For although, from the very beginning, all things opposed the spread of 
His doctrine in the world, -both the princes of the times, and their chief captains and generals, and all, to 
speak generally, who were possessed of the smallest influence, and in addition to these, the rulers of the 
different cities, and the soldiers, and the people, -yet it proved victorious, as being the Word of God, the 
nature of which is such that it cannot be hindered; and becoming more powerful than all such adversaries, it 
made itself master of the whole of Greece, and a considerable portion of Barbarian lands, and convened 
countless numbers of souls to His religion. And although, among the multitude of converts to Christianity, the 
simple and ignorant necessarily outnumbered the more intelligent, as the former class always does the 
latter, yet Celsus, unwilling to take note of this, thinks that this philanthropic doctrine, which reaches to every 
soul under the sun, is vulgar,[1] and on account of its vulgarity and its want of reasoning power, obtained a 

hold only over the ignorant. And yet he himself admits that it was not the simple alone who were led by the 
doctrine of Jesus to adopt His religion; for he acknowledges that there were amongst them some persons 
of moderate intelligence, and gentle disposition, and possessed of understanding, and capable of 
comprehending allegories. 

CHAP. XXVIII. 

And since, in imitation of a rhetorician training a pupil, he introduces a Jew, who enters into a personal 
discussion with Jesus, and speaks in a very childish manner, altogether unworthy of the grey hairs of a 
philosopher, let me endeavour, to the best of my ability, to examine his statements, and show that he does 
not maintain, throughout the discussion, the consistency due to the character of a Jew. For he represents 
him disputing with Jesus, and confuting Him, as he thinks, on many points; and in the first place, he accuses 
Him of having "invented his birth from a virgin," and upbraids Him with being "born in a certain Jewish 
village, of a poor woman of the country, who gained her subsistence by spinning, and who was turned out of 
doors by her husband, a carpenter by trade, because she was convicted of adultery; that after being driven 
away by her husband, and wandering about for a time, she disgracefully gave birth to Jesus, an illegitimate 
child, who having hired himself out as a servant in Egypt on account of his poverty, and having there 
acquired some miraculous powers, on which the Egyptians greatly pride themselves, returned to his own 
country, highly elated on account of them, and by means of these proclaimed himself a God." Now, as I 
cannot allow anything said by unbelievers to remain unexamined, but must investigate everything from the 
beginning, I give it as my opinion that all these things worthily harmonize with the predictions that Jesus is the 
Son of God. 

CHAP. XXIX. 

For birth is an aid towards an individual's becoming famous, and distinguished, and talked about; viz., when 
a man's parents happen to be in a position of rank and influence, and are possessed of wealth, and are 
able to spend it upon the education of their son, and when the country of one's birth is great and illustrious; 
but when a man having all these things against him is able, notwithstanding these hindrances, to make 
himself known, and to produce an impression on those who hear of him, and to become distinguished and 
visible to the whole world, which speaks of him as it did not do before, how can we help admiring such a 
nature as being both noble in itself, and devoting itself to great deeds, and possessing a courage which is 
not by any means to be despised ? And if one were to examine more fully the history of such an individual, 
why should he not seek to know in what manner, after being reared up in frugality and poverty, and without 
receiving any complete education, and without having studied systems and opinions by means of which he 
might have acquired confidence to associate with multitudes, and play the demagogue, and attract to 
himself many hearers, he nevertheless devoted himself to the teaching of new opinions, introducing among 
men a doctrine which not only subverted the customs of the Jews, while preserving due respect for their 
prophets, but which especially overturned the established observances of the Greeks regarding the 
Divinity? And how could such a person-one who had been so brought up, and who, as his calumniators 
admit, had learned nothing great from men-have been able to teach, in a manner not at all to be despised, 
such doctrines as he did regarding the divine judgment, and the punishments that are to overtake 
wickedness, and the rewards that are to be conferred upon virtue; so that not only rustic and ignorant 
individuals were won by his words, but also not a few of those who were distinguished by their wisdom, and 
who were able to discern the hidden meaning in those more common doctrines, as they were considered, 
which were in circulation, and which secret meaning enwrapped, so to speak, some more recondite' 
signification still? The Seriphian, in Plato, who reproaches Themistocles after he had become celebrated 
for his military skill, saying that his reputation was due not to his own merits, but to his good fortune in having 
been born in the most illustrious country in Greece, received from the good-natured Athenian, who saw that 
his native country did contribute to his renown, the following reply: "Neither would I, had I been a Seriphian, 
have been so distinguished as I am, nor would you have been a Themistocles, even if you had had the 
good fortune to be an Athenian!" And now, our Jesus, who is reproached with being born in a village, and 
that not a Greek one, nor belonging to any nation widely esteemed, and being despised as the son of a 
poor labouring woman, and as having on account of his poverty left his native country and hired himself out 
in Egypt, and being, to use the instance already quoted, not only a Seriphian, as it were, a native of a very 
small and undistinguished island, but even, so to speak, the meanest of the Seriphians, has yet been able 
to shake[1] the whole inhabited world not only to a degree far above what Themistocles the Athenian ever 
did, but beyond what even Pythagoras, or Plato, or any otherwise man in any part of the world whatever, or 
any prince or general, ever succeeded in doing? 

CHAP. XXX. 

Now, would not any one who investigated witii ordinary care tiie nature of tiiese facts, be strucl< witii 
amazement attiiis man's victory?-witli iiis complete success in surmounting by his reputation all causes 
that tended to bring him into disrepute, and with his superiority over all other illustrious individuals in the 
world ? And yet it is a rate thing for distinguished men to succeed in acquiring a reputation for several things 
at once. For one man is admired on account of his wisdom, another for his military skill, and some of the 
Barbarians for their marvellous powers of incantation, and some for one quality, and others for another; but 
not many have been admired and acquired a reputation for many things at the same time; whereas this 
man, in addition to his other merits, is an object of admiration both for his wisdom, and for his miracles, and 
for his powers of government. For he persuaded some to withdraw themselves from their laws, and to 
secede to him, not as a tyrant would do, nor as a robber, who arms[3] his followers against men; nor as a 
rich man, who bestows help upon those who come to him; nor as one of those who confessedly are 
deserving of censure; but as a teacher of the doctrine regarding the God of all things, and of the worship 
which belongs to Him, and of all moral precepts which are able to secure the favour of the Supreme God to 
him who orders his life in conformity therewith. Now, to Themistocles, or to any other man of distinction, 
nothing happened to prove a hindrance to their reputation; whereas to this man, besides what we have 
already enumerated, and which are enough to cover with dishonour the soul of a man even of the most 
noble nature, there was that apparently infamous death of crucifixion, which was enough to efface his 
previously acquired glory, and to lead those who, as they who disavow his doctrine assert, were formerly 
deluded by him to abandon their delusion, and to pass condemnation upon their deceiver. 

CHAP. XXXI. 

And besides this, one may well wonder how it happened that the disciples-if, as the calumniators of Jesus 
say, they did not see Him after His resurrection from the dead, and were not persuaded of His divinity-were 
not afraid to endure the same sufferings with their Master, and to expose themselves to danger, and to 
leave their native country to teach, according to the desire of Jesus, the doctrine delivered to them by Him. 
For I think that no one who candidly examines the facts would say that these men devoted themselves to a 
life of danger for the sake of the doctrine of Jesus, without profound belief which He had wrought in their 
minds of its truth, not only teaching them to conform to His precepts, but others also, and to conform, 
moreover, when manifest destruction to life impended over him who ventured to introduce these new 
opinions into all places and before all audiences, and who could retain as his friend no human being who 
adhered to the former opinions and usages. For did not the disciples of Jesus see, when they ventured to 
prove not only to the Jews from their prophetic Scriptures that this is He who was spoken of by the prophets, 
but also to the other heathen nations, that He who was crucified yesterday or the day before underwent this 
death voluntarily on behalf of the human race, -that this was analogous to the case of those who have died 
for their country in order to remove pestilence, or barrenness, or tempests? For it is probable that there is in 
the nature of things, for certain mysterious tea-sons which are difficult to be understood by the multitude, 
such a virtue that one just man, dying a voluntary death for the common good, might be the means of 
removing wicked spirits, which are the cause of plagues, or barrenness, or tempests, or similar calamities. 
Let those, therefore, who would disbelieve the statement that Jesus died on the cross on behalf of men, say 
whether they also refuse to accept the many accounts current both among Greeks and Barbarians, of 
persons who have laid down their lives for the public advantage, in order to remove those evils which had 
fallen upon cities and countries? Or will they say that such events actually happened, but that no credit is to 
be attached to that account which makes this so-called man to have died to ensure the destruction of a 
mighty evil spirit, the ruler of evil spirits, who had held in subjection the souls of all men upon earth? And the 
disciples of Jesus, seeing this and much more (which, it is probable, they learned from Jesus in private), 
and being filled, moreover, with a divine power (since it was no mere poetical virgin that endowed them with 
strength and courage, but the true wisdom and understanding of God), exerted all their efforts "to become 
distinguished among all men," not only among the Argives, but among all the Greeks and Barbarians alike, 
and "so bear away for themselves a glorious renown. "[1] 

CHAP. XXXII. 

But let us now return to where the Jew is introduced, speaking of the mother of Jesus, and saying that "when 
she was pregnant she was turned out of doors by the carpenter to whom she had been betrothed, as having 
been guilty of adultery, and that she bore a child to a certain soldier named Panthera;" and let us see 
whether those who have blindly concocted these fables about the adultery of the Virgin with Panthera, and 
her rejection by the carpenter, did not invent these stories to overturn His miraculous conception by the Holy 

Ghost: for they could have falsified the history in a different manner, on account of its extremely miraculous 
character, and not have admitted, as it were against their will, that Jesus was born of no ordinary human 
marriage. It was to be expected, indeed, that those who would not believe the miraculous birth of Jesus 
would invent some falsehood. And their not doing this in a credible manner, but (their) preserving the fact 
that it was not by Joseph that the Virgin conceived Jesus, rendered the falsehood very palpable to those 
who can understand and detect such inventions. Is it at all agreeable to reason, that he who dared to do so 
much for the human race, in order that, as far as in him lay, all the Greeks and Barbarians, who were looking 
for divine condemnation, might depart from evil, and regulate their entire conduct in a manner pleasing to 
the Creator of the world, should not have had a miraculous birth, but one the vilest and most disgraceful of 
all? And I will ask of them as Greeks, and particularly of Celsus, who either holds or not the sentiments of 
Plato, and at any rate quotes them, whether He who sends souls down into the bodies of men, degraded 
Him who was to dare such mighty acts, and to teach so many men, and to reform so many from the mass of 
wickedness in the world, to a birth more disgraceful than any other, and did not rather introduce Him into the 
world through a lawful marriage? Or is it not more in conformity with reason, that every soul, for certain 
mysterious reasons (I speak now according to the opinion of Pythagoras, and Plato, and Empedocles, 
whom Celsus frequently names), is introduced into a body, and introduced according to its deserts and 
former actions? It is probable, therefore, that this soul also, which conferred more benefit by its residence in 
the flesh than that of many men (to avoid prejudice, I do not say "all"), stood in need of a body not only 
superior to others, but invested with all excellent qualities. 

CHAP. XXXIII. 

Now if a particular soul, for certain mysterious reasons, is not deserving of being placed in the body of a 
wholly irrational being, nor yet in that of one purely rational, but is clothed with a monstrous body, so that 
reason cannot discharge its functions in one so fashioned, which has the head disproportioned to the other 
parts, and altogether too short; and another receives such a body that the soul is a little more rational than 
the other; and another still more so, the nature of the body counteracting to a greater or less degree the 
reception of the reasoning principle; why should there not be also some soul which receives an altogether 
miraculous body, possessing some qualities common to those of other men, so that it may be able to pass 
through life with them, but possessing also some quality of superiority, so that the soul may be able to 
remain untainted by sin? And if there be any truth in the doctrine of the physiognomists, whether Zopyrus, or 
Loxus, or Polemon, or any other who wrote on such a subject, and who profess to know in some wonderful 
way that all bodies are adapted to the habits of the souls, must there have been for that soul which was to 
dwell with miraculous power among men, and work mighty deeds, a body produced, as Celsus thinks, by 
an act of adultery between Panthera and the Virgin?! Why, from such unhallowed intercourse there must 
rather have been brought forth some fool to do injury to mankind,-a teacher of licentiousness and 
wickedness, and other evils; and not of temperance, and righteousness, and the other virtues! 

CHAP. XXXIV. 

But it was, as the prophets also predicted, from a virgin that there was to be born, according to the promised 
sign, one who was to give His name to the fact, showing that at His birth God was to be with man. Now it 
seems to me appropriate to the character of a Jew to have quoted the prophecy of Isaiah, which says that 
Immanuel was to be born of a virgin. This, however, Celsus, who professes to know everything, has not 
done, either from ignorance or from an unwillingness (if he had read it and voluntarily passed it by in silence) 
to furnish an argument which might defeat his purpose. And the prediction runs thus: "And the Lord spake 
again unto Ahaz, saying. Ask thee a sign of the RD thy God; ask it either in the depth or in the height above. 
But Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the LORD. And he said. Hear ye now, O house of David; is it a 
small thing for you to weary men, but will ye weary my God also? Therefore the Lord Himself shall give you 
a sign. Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call His name Immanuel, which is, being 
interpreted, God with us."[1] And that it was from intentional malice that Celsus did not quote this prophecy, is 
clear to me from this, that although he makes numerous quotations from the Gospel according to Matthew, 
as of the star that appeared at the birth of Christ, and other miraculous occurrences, he has made no 
mention at all of this. Now, if a Jew should split words, and say that the words are not, "Lo, a virgin," but, "Lo, 
a young woman, "[3] we reply that the word "Olmah"-which the Septuagint have rendered by "a virgin," and 
others by "a young woman"-occurs, as they say, in Deuteronomy, as applied to a "virgin," in the following 
connection: "If a damsel that is a virgin be betrothed unto an husband, and a man find her in the city, and lie 
with her; then ye shall bring them both out unto the gate of that city, and ye shall stone them with stones that 
they die; the damsel, [3] because she cried not, being in the city; and the man, because he humbled his 
neighbour's wife. "[4] And again: "But if a man find a betrothed damsel in a field, and the man force her, and 

lie with iier: tiien tiie man only that lay with her shall die: but unto the damsel[5] ye shall do nothing; there is in 
her no sin worthy of death." 

CHAP. XXXV. 

But that we may not seem, because of a Hebrew word, to endeavour to persuade those who are unable to 
determine whether they ought to believe it or not, that the prophet spoke of this man being born of a virgin, 
because at his birth these words, "God with us," were uttered, let us make good our point from the words 
themselves. The Lord is related to have spoken to Ahaz thus: "Ask a sign for thyself from the LORD thy God, 
either in the depth or height above; "[6] and afterwards the sign is given. Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and 
bear a son. "[7] What kind of sign, then, would that have been-a young woman who was not a virgin giving 
birth to a child ? And which of the two is the more appropriate as the mother of Immanuel (i.e., "God with 
us"),-whether a woman who has had intercourse with a man, and who has conceived after the manner of 
women, or one who is still a pure and holy virgin? Surely it is appropriate only to the latter to produce a 
being at whose birth it is said, "God with us." And should he be so captious I as to say that it is to Ahaz that 
the command is addressed, "Ask for thyself a sign from the LORD thy God," we shall ask in return, who in the 
times of Ahaz bore a son at whose birth the expression is made use of, "Immanuel," i.e., "God with us?" And 
if no one can be found, then manifestly what was said to Ahaz was said to the house of David, because it is 
written that the Saviour was born of the house of David according to the flesh; and this sign is said to be "in 
the depth or in the height," since "He that descended is the same also that ascended up far above all 
heavens, that He might flII all things. "[8] And these arguments I employ as against a Jew who believes in 
prophecy. Let Celsus now tell me, or any ofthose who think with him, with what meaning the prophet utters 
either these statements about the future, or the others which are contained in the prophecies? Is it with any 
foresight of the future or not? If with a foresight of the future, then the prophets were divinely inspired; if with no 
foresight of the future, let him explain the meaning of one who speaks thus boldly regarding the future, and 
who is an object of admiration among the Jews because of his propheflc powers. 

CHAP. XXXVI. 

And now, since we have touched upon the subject of the prophets, what we are about to advance will be 
useful not only to the Jews, who believe that they spake by divine inspiration, but also to the more candid 
among the Greeks. To these we say that we must necessarily admit that the Jews had prophets, if they were 
to be kept together under that system of law which had been given them, and were to believe in the Creator 
of the world, as they had learned, and to be without pretexts, so far as the law was concerned, for 
apostatizing to the polytheism of the heathen. And we establish this necessity in the following manner. "For 
the nations," as it is written in the law of the Jews itself, "shall hearken unto observers of times, and diviners; 
"[1] but to that people it is said: "But as for thee, the LORD thy God hath not suffered thee so to do."[1] And to 
this is subjoined the promise: "A prophet shall the LORD thy God raise up unto thee from among thy 
brethren. "[2] Since, therefore, the heathen employ modes of divination either by oracles or by omens, or by 
birds, or by ventriloquists, or by those who profess the art of sacrifice, or by Chaldean genealogists-all 
which practices were forbidden to the Jews-this people, if they had no means of attaining a knowledge of 
futurity, being led by the passion common to humanity of ascertaining the future would have despised their 
own prophets, as not having in them any particle of divinity; and would not have accepted any prophet after 
Moses, nor committed their words to writing, but would have spontaneously betaken themselves to the 
divining usages of the heathen, or attempted to establish some such practices amongst themselves. There 
is therefore no absurdity in their prophets having uttered predictions even about events of no importance, to 
soothe those who desire such things, as when Samuel prophesies regarding three she-asses which were 
lost, [3] or when mention is made in the third book of Kings respecting the sickness of a king's son. [4] And 
why should not those who desired to obtain auguries from idols be severely rebuked by the administrators 
of the law among the Jews?-as Elijah is found rebuking Ahaziah, and saying, "Is it because there is not a 
God in Israel that ye go to inquire of Baalzebub, god of Ekron?" 

CHAP. XXXVII. 

I think, then, that it has been pretty well established not only that our Saviour was to be born of a virgin, but 
also that there were prophets among the Jews who uttered not merely general predictions about the 
future,-as, e.g., regarding Christ and the kingdoms of the world, and the events that were to happen to Israel, 
and those nations which were to believe on the Saviour, and many other things concerning Him,-but also 
prophecies respecting particular events; as, for instance, how the asses of Kish, which were lost, were to be 
discovered, and regarding the sickness which had fallen upon the son of the king of Israel, and any other 
recorded circumstance of a similar kind. But as a further answer to the Greeks, who do not believe in the 
birth of Jesus from a virgin, we have to say that the Creator has shown, by the generation of several kinds of 
animals, that what He has done in the instance of one animal. He could do, if it pleased Him, in that of others, 
and also of man himself. For it is ascertained that there is a certain female animal which has no intercourse 
with the male (as writers on animals say is the case with vultures), and that this animal, without sexual 
intercourse, preserves the succession of race. What incredibility, therefore, is there in supposing that, if God 
wished to send a divine teacher to the human race. He caused Him to be born in some manner different 
from the common![6] Nay, according to the Greeks themselves, all men were not born of a man and woman. 
For if the world has been created, as many even of the Greeks are pleased to admit, then the first men must 
have been produced not from sexual intercourse, but from the earth, in which spermatic elements existed; 
which, however, I consider more incredible than that Jesus was born like other men, so far as regards the 
half of his birth. And there is no absurdity in employing Grecian histories to answer Greeks, with the view of 
showing that we are not the only persons who have recourse to miraculous narratives of this kind. For some 
have thought fit, not in regard to ancient and heroic narratives, but in regard to events of very recent 
occurrence, to relate as a possible thing that Plato was the son of Amphictione, Ariston being prevented 
from having marital intercourse with his wife until she had given birth to him with whom she was pregnant by 
Apollo. And yet these are veritable fables, which have led to the invention of such stories concerning a man 
whom they regarded as possessing greater wisdom and power than the multitude, and as having received 
the beginning of his corporeal substance from better and diviner elements than others, because they 
thought that this was appropriate to persons who were too great to be human beings. And since Celsus has 
introduced the Jew disputing with Jesus, and tearing in pieces, as he imagines, the fiction of His birth from a 

virgin, comparing tiie Greel< fables about Danae, and IVIelanippe, and Auge, and Antiope, our answer is, 
tiiat sucii language becomes a buffoon, land not one who is writing in a serious tone. 

CHAP. XXXVIII. 

But, moreover, taking the history, contained in the Gospel according to Matthew, of our Lord's descent into 
Egypt, he refuses to believe the miraculous circumstances attending it, viz., either that the angel gave the 
divine intimation, or that our Lord's quitting Judea and residing in Egypt was an event of any significance; but 
he invents something altogether different, admitting somehow the miraculous works done by Jesus, by 
means of which He induced the multitude to follow Him as the Christ. And yet he desires to throw discredit on 
them, as being done by help of magic and not by divine power; for he asserts "that he (Jesus), having been 
brought up as an illegitimate child, and having served for hire in Egypt, and then coming to the knowledge of 
certain miraculous powers, returned from thence to his own country, and by means of those powers 
proclaimed himself a god." Now I do not understand how a magician should exert himself to teach a 
doctrine which persuades us always to act as if God were to judge every man for his deeds; and should 
have trained his disciples, whom he was to employ as the ministers of his doctrine, in the same belief. For 
did the latter make an impression upon their hearers, after they had been so taught to work miracles; or was 
it without the aid of these? The assertion, therefore, that they did no miracles at all, but that, after yielding their 
belief to arguments which were not at all convincing, like the wisdom of Grecian dialectics, [1] they gave 
themselves up to the task of teaching the new doctrine to those persons among whom they happened to 
take up their abode, is altogether absurd. For in what did they place their confidence when they taught the 
doctrine and disseminated the new opinions? But if they indeed wrought miracles, then how can it be 
believed that magicians exposed themselves to such hazards to introduce a doctrine which forbade the 
practice of magic? 

CHAP. XXXIX. 

I do not think it necessary to grapple with an argument advanced not in a serious but in a scoffing spirit, such 
as the following: "If the mother of Jesus was beautiful, then the god whose nature is not to love a corruptible 
body, had intercourse with her because she was beautiful;" or, "It was improbable that the god would 
entertain a passion for her, because she was neither rich nor of royal rank, seeing no one, even of her 
neighbours, knew her." And it is in the same scoffing spirit that he adds: "When hated by her husband, and 
turned out of doors, she was not saved by divine power, nor was her story believed. Such things, he says, 
have no connection with the kingdom of heaven." In what respect does such language differ from that of 
those who pour abuse on others on the public streets, and whose words are unworthy of any serious 
attention? 

CHAP. XL. 

After these assertions, he takes from the Gospel of Matthew, and perhaps also from the other Gospels, the 
account of the dove alighting upon our Saviour at His baptism by John, and desires to throw discredit upon 
the statement, alleging that the narrative is a fiction. Having completely disposed, as he imagined, of the 
story of our Lord's birth from a virgin, he does not proceed to deal in an orderly manner with the accounts 
that follow it; since passion and hatred observe no order, but angry and vindictive men slander those whom 
they hate, as the feeling comes upon them, being prevented by their passion from arranging their 
accusations on a careful and orderly plan. For if he had observed a proper arrangement, he would have 
taken up the Gospel, and, with the view of assailing it, would, have objected to the first narrative, then 
passed on to the second, and so on to the others. But now, after the birth from a virgin, this Celsus, who 
professes to be acquainted with all our history, attacks the account of the appearance of the Holy Spirit in 
the form of a dove at the baptism. He then, after that, tries to throw discredit upon the prediction that our Lord 
was to come into the world. In the next place, he runs away to what immediately follows the narrative of the 
birth of Jesus-the account of the star, and of the wise men who came from the east to worship the child. And 
you yourself may find, if you take the trouble, many confused statements made by Celsus throughout his 
whole book; so that even in this account he may, by those who know how to observe and require an orderly 
method of arrangement, be convicted of great rashness and boasting, in having inscribed upon his work the 
title of A True Discourse,-a thing which is never done by a learned philosopher. For Plato says, that it is not 
an indication of an intelligent man to make strong assertions respecting those matters which are somewhat 
uncertain; and the celebrated Chrysippus even, who frequently states the reasons by which he is decided, 
refers us to those whom we shall find to be abler speakers than himself. This man, however, who is wiser 
than those already named, and than all the other Greeks, agreeably to his assertion of being acquainted 

with everything, inscribed upon his bool<the words, A True Discourse! 

CHAP. XL!. 

But, that we may not have the appearance of intentionally passing by his charges through inability to refute 
them, we have resolved to answer each one of them separately according to our ability, attending not to the 
connection and sequence of the nature of the things themselves, but to the arrangement of the subjects as 
they occur in this book. Let us therefore notice what he has to say by way of impugning the bodily 
appearance of the Holy Spirit to our Saviour in the form of a dove. And it is a Jew who addresses the 
following language to Him whom we acknowledge to be our Lord Jesus: "When you were bathing," says the 
Jew, "beside John, you say that what had the appearance of a bird from the air alighted upon you." And then 
this same Jew of his, continuing his interrogations, asks, "What credible witness beheld this appearance? or 
who heard a voice from heaven declaring you to be the Son of God? What proof is there of it, save your own 
assertion, and the statement of another of those individuals who have been punished along with you?" 

CHAP. XL!!. 

Before we begin our reply, we have to remark that the endeavour to show, with regard to almost any history, 
however true, that it actually occurred, and to produce an intelligent conception regarding it, is one of the 
most difficult undertakings that can be attempted, and is in some instances an impossibility. For suppose 
that some one were to assert that there never had been any Trojan war, chiefly on account of the impossible 
narrative interwoven therewith, about a certain Achilles being the son of a sea-goddess Thetis and of a man 
Peleus, or Sarpedon being the son of Zeus, or Ascalaphus and lalmenus the sons of Ares, or AEneas that 
of Aphrodite, how should we prove that such was the case, especially under the weight of the fiction 
attached, I know not how, to the universally prevalent opinion that there was really a war in Ilium between 
Greeks and Trojans? And suppose, also, that some one disbelieved the story of OEdipus and Jocasta, 
and of their two sons Eteocles and Polynices, because the sphinx, a kind of half-virgin, was introduced into 
the narrative, how should we demonstrate the reality of such a thing? And in like manner also with the history 
of the Epigoni, although there is no such marvellous event interwoven with it, or with the return of the 
Heracleidae, or countless other historical events. But he who deals candidly with histories, and would wish 
to keep himself also from being imposed upon by them, will exercise his judgment as to what statements he 
will give his assent to, and what he will accept figuratively, seeking to discover the meaning of the authors of 
such inventions, and from what statements he will withhold his belief, as having been written for the 
gratification of certain individuals. And we have said this by way of anticipation respecting the whole history 
related in the Gospels concerning Jesus, not as inviting men of acuteness to a simple and unreasoning 
faith, but wishing to show that there is need of candour in those who are to read, and of much investigation, 
and, so to speak, of insight into the meaning of the writers, that the object with which each event has been 
recorded may be discovered. 

CHAP. XL!!!. 

We shall therefore say, in the first place, that if he who disbelieves the appearance of the Holy Spirit in the 
form of a dove had been described as an Epicurean, or a follower of Democritus, or a Peripatetic, the 
statement would have been in keeping with the character of such an objector. But now even this Celsus, 
wisest of all men, did not perceive that it is to a Jew, who believes more incredible things contained in the 
writings of the prophets than the narrative of the appearance of the dove, that he attributes such an 
objection! For one might say to the Jew, when expressing his disbelief of the appearance, and thinking to 
assail it as a fiction, "How are you able to prove, sir, that the Lord spake to Adam, or to Eve, or to Cain, or to 
Noah, or to Abraham, or to Isaac, or to Jacob, those words which He is recorded to have spoken to these 
men?" And, to compare history with history, I would say to the Jew, "Even your own Ezekiel writes, saying,' 
The heavens were opened, and I saw a vision of God." After relating which, he adds, ' This was the 
appearance of the likeness of the glory of the LORD; and He said to me, "'[2] etc. Now, if what is related of 
Jesus be false, since we cannot, as you suppose, clearly prove it to be true, it being seen or heard by 
Himself alone, and, as you appear to have observed, also by one of those who were punished, why should 
we not rather say that Ezekiel also was dealing in the marvellous when he said, "The heavens were 
opened," etc.? Nay, even Isaiah asserts, "I saw the Lord of hosts sitting on a throne, high and lifted up; and 
the seraphim stood round about it: the one had six wings, and the other had six wings. "[3] How can we tell 
whether he really saw them or not? Now, O Jew, you have believed these visions to be true, and to have 
been not only shown to the prophet by a diviner Spirit, but also to have been both spoken and recorded by 
the same. And who is the more worthy of belief, when declaring that the heavens were opened before him. 

and that he heard a voice, or beheld the Lord of Sabaoth sitting upon a throne high and lifted up,-whether 
Isaiah and Ezekiel or Jesus? Of the former, indeed, no work has been found equal to those of the latter; 
whereas the good deeds of Jesus have not been confined solely to the period of His tabernacling in the 
flesh, but up to the present time His power still produces conversion and amelioration of life in those who 
believe in God through Him. And a manifest proof that these things are done by His power, is the fact that, 
although, as He Himself said, and as is admitted, there are not labourers enough to gather in the harvest of 
souls, there really is nevertheless such a great harvest of those who are gathered together and conveyed 
into the everywhere existing threshing-floors and Churches of God. 

CHAP. XLIV. 

And with these arguments I answer the Jew, not disbelieving, I who am a Christian, Ezekiel and Isaiah, but 
being very desirous to show, on the footing of our common belief, that this man is far more worthy of credit 
than they are when He says that He beheld such a sight, and, as is probable, related to His disciples the 
vision which He saw, and told them of the voice which He heard. But another party might object, that not all 
those who have narrated the appearance of the dove and the voice from heaven heard the accounts of 
these things from Jesus, but that that Spirit which taught Moses the history of events before his own time, 
beginning with the creation, and descending down to Abraham his father, taught also the writers of the 
Gospel the miraculous occurrence which took place at the time of Jesus' baptism. And he who is adorned 
with the spiritual gift,[1] called the "word of wisdom," will explain also the reason of the heavens opening, 
and the dove appearing, and why the Holy Spirit appeared to Jesus in the form of no other living thing than 
that of a dove. But our present subject does not require us to explain this, our purpose being to show that 
Celsus displayed no sound judgment in representing a Jew as disbelieving, on such grounds, a fact which 
has greater probability in its favour than many events in which he firmly reposes confidence. 

CHAP. XLV. 

And I remember on one occasion, at a disputation held with certain Jews who were reputed learned men, 
having employed the following argument in the presence of many judges: "Tell me, sirs," I said, "since there 
are two individuals who have visited the human race, regarding whom are related marvellous works 
surpassing human power-Moses, viz., your own legislator, who wrote about himself, and Jesus our teacher, 
who has left no writings regarding Himself, but to whom testimony is borne by the disciples in the 
Gospels-what are the grounds for deciding that Moses is to be believed as speaking the truth, although the 
Egyptians slander him as a sorcerer, and as appearing to have wrought his mighty works by jugglery, while 
Jesus is not to be believed because you are His accusers? And yet there are nations which bear testimony 
in favour of both: the Jews to Moses; and the Christians, who do not deny the prophetic mission of Moses, 
but proving from that very source the truth of the statement regarding Jesus, accept as true the miraculous 
circumstances related of Him by His disciples. Now, if ye ask us for the reasons of our faith in Jesus, give 
yours first for believing in Moses, who lived before Him, and then we shall give you ours for accepting the 
latter. But if you draw back, and shirk a demonstration, then we, following your own example, decline for the 
present to offer any demonstration likewise; Nevertheless, admit that ye have no proof to offer for Moses, 
and then listen to our defence of Jesus derived from the law and the prophets. And now observe what is 
almost incredible! It is shown from the declarations concerning Jesus, contained in the law and the prophets, 
that both Moses and the prophets were truly prophets of God." 

CHAP. XLVI. 

For the law and the prophets are full of marvels similar to those recorded of Jesus at His baptism, viz., 
regarding the dove and the voice from heaven. And I think the wonders wrought by Jesus are a proof of the 
Holy Spirit's having then appeared in the form of a dove, although Celsus, from a desire to cast discredit 
upon them, alleges that He performed only what He had learned among the Egyptians. And I shall refer not 
only to His miracles, but, as is proper, to those also of the apostles of Jesus. For they could not without the 
help of miracles and wonders have prevailed on those who heard their new doctrines and new teachings to 
abandon their national usages, and to accept their instructions at the danger to themselves even of death. 
And there are still preserved among Christians traces of that Holy Spirit which appeared in the form of a 
dove. They expel evil spirits, and perform many cures, and foresee certain events, according to the will of 
the Logos. And although Celsus, or the Jew whom he has introduced, may treat with mockery what I am 
going to say, I shall say it nevertheless,-that many have been converted to Christianity as if against their 
will, some sort of spirit having suddenly transformed their minds from a hatred of the doctrine to a readiness 
to die in its defence, and having appeared to them either in a waking vision or a dream of the night. Many 

such instances have we known, which, ifwe were to commit to writing, although they were seen and 
witnessed by ourselves, we should afford great occasion for ridicule to unbelievers, who would imagine that 
we, like those whom they suppose to have invented such things, had ourselves also done the same. But 
God is witness of our conscientious desire, not by false statements, but by testimonies of different kinds, to 
establish the divinity of the doctrine of Jesus. And as it is a Jew who is perplexed about the account of the 
Holy Spirit having descended upon Jesus in the form of a dove, we would say to him, "Sir, who is it that says 
in Isaiah, 'And now the Lord hath sent me and His Spirit?[1] In which sentence, as the meaning is 
doubtful-viz., whether the Father and the Holy Spirit sent Jesus, or the Father sent both Christ and the Holy 
Spirit-the latter is correct. For, because the Saviour was sent, afterwards the Holy Spirit was sent also, that 
the prediction of the prophet might be fulfilled; and as it was necessary that the fulfilment of the prophecy 
should be known to posterity, the disciples of Jesus for that reason committed the result to writing. 

CHAP. XLVII. 

I would like to say to Celsus, who represents the Jew as accepting somehow John as a Baptist, who 
baptized Jesus, that the existence of John the Baptist, baptizing for the remission of sins, is related by one 
who lived no great length of time after John and Jesus. For in the 1 8th book of his Antiquities[2] of the Jews, 
Josephus bears witness to John as having been a Baptist, and as promising purification to those who 
underwent the rite. Now this writer, although not believing in Jesus as the Christ, in seeking after the cause of 
the fall of Jerusalem and the destruction of the temple, whereas he ought to have said that the conspiracy 
against Jesus was the cause of these calamities befalling the people, since they put to death Christ, who 
was a prophet, says nevertheless-being, although against his will, not far from the truth-that these disasters 
happened to the Jews as a punishment for the death of James the Just, who was a brother of Jesus (called 
Christ),-the Jews having put him to death, although he was a man most distinguished for his justice. [3] Paul, 
a genuine disciple of Jesus, says that he regarded this James as a brother of the Lord, not so much on 
account of their relationship by blood, or of their being brought up together, as because of his virtue and 
doctrine. [4] If, then, he says that it was on account of James that the desolation of Jerusalem was made to 
overtake the Jews, how should it not be more in accordance with reason to say that it happened on account 
(of the death) of Jesus Christ, of whose divinity so many Churches are witnesses, composed of those who 
have been convened from a flood of sins, and who have joined themselves to the Creator, and who refer all 
their actions to His good pleasure. 

CHAP. XLVIII. 

Although the Jew, then, may offer no defence for himself in the instances of Ezekiel and Isaiah, when we 
compare the opening of the heavens to Jesus; and the voice that was heard by Him, to the similar cases 
which we find recorded in Ezekiel and Isaiah, or any other of the prophets, we nevertheless, so far as we 
can, shall support our position, maintaining that, as it is a matter of belief that in a dream impressions have 
been brought before the minds of many, some relating to divine things, and others to future events of this life, 
and this either with clearness or in an enigmatic manner,-a fact which is manifest to all who accept the 
doctrine of providence; so how is it absurd to say that the mind which could receive impressions in a dream 
should be impressed also in a waking vision, for the benefit either of him on whom the impressions are 
made, or of those who are to hear the account of them from him? And as in a dream we fancy that we hear, 
and that the organs of hearing are actually impressed, and that we see with our eyes-although neither the 
bodily organs of sight nor hearing are affected, but it is the mind alone which has these sensations-so there 
is no absurdity in believing that similar things occurred to the prophets, when it is recorded that they 
witnessed occurrences of a rather wonderful kind, as when they either heard the words of the Lord or beheld 
the heavens opened. For I do not suppose that the visible heaven was actually opened, and its physical 
structure divided, in order that Ezekiel might be able to record such an occurrence. Should not, therefore, the 
same be believed of the Saviour by every intelligent hearer of the Gospels?-although such an occurrence 
may be a stumbling-block to the simple, who in their simplicity would set the whole world in movement, and 
split in sunder the compact and mighty body of the whole heavens. But he who examines such matters more 
profoundly will say, that there being, as the Scripture calls it, a kind of general divine perception which the 
blessed man alone knows how to discover, according to the saying of Solomon, "Thou shall find the 
knowledge of God;"[5] and as there are various forms of this perceptive power, such as a faculty of vision 
which can naturally see things that are better than bodies, among which are ranked the cherubim and 
seraphim; and a faculty of hearing which can perceive voices which have not their being in the air; and a 
sense of taste which can make use of living bread that has come down from heaven, and that giveth life unto 
the world; and so also a sense of smelling, which scents such things as leads Paul to say that he is a sweet 
savour of Christ unto God;[1] and a sense of touch, by which John says that he "handled with his hands of 

the Word of life;"[2]-the blessed prophets having discovered this divine perception, and seeing and 
hearing in this divine manner, and tasting lil<ewise, and smelling, so to speak, with no sensible organs of 
perception, and laying hold on the Logos by faith, so that a healing effluence from it comes upon them, saw 
in this manner what they record as having seen, and heard what they say they heard, and were affected in a 
similar manner to what they describe when eating the roll of a book that was given them. [3] And so also 
Isaac smelled the savour of his son's divine garments, [4] and added to the spiritual blessing these words: 
"See, the savour of my son is as the savour of a full field which the LORD blessed. "[5] And similarly to this, 
and more as a matter to be understood by the mind than to be perceived by the senses, Jesus touched the 
leper,[6] to cleanse him, as I think, in a twofold sense,-freeing him not only, as the multitude heard, from the 
visible leprosy by visible contact, but also from that other leprosy, by His truly divine touch. It is in this way, 
accordingly, that John testifies when he says, "I beheld the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove, and 
it abode upon Him. And I knew Him not; but He that sent me to baptize with water, the same said to me. 
Upon whom you will see the Spirit descending, and abiding on Him, the same is He that baptizeth with the 
Holy Ghost And I saw, and bear witness, that this is the Son of God. "[7] Now it was to Jesus that the heavens 
were opened; and on that occasion no one except John is recorded to have seen them opened. But with 
respect to this opening of the heavens, the Saviour, foretelling to His disciples that it would happen, and that 
they would see it, says, "Verily, verily, I say unto you. Ye shall see the heavens opened, and the angels of 
God ascending and descending upon the Son of man. "[8] And so Paul was carried away into the third 
heaven, having previously seen it opened, since he was a disciple of Jesus. It does not, however, belong to 
our present object to explain why Paul says, "Whether in the body, I know not; or whether out of the body, I 
know not: God knoweth."[9] But I shall add to my argument even those very points which Celsus imagines, 
viz., that Jesus Himself related the account of the opening of the heavens, and the descent of the Holy Spirit 
upon Him at the Jordan in the form of a dove, although the Scripture does not assert that He said that He 
saw it. For this great man did not perceive that it was not in keeping with Him who commanded His disciples 
on the occasion of the vision on the mount, "Tell what ye have seen to no man, until the Son of man he risen 
from the dead,"[1 0] to have related to His disciples what was seen and heard by John at the Jordan. For it 
may be observed as a trait of the character of Jesus, that He on all occasions avoided unnecessary talk 
about Himself; and on that account said, "If I speak of Myself, My witness is not true. "[1 1] And since He 
avoided unnecessary talk about Himself, and preferred to show by acts rather than words that He was the 
Christ, the Jews for that reason said to Him, "If Thou art the Christ, tell us plainly. "[1 2] And as it is a Jew who, 
in the work of Celsus, uses the language to Jesus regarding the appearance of the Holy Spirit in the form of 
a dove, "This is your own testimony, unsupported save by one of those who were sharers of your 
punishment, whom you adduce," it is necessary for us to show him that such a statement is not appropriately 
placed in the mouth of a Jew. For the Jews do not connect John with Jesus, nor the punishment of John with 
that of Christ. And by this instance, this man who boasts of universal knowledge is convicted of not knowing 
what words he ought to ascribe to a Jew engaged in a disputation with Jesus. 

CHAP. XLIX. 

After this he wilfully sets aside, I know not why, the strongest evidence in confirmation of the claims of Jesus, 
viz., that His coming was predicted by the Jewish prophets-Moses, and those who succeeded as well as 
preceded that legislator-from inability, as I think, to meet the argument that neither the Jews nor any other 
heretical sect refuse to believe that Christ was the subject of prophecy. But perhaps he was unacquainted 
with the prophecies relating to Christ. For no one who was acquainted with the statements of the Christians, 
that many prophets foretold the advent of the Saviour, would have ascribed to a Jew sentiments which it 
would have better befitted a Samaritan or a Sadducee to utter; nor would the Jew in the dialogue have 
expressed himself in language like the following: "But my prophet once declared in Jerusalem, that the Son 
of God will come as the Judge of the righteous and the Punisher of the wicked." Now it is not one of the 
prophets merely who predicted the advent of Christ. But although the Samaritans and Sadducees, who 
receive the books of Moses alone, would say that there were contained in them predictions regarding 
Christ, yet certainly not in Jerusalem, which is not even mentioned in the times of Moses, was the prophecy 
uttered. It were indeed to be desired, that all the accusers of Christianity were equally ignorant with Celsus, 
not only of the facts, but of the bare letter of Scripture, and would so direct their assaults against it, that their 
arguments might not have the least available influence in shaking, I do not say the faith, but the little faith of 
unstable and temporary believers. A Jew, however, would not admit that any prophet used the expression, 
"The ' Son of God' will come;" for the term which they employ is, "The 'Christ of God' will come." And many a 
time indeed do they directly interrogate us about the "Son of God," saying that no such being exists, or was 
made the subject of prophecy. We do not of course assert that the "Son of God" is not the subject of 
prophecy; but we assert that he most inappropriately attributes to the Jewish disputant, who would not allow 
that He was, such language as, "My prophet once declared in Jerusalem that the ' Son of God' will come." 

CHAP. L. 

In the next place, as if the only event predicted were this, that He was to be "the Judge of the righteous and 
the Punisher of the wicked," and as if neither the place of His birth, nor the sufferings which He waste endure 
at the hands of the Jews, nor His resurrection, nor the wonderful works which He was to perform, had been 
made the subject of prophecy, he continues "Why should it be you alone, rather than innumerable others, 
who existed after the prophecies were published, to whom these predictions are applicable?" And desiring, 
I know not how, to suggest to others the possibility of the notion that they themselves were the persons 
referred to by the prophets, he says that "some, carried away by enthusiasm, and others having gathered a 
multitude of followers, give out that the Son of God is come down from heaven." Now we have not 
ascertained that such occurrences are admitted to have taken place among the Jews, we have to remark 
then, in the first place, that many of the prophets have uttered predictions! in all kinds of ways[1] regarding 
Christ; some by means of dark sayings, others in allegories or in some other manner, and some also in 
express words. And as in what follows he says, in the character of the Jew addressing the converts from his 
own nation, and repeating emphatically and malevolently, that "the prophecies referred to the events of his 
life may also suit other events as well," we shall state a few of them out of a greater number; and with respect 
to these, any one who chooses may say what he thinks fitted to ensure a refutation of them, and which may 
turn away intelligent believers from the faith. 

CHAP. LI. 

Now the Scripture speaks, respecting the place of the Saviour's birth-that the Ruler was to come forth from 
Bethlehem-in the following manner: "And thou Bethlehem, house of Ephrata, art not the least among the 
thousands of Judah: for out of thee shall He come forth unto Me who is to be Ruler in Israel; and His goings 
forth have been of old, from everlasting. "[2] Now this prophecy could not suit any one of those who, as 
Celsus' Jew says, were fanatics and mob-leaders, and who gave out that they had come from heaven, 
unless it were clearly shown that He had been born in Bethlehem, or, as another might say, had come forth 
from Bethlehem to be the leader of the people. With respect to the birth of Jesus in Bethlehem, if any one 
desires, after the prophecy of Micah and after the history recorded in the Gospels by the disciples of Jesus, 
to have additional evidence from other sources, let him know that, in conformity with the narrative in the 
Gospel regarding His birth, there is shown at Bethlehem the cave[3] where He was born, and the manger in 
the cave where He was wrapped in swaddling-clothes. And this sight is greatly talked of in surrounding 
places, even among the enemies of the faith, it being said that in this cave was born that Jesus who is 
worshipped and reverenced by the Christians. [4] Moreover, I am of opinion that, before the advent of Christ, 
the chief priests and scribes of the people, on account of the distinctness and clearness of this prophecy, 
taught that in Bethlehem the Christ was to be born. And this opinion had prevailed also extensively among 
the Jews; for which reason it is related that Herod, on inquiring at the chief priests and scribes of the people, 
heard from them that the Christ was to be born in Bethlehem of Judea, "whence David was." It is stated also 
in the Gospel according to John, that the Jews declared that the Christ was to be born in Bethlehem, 
"whence David was."[1] But after our Lord's coming, those who busied themselves with overthrowing the 
belief that the place of His birth had been the subject of prophecy from the beginning, withheld such 
teaching from the people; acting in a similar manner to those individuals who won over those soldiers of the 
guard stationed around the tomb who had seen Him arise from the dead, and who instructed these 
eye-witnesses to report as follows: "Say that His disciples, while we slept, came and stole Him away. And if 
this come to the governor's ears, we shall persuade him, and secure you. "[2] 

CHAP. Lll. 

Strife and prejudice are powerful instruments in leading men to disregard even those things which are 
abundantly clear; so that they who have somehow become familiar with certain opinions, which have deeply 
imbued their minds, and stamped them with a certain character, will not give them up. For a man will 
abandon his habits in respect to other things, although it may be difficult for him to tear himself from them, 
more easily than he will surrender his opinions. Nay, even the former are not easily put aside by those who 
have become accustomed to them; and so neither houses, nor cities, nor villages, nor intimate 
acquaintances, are willingly forsaken when we are prejudiced in their favour. This, therefore, was a reason 
why many of the Jews at that time disregarded the clear testimony of the prophecies, and miracles which 
Jesus wrought, and of the sufferings which He is related to have endured. And that human nature is thus 
affected, will be manifest to those who observe that those who have once been prejudiced in favour of the 
most contemptible and paltry traditions of their ancestors and fellow-citizens, with difficulty lay them aside. 

For example, no one could easily persuade an Egyptian to despise what he had learned from his fathers, 
so as no longer to consider this or that irrational animal as a god, or not to guard against eating, even under 
the penalty of death, of the flesh of such an animal. Now, if in carrying our examination of this subject to a 
considerable length, we have enumerated the points respecting Bethlehem, and the prophecy regarding it, 
we consider that we were obliged to do this, by way of defence against those who would assert that if the 
prophecies current among the Jews I regarding Jesus were so clear as we represent them, why did they not 
at His coming give in their adhesion to His doctrine, and betake them selves to the better life pointed out by 
Him? Let no one, however, bring such a reproach against believers, since he may see that reasons of no 
light weight are assigned by those who have learned to state them, for their faith in Jesus. 

CHAP. Llll. 

And if we should ask for a second prophecy, which may appear to us to have a clear reference to Jesus, we 
would quote that which was written by Moses very many years before the advent of Christ, when he makes 
Jacob, on his departure from this life, to have uttered predictions regarding each of his sons, and to have 
said of Judah along with the others: "The ruler will not fail from Judah, and the governor from his loins, until 
that which is reserved for him come. "[3] Now, any one meeting with this prophecy, which is in reality much 
older than Moses, so that one who was not a believer might suspect that it was not written by him, would be 
surprised that Moses should be able to predict that the princes of the Jews, seeing there are among them 
twelve tribes, should be born of the tribe of Judah, and should be the rulers of the people; for which reason 
also the whole nation are called Jews, deriving their name from the ruling tribe. And, in the second place, 
one who candidly considers the prophecy, would be surprised how, after declaring that the rulers and 
governors of the people were to proceed from the tribe of Judah, he should determine also the limit of their 
rule, saying that "the ruler should not fail from Judah, nor the governor from his loins, until there should come 
that which was reserved for him, and that He is the expectation of the Gentiles. "[4] For He came for whom 
these things were reserved, viz., the Christ of God, the ruler of the promises of God. And manifestly He is the 
only one among those who preceded, and, I might make bold to say, among those also who followed Him, 
who was the expectation of the Gentiles; for converts from among all the Gentile nations have believed on 
God through Him, and that in conformity with the prediction of Isaiah, that in His name the Gentiles had 
hoped: "In Thy name shall the Gentiles hope. "[5] And this man said also to those who are in prison, as 
every man is a captive to the chains of his sins, "Come forth;" and to the ignorant, "Come into the light:" these 
things also having been thus foretold: "I have given Thee for a covenant of the people, to establish the 
earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritage; saying to the prisoners. Go forth; and to them that are in 
darkness. Show yourselves. "[1] And we may see at the appearing of this man, by means of those who 
everywhere throughout the world have reposed a simple faith in Him, the fulfilment of this prediction: "They 
shall feed in the ways, and their pastures shall be in all the beaten tracks. "[2] 

CHAP. LIV. 

And since Celsus, although professing to know all about the Gospel, reproaches the Saviour because of 
His sufferings, saying that He received no assistance from the Father, or was unable to aid Himself; we 
have to state that His sufferings were the subject of prophecy, along with the cause of them; because it was 
for the benefit of mankind that He should die on their account, [3] and should suffer stripes because of His 
condemnation. It was predicted, moreover, that some from among the Gentiles would come to the 
knowledge of Him (among whom the prophets are not included); and it had been declared that He would be 
seen in a form which is deemed dishonourable among men. The words of prophecy run thus: "Lo, my 
Servant shall have understanding, and shall be exalted and glorified, and raised exceedingly high. In like 
manner, many shall be astonished at Thee; so Thy form shall be in no reputation among men, and Thy 
glory among the sons of men. Lo, many nations shall marvel because of Him; and kings shall close their 
mouths: because they, to whom no message about Him was sent, shall see Him; and they who have not 
heard of Him, shall have knowledge of Him. "[4] "Lord, who hath believed our report? and to whom was the 
arm of the LORD revealed? We have reported, as a child before Him, as a root in a thirsty ground. He has 
no form nor glory; and we beheld Him, and He had not any form nor beauty: but His appearance was without 
honour, and deficient more than that of all men. He was a man under suffering, and who knew how to bear 
sickness: because His countenance was averted. He was treated with disrespect, and was made of no 
account. This man bears our sins, and suffers pain on our behalf; and we regarded Him as in trouble, and in 
suffering, and as ill-treated. But He was wounded for our sins, and bruised for our iniquities. The 
chastisement of our peace was upon Him; by His stripes we were healed. We all, like sheep, wandered 
from the way. A man wandered in his way, and the Lord delivered Him on account of our sins; and He, 
because of His evil treatment, opens not His mouth. As a sheep was He led to slaughter; and as a lamb 

before her shearer is dumb, so He opens not His mouth. In His humiliation His judgment was taken away. 
And who shall describe His generation? because His life is taken away from the earth; because of the 
iniquities of My people was He led unto death. "[5] 

CHAP. LV. 

Now I remember that, on one occasion, at a disputation held with certain Jews, who were reckoned wise 
men, I quoted these prophecies; to which my Jewish opponent replied, that these predictions bore 
reference to the whole people, regarded as one individual, and as being in a state of dispersion and 
suffering, in order that many proselytes might be gained, on account of the dispersion of the Jews among 
numerous heathen nations. And in this way he explained the words, "Thy form shall be of no reputation 
among men;" and then, "They to whom no message was sent respecting him shall see;" and the 
expression, "A man under suffering." Many arguments were employed on that occasion during the 
discussion to prove that these predictions regarding one particular person were not rightly applied by them 
to the whole nation. And I asked to what character the expression would be appropriate, "This man bears 
our sins, and suffers pain on our behalf;" and this, "But He was wounded for our sins, and bruised for our 
iniquities;" and to whom the expression properly belonged, "By His stripes were we healed." For it is 
manifest that it is they who had been sinners, and had been healed by the Saviour's sufferings (whether 
belonging to the Jewish nation or converts from the Gentiles), who use such language in the writings of the 
prophet who foresaw these events, and who, under the influence of the Holy Spirit, applied these words to a 
person. But we seemed to press them hardest with the expression, "Because of the iniquities of My people 
was He led away unto death." For if the people, according to them, are the subject of the prophecy, how is 
the man said to be led away to death because of the iniquities of the people of God, unless he be a different 
person from that people of God? And who is this person save Jesus Christ, by whose stripes they who 
believe on Him are healed, when "He had spoiled the principalities and powers (that were over us), and 
had made a show of them openly on His cross?"[6] At another time we may explain the several parts of the 
prophecy, leaving none of them unexamined. But these matters have been treated at greater length, 
necessarily as I think, on account of the language of the Jew, as quoted in the work of Celsus. 

CHAP. LVI. 

Now it escaped the notice of Celsus, and of the Jew whom he has introduced, and of all who are not 
believers in Jesus, that the prophecies speak of two advents of Christ: the former characterized by human 
suffering and humility, in order that Christ, being with men, might make known the way that leads to God, and 
might leave no man in this life a ground of excuse, in saying that he knew not of the judgment to come; and 
the latter, distinguished only by glory and divinity, having no element of human infirmity intermingled with its 
divine greatness. To quote the prophecies at length would be tedious; and I deem it sufficient for the present 
to quote a part of the forty-fifth Psalm, which has this inscription, in addition to others, "A Psalm for the 
Beloved," where God is evidently addressed in these words: "Grace is poured into Thy lips: therefore God 
will bless Thee for ever and ever. Gird Thy sword on Thy thigh, O mighty One, with Thy beauty and Thy 
majesty. And stretch forth, and ride prosperously, and reign, because of Thy truth, and meekness, and 
righteousness; and Thy right hand shall lead Thee marvellously. Thine arrows are pointed, O mighty One; 
the people will fall under Thee in the heart of the enemies of the King."[1] But attend carefully to what follows, 
where He is called God: "For Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever: a sceptre of righteousness is the 
sceptre of Thy kingdom. Thou hast loved righteousness, and hated iniquity: therefore God, even Thy God, 
hath anointed Thee with the oil of gladness above Thy fellows. "[2] And observe that the prophet, speaking 
familiarly to God, whose "throne is for ever and ever," and "a sceptre of righteousness the sceptre of His 
kingdom," says that this God has been anointed by a God who was His God, and anointed, because more 
than His fellows He had loved righteousness and hated iniquity. And I remember that I pressed the Jew, 
who was deemed a learned man, very hard with this passage; and he, being perplexed about it, gave such 
an answer as was in keeping with his Judaistic views, saying that the words, "Thy throne, O God, is for ever 
and ever: a sceptre of righteousness is the sceptre of Thy kingdom," are spoken of the God of all things; 
and these, "Thou hast loved righteousness and hated iniquity, therefore Thy God hath anointed Thee," etc., 
refer to the Messiah. [3] 

CHAP. LVII. 

The Jew, moreover, in the treatise, addresses the Saviour thus: "If you say that every man, born according 
to the decree of Divine Providence, is a son of God, in what respect should you differ from another?" In reply 
to whom we say, that every man who, as Paul expresses it, is no longer under fear, as a schoolmaster, but 

who chooses good for its own sake, is "a son of God;" but this man is distinguished far and wide above 
every man who is called, on account of his virtues, a son of God, seeing He is, as it were, a kind of source 
and beginning of all such. The words of Paul are as follow: "For ye have not received the spirit of bondage 
again to fear; but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father."[4] But, according 
to the Jew of Celsus, "countless individuals will convict Jesus of falsehood, alleging that those predictions 
which were spoken of him were intended of them." We are not aware, indeed, whether Celsus knew of any 
who, after coming into this world, and having desired to act as Jesus did, declared themselves to be also 
the "sons of God," or the "power" of God. But since it is in the spirit of truth that we examine each passage, 
we shall mention that there was a certain Theudas among the Jews before the birth of Christ, who gave 
himself out as some great one, after whose death his deluded followers were completely dispersed. And 
after him, in the days of the census, when Jesus appears to have been born, one Judas, a Galilean, 
gathered around him many of the Jewish people, saying he was a wise man, and a teacher of certain new 
doctrines. And when he also had paid the penalty of his rebellion, his doctrine was overturned, having taken 
hold of very few persons indeed, and these of the very humblest condition. And after the times of Jesus, 
Dositheus the Samaritan also wished to persuade the Samaritans that he was the Christ predicted by 
Moses; and he appears to have gained over some to his views. But it is not absurd, in quoting the extremely 
wise observation of that Gamaliel named in the book of Acts, to show how those persons above mentioned 
were strangers to the promise, being neither "sons of God" nor "powers" of God, whereas Christ Jesus was 
truly the Son of God. Now Gamaliel, in the passage referred to, said: "If this counsel or this work be of men, it 
will come to nought" (as also did the designs of those men already mentioned after their death); "but if it be 
of God, ye cannot overthrow this doctrine, lest haply ye be found even to fight against God. "[3] There was 
also Simon the Samaritan magician, who wished to draw away certain by his magical arts. And on that 
occasion he was successful; but now-a-days it is impossible to find, I suppose, thirty of his followers in the 
entire world, and probably I have even overstated the number. There are exceedingly few in Palestine; 
while in the rest of the world, through which he desired to spread the glory of his name, you find it nowhere 
mentioned. And where it is found, it is found quoted from the Acts of the Apostles; so that it is to Christians 
that he owes this mention of himself, the unmistakeable result having proved that Simon was in no respect 
divine. 

CHAP. LVIII. 

After these matters this Jew of Celsus, instead of the Magi mentioned in the Gospel, says that "Chaldeans 
are spoken of by Jesus as having been induced to come to him at his birth, and to worship him while yet an 
infant as a God, and to have made this known to Herod the tetrarch; and that the latter sent and slew all the 
infants that had been born about the same time, thinking that in this way he would ensure his death among 
the others; and that he was led to do this through fear that, if Jesus lived to a sufficient age, he would obtain 
the throne." See now in this instance the blunder of one who cannot distinguish between Magi and 
Chaldeans, nor perceive that what they profess is different, and so has falsified the Gospel narrative. I know 
not, moreover, why he has passed by in silence the cause which led the Magi to come, and why he has not 
stated, according to the scriptural account, that it was a star seen by them in the east. Let us see now what 
answer we have to make to these statements. The star that was seen in the east we consider to have been 
a new star, unlike any of the other well-known planetary bodies, either those in the firmament above or those 
among the lower orbs, but partaking of the nature of those celestial bodies which appear at times, such as 
comets, or those meteors which resemble beams of wood, or beards, or wine jars, or any of those other 
names by which the Greeks are accustomed to describe their varying appearances. And we establish our 
position in the following manner. 

CHAP. LIX. 

It has been observed that, on the occurrence of great events, and of mighty changes in terrestrial things, 
such stars are wont to appear, indicating either the removal of dynasties or the breaking out of wars, or the 
happening of such circumstances as may cause commotions upon the earth. But we have read in the 
Treatise an Comets by Chaeremon the Stoic, that on some occasions also, when good was to happen, 
comets made their appearance; and he gives an account of such instances. If, then, at the commencement 
of new dynasties, or on the occasion of other important events, there arises a comet so called, or any 
similar celestial body, why should it be matter of wonder that at the birth of Him who was to introduce a new 
doctrine to the human race, and to make known His teaching not only to Jews, but also to Greeks, and to 
many of the barbarous nations besides, a star should have arisen? Now I would say, that with respect to 
comets there is no prophecy in circulation to the effect that such and such a comet was to arise in 
connection with a particular kingdom or a particular time; but with respect to the appearance of a star at the 

birth of Jesus there is a prophecy of Balaam recorded by IVIoses i to this effect: "There shall arise a star out 
of Jacob, and a man shall rise up out of Israel. "[1] And now, if it shall be deemed necessary to examine the 
narrative about the Magi, and the appearance of the star at the birth of Jesus, the following is what we have 
to say, partly in answer to the Greeks, and partly to the Jews. 

CHAP. LX. 

To the Greeks, then, I have to say that the Magi, being on familiar terms with evil spirits, and invoking them 
for such purposes as their knowledge and wishes extend to, bring about such results only as do not appear 
to exceed the superhuman power and strength of the evil spirits, and of the spells which invoke them, to 
accomplish; but should some greater manifestation of divinity be made, then the powers of the evil spirits 
are overthrown, being unable to resist the light of divinity. It is probable, therefore, that since at the birth of 
Jesus "a multitude of the heavenly host," as Luke records, and as I believe, "praised God, saying. Glory to 
God in the highest, and on earth peace, good-will towards men," the evil spirits on that account became 
feeble, and lost their strength, the falsity of their sorcery being manifested, and their power being broken; this 
overthrow being brought about not only by the angels having visited the terrestrial regions on account of the 
birth of Jesus, but also by the power of Jesus Himself, and His innate divinity. The Magi, accordingly, 
wishing to produce the customary results, which formerly they used to perform by means of certain spells 
and sorceries, sought to know the reason of their failure, conjecturing the cause to be a great one; and 
beholding a divine sign in the heaven, they desired to learn its signification. I am therefore of opinion that, 
possessing as they did the prophecies of Balaam, which Moses also records, inasmuch as Balaam was 
celebrated for such predictions, and finding among them the prophecy about the star, and the words, "I shall 
show him to him, but not now; I deem him happy, although he will not be near,"[1] they conjectured that the 
man whose appearance had been foretold along with that of the star, had actually come into the world; and 
having pro-determined that he was superior in power to all demons, and to all common appearances and 
powers, they resolved to offer him homage. They came, accordingly, to Judea, persuaded that some king 
had been born; but not knowing over what kingdom he was to reign, and being ignorant also of the place of 
his birth, bringing gifts, which they offered to him as one whose nature partook, if I may so speak, both of 
God and of a mortal man, -gold, viz., as to a king; myrrh, as to one who was mortal; and incense, as to a 
God; and they brought these offerings after they had learned the place of His birth. But since He was a God, 
the Saviour of the human race, raised far above all those angels which minister to men, an angel rewarded 
the piety of the Magi for their worship of Him, by making known to them that they were not to go back to 
Herod, but to return to their own homes by another way. 

CHAP. LXI. 

That Herod conspired against the Child (although the Jew of Celsus does not believe that this really 
happened), is not to be wondered at. For wickedness is in a certain sense blind, and would desire to defeat 
fate, as if it were stronger than it. And this being Herod's condition, he both believed that a king of the Jews 
had been born, and yet cherished a purpose contradictory of such a belief; not seeing that the Child is 
assuredly either a king and will come to the throne, or that he is not to be a king, and that his death, therefore, 
will be to no purpose. He desired accordingly to kill Him, his mind being agitated by contending passions 
on account of his wickedness, and being instigated by the blind and wicked devil who from the very 
beginning plotted against the Saviour, imagining that He was and would become some mighty one. An 
angel, however, perceiving the course of events, intimated to Joseph, although Celsus may not believe it, 
that he was to withdraw with the Child and His mother into Egypt, while Herod slew all the infants that were in 
Bethlehem and the surrounding borders, in the hope that he would thus destroy Him also who had been 
born King of the Jews. For he saw not the sleepless guardian power that is around those who deserve to be 
protected and preserved for the salvation of men, of whom Jesus is the first, superior to all others in honour 
and excellence, who was to be a King indeed, but not in the sense that Herod supposed, but in that in which 
it became God to bestow a kingdom, -for the benefit, viz., of those who were to be under His sway, who was 
to confer no ordinary and unimportant blessings, so to speak, upon His subjects, but who was to train them 
and to subject them to laws that were truly from God. And Jesus, knowing this well, and denying that He was 
a king in the sense that the multitude expected, but declaring the superiority of His kingdom, says: "If My 
kingdom were of this world, then would My servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews: but now 
is My kingdom not of this world. "[2] Now, if Celsus had seen this, he would not have said: "But if, then, this 
was done in order that you might not reign in his stead when you had grown to man's estate; why, after you 
did reach that estate, do you not become a king, instead of you, the Son of God, wandering about in so 
mean a condition, hiding yourself through fear, and leading a miserable life up and down?" Now, it is not 
dishonourable to avoid exposing one's self to dangers, but to guard carefully against them, when this is 

done, not through fear of death, but from a desire to benefit others by remaining in life, until the proper time 
come for one who has assumed human nature to die a death that will be useful to mankind. And this is plain 
to him who reflects that Jesus died for the sake of men,-a point of which we have spoken to the best of our 
ability in the preceding pages. 

CHAP. LXII. 

And after such statements, showing his ignorance even of the number of the apostles, he proceeds thus: 
"Jesus having gathered around him ten or eleven persons of notorious character, the very wickedest of 
tax-gatherers and sailors, fled in company with them from place to place, and obtained his living in a 
shameful and importunate manner." Let us to the best of our power see what truth there is in such a 
statement. It is manifest to us all who possess the Gospel narratives, which Celsus does not appear even to 
have read, that Jesus selected twelve apostles, and that of these Matthew alone was a tax-gatherer; that 
when he calls them indiscriminately sailors, he probably means James and John, because they left their 
ship and their father Zebedee, and followed Jesus; for Peter and his brother Andrew, who employed a net to 
gain their necessary subsistence, must be classed not as sailors, but as the Scripture describes them, as 
fishermen. The Lebes[3] also, who was a follower of Jesus, may have been a tax-gatherer; but he was not of 
the number of the apostles, except according to a statement in one of the copies of Mark's Gospel. [1] And 
we have not ascertained the employments of the remaining disciples, by which they earned their livelihood 
before becoming disciples of Jesus. I assert, therefore, in answer to such statements as the above, that it is 
clear to all who are able to institute an intelligent and candid examination into the history of the apostles of 
Jesus, that it was by help of a divine power that these men taught Christianity, and succeeded in leading 
others to embrace the word of God. For it was not any power of speaking, or any orderly arrangement of 
their message, according to the arts of Grecian dialectics or rhetoric, which was in them the effective cause 
of converting their hearers. Nay, I am of opinion that if Jesus had selected some individuals who were wise 
according to the apprehension of the multitude, and who were fitted both to think and speak so as to please 
them, and had used such as the ministers of His doctrine. He would most justly have been suspected of 
employing artifices, like those philosophers who are the leaders of certain sects, and consequently the 
promise respecting the divinity of His doctrine would not have manifested itself; for had the doctrine and the 
preaching consisted in the persuasive utterance and arrangement of words, then faith also, like that of the 
philosophers of the world in their opinions, would have been through the wisdom of men, and not through the 
power of God. Now, who is there on seeing fishermen and tax-gatherers, who had not acquired even the 
merest elements of learning (as the Gospel relates of them, and in respect to which Celsus believes that 
they speak the truth, inasmuch as it is their own ignorance which they record), discoursing boldly not only 
among the Jews of faith in Jesus, but also preaching Him with success among other nations, would not 
inquire whence they derived this power of persuasion, as theirs was certainly not the common method 
followed by the multitude? And who would not say that the promise, "Follow Me, and I will make you fishers 
of men, "[2] had been accomplished by Jesus in the history of His apostles by a sort of divine power? And to 
this also, Paul, referring in terms of commendation, as we have stated a little above, says: "And my speech 
and my preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of 
power; that your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. "[3] For, according to 
the predictions in the prophets, foretelling the preaching of the Gospel, "the Lord gave the word in great 
power to them who preached it, even the King of the powers of the Beloved, "[4] in order that the prophecy 
might be fulfilled which said, "His words shall run very swiftly. "[5] And we see that "the voice of the apostles 
of Jesus has gone forth into all the earth, and their words to the end of the world, "[6] On this account are they 
who hear the word powerfully proclaimed filled with power, which they manifest both by their dispositions 
and their lives, and by struggling even to death on behalf of the truth; while some are altogether empty, 
although they profess to believe in God through Jesus, inasmuch as, not possessing any divine power, they 
have the appearance only of being converted to the word of God. And although I have previously 
mentioned a Gospel declaration uttered by the Saviour, I shall nevertheless quote it again, as appropriate 
to the present occasion, as it confirms both the divine manifestation of our Saviour's foreknowledge 
regarding the preaching of His Gospel, and the power of His word, which without the aid of teachers gains 
the mastery over those who yield their assent to persuasion accompanied with divine power; and the words 
of Jesus referred to are, "The harvest is plenteous, but the labourers are few; pray ye therefore the Lord of 
the harvest, that He will send forth labourers into His harvest. "[7] 

CHAP. LXIII. 

And since Celsus has termed the apostles of Jesus men of infamous notoriety, saying that they were 
tax-gatherers and sailors of the vilest character, we have to remark, with respect to this charge, that he 

seems, in order to bring an accusation against Ciiristianity, to believe tiie Gospel accounts only where he 
pleases, and to express his disbelief of them, in order that he may not be forced to admit the manifestations 
of Divinity related in these same books; whereas one who sees the spirit of truth by which the writers are 
influenced, ought, from their narration of things of inferior importance, to believe also the account of divine 
things. Now in the general Epistle of Barnabas, from which perhaps Celsus took the statement that the 
apostles were notoriously wicked men, it is recorded that "Jesus selected His own apostles, as persons 
who were more guilty of sin than all other evildoers. "[8] And in the Gospel according to Luke, Peter says to 
Jesus, "Depart from me, O Lord, for I am a sinful man. "[9] Moreover, Paul, who himself also at a later time 
became an apostle of Jesus, says in his Epistle to Timothy, "This is a faithful saying, that Jesus Christ came 
into, the world to save sinners, of whom I am the chief."[1] And I do not know how Celsus should have 
forgotten or not have thought of saying something about Paul, the founder, after Jesus, of the Churches that 
are in Christ. He saw, probably, that anything he might say about that apostle would require to be explained, 
in consistency with the fact that, after being a persecutor of the Church of God, and a bitter opponent of 
believers, who went so far even as to deliver over the disciples of Jesus to death, so great a change 
afterwards passed over him, that he preached the Gospel of Jesus from Jerusalem round about to lllyricum, 
and was ambitious to carry the glad tidings where he needed not to build upon another man's foundation, 
but to places where the Gospel of God in Christ had not been proclaimed at all. What absurdity, therefore, is 
there, if Jesus, desiring to manifest to the human race the power which He possesses to heal souls, should 
have selected notorious and wicked men, and should have raised them to such a degree of moral 
excellence, that they, became a pattern of the purest virtue to all who were converted by their instrumentality 
to the Gospel of Christ? 

CHAP. LXIV. 

But if we were to reproach those who have been converted with their former lives, then we would have 
occasion to accuse Phaedo also, even after he became a philosopher; since, as the history relates, he was 
drawn away by Socrates from a house of bad fame[2] to the pursuits of philosophy. Nay, even the licentious 
life of Polemo, the successor of Xenocrates, will be a subject of reproach to philosophy; whereas even in 
these instances we ought to regard it as a ground of praise, that reasoning was enabled, by the persuasive 
power of these men, to convert from the practice of such vices those who had been formerly entangled by 
them. Now among the Greeks there was only one Phaedo, I know, not if there were a second, and one 
Polemo, who betook themselves to philosophy, after a licentious and most wicked life; while with Jesus 
there were not only at the time we speak of, the twelve disciples, but many more at all times, who, becoming 
a band of temperate men, speak in the following terms of their former lives: "For we ourselves also were 
sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, 
hateful, and hating one another. But after that the kindness and love of God our Saviour towards man 
appeared, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which He shed upon us 
richly, "[3] we became such as we are. For "God sent forth His Word and healed them, and delivered them 
from their destructions, "[4] as the prophet taught in the book of Psalms. And in addition to what has been 
already said, I would add the following: that Chrysippus, in his treatise on the Cure of the Passions, in his 
endeavours to restrain the passions of the human soul, not pretending to determine what opinions are the 
true ones, says that according to the principles of the different sects are those to be cured who have been 
brought under the dominion of the passions, and continues: "And if pleasure be an end, then by it must the 
passions be healed; and if there be three kinds of chief blessings, still, according to this doctrine, it is in the 
same way that those are to be freed from their passions who are under their dominion;" whereas the 
assailants of Christianity do not see in how many persons the passions have been brought under restraint, 
and the flood of wickedness checked, and savage manners softened, by means of the Gospel. So that it 
well became those who are ever boasting of their zeal for the public good, to make a public 
acknowledgement of their thanks to that doctrine which by a new method led men to abandon many vices, 
and to bear their testimony at least to it, that even though not the truth, it has at all events been productive of 
benefit to the human race. 

CHAP. LXV. 

And since Jesus, in teaching His disciples not to be guilty of rashness, gave them the precept. "If they 
persecute you in this city, flee ye into another; and if they persecute you in the other, flee again into a 
third, "[5] to which teaching He added the example of a consistent life, acting so as not to expose Himself to 
danger rashly, or unseasonably, or without good grounds; from this Celsus takes occasion to bring a 
malicious and slanderous accusation,-the Jew whom he brings forward saying to Jesus, "In company with 
your disciples you go and hide yourself in different places." Now similar to what has thus been made the 

ground of a slanderous charge against Jesus and His disciples, do we say was the conduct recorded of 
Aristotle. This philosopher, seeing that a court was about to be summoned to try him, on the ground of his 
being guilty of impiety on account of certain of his philosophical tenets which the Athenians regarded as 
impious, withdrew from Athens, and fixed his school in Chalcis, defending his course of procedure to his 
friends by saying, "Let us depart from Athens, that we may not give the Athenians a handle for incurring guilt 
a second time, as formerly in the case of Socrates, and so prevent them from committing a second act of 
impiety against philosophy." He further says, "that Jesus went about with His disciples, and obtained His 
livelihood in a disgraceful and importunate manner." Let him show wherein lay the disgraceful and 
importunate element in their manner of subsistence. For it is related in the Gospels, that there were certain 
women who had been healed of their diseases, among whom also was Susanna, who from their own 
possessions afforded the disciples the means of support. And who is there among philosophers, that, when 
devoting himself to the service of his acquaintances, is not in the habit of receiving from them what is needful 
for his wants? Or is it only in them that such acts are proper and becoming; but when the disciples of Jesus 
do the same, they are accused by Celsus of obtaining their livelihood by disgraceful importunity? 

CHAP. LXVI. 

And in addition to the above, this Jew of Celsus afterwards addresses Jesus: "What need, moreover, was 
there that you, while still an infant, should be conveyed into Egygt? Was it to escape being murdered? But 
then it was not likely that a God should be afraid of death; and yet an angel came down from heaven, 
commanding you and your friends to flee, lest ye should be captured and put to death! And was not the 
great God, who had already sent two angels on your account, able to keep you. His only Son, there in 
safety?" From these words Celsus seems to think that there was no element of divinity in the human body 
and soul of Jesus, but that His body was not even such as is described in the fables of Homer; and with a 
taunt also at the blood of Jesus which was shed upon the cross, he adds that it was not "Ichor, such as flows 
in the veins of the blessed gods."[1] We now, believing Jesus Himself, when He says respecting His 
divinity, "I am the way, and the truth, and the life, "[2] and employs other terms of similar import; and when He 
says respecting His being clothed with a human body, "And now ye seek to kill Me, a man that hath told you 
the truth, "[3] conclude that He was a kind of compound being. And so it became Him who was making 
provision for His sojourning in the world as a human being, not to expose Himself unseasonably to the 
danger of death. And in like manner it was necessary that He should be taken away by His parents, acting 
under the instructions of an angel from heaven, who communicated to them the divine will, saying on the first 
occasion, "Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife; for that which is conceived in 
her is of the Holy Ghost;"[4] and on the second, "Arise, and take the young Child, and His mother, and flee 
into Egypt; and be thou there until I bring thee word: for Herod will seek the young Child to destroy Him. "[5] 
Now, what is recorded in these words appears to me to be not at all marvellous. For in either passage of 
Scripture it is stated that it was in a dream that the angel spoke these words; and that in a dream certain 
persons may have certain things pointed out to them to do, is an event of frequent occurrence to many 
individuals,-the impression on the mind being produced either by an angel or by some other thing. Where, 
then, is the absurdity in believing that He who had once become incarnate, should be led also by human 
guidance to keep out of the way of dangers? Not indeed from any impossibility that it should be otherwise, 
but from the moral fitness that ways and means should be made use of to ensure the safety of Jesus. And it 
was certainly better that the Child Jesus should escape the snare of Herod, and should reside with His 
parents in Egypt until the death of the conspirator, than that Divine Providence should hinder the free-will of 
Herod in his wish to put the Child to death, or that the fabled poetic helmet of Hades should have been 
employed, or anything of a similar kind done with respect to Jesus, or that they who came to destroy Him 
should have been smitten with blindness like the people of Sodom. For the sending of help to Him in a very 
miraculous and unnecessarily public manner, would not have been of any service to Him who, wished to 
show that as a man, to whom witness was borne by God, He possessed within that form which was seen by 
the eyes of men some higher element of divinity ,-that which was properly the Son of God-God the 
Word-the power of God, and the wisdom of God-He who is called the Christ. But this is not a suitable 
occasion for discussing the composite nature of the incarnate Jesus; the investigation into such a subject 
being for believers, so to speak, a sort of private question. 

CHAP. LXVII. 

After the above, this Jew of Celsus, as if he were a Greek who loved learning, and were well instructed in 
Greek literature, continues: "The old mythological fables, which attributed a divine origin to Perseus, and 
Amphion, and AEacus, and Minos, were not believed by us. Nevertheless, that they might not appear 
unworthy of credit, they represented the deeds of these personages as great and wonderful, and truly 

beyond the power of man; but what hast thou done that is noble or wonderful either in deed or in word? Thou 
hast made no manifestation to us, although they challenged you in the temple to exhibit some 
unmistakeable sign that you were the Son of God." In reply to which we have to say Let the Greeks show to 
us, among those who have been enumerated, any one whose deeds have been marked by a utility and 
splendour extending to after generations, and which have been so great as to produce a belief in the fables 
which represented them as of divine descent. But these Greeks can show us nothing regarding those men 
of whom they speak, which is even inferior by a great degree to what Jesus did; unless they take us back to 
their fables and histories, wishing us to believe them without any reasonable grounds, and to discredit the 
Gospel accounts even after the clearest evidence. For we assert that the whole habitable world contains 
evidence of the works of Jesus, in the existence of those Churches of God which have been founded 
through Him by those who have been converted from the practice of innumerable sins.[1] And the name of 
Jesus can still remove distractions from the minds of men, and expel demons, and also take away 
diseases; and produce a marvellous meekness of spirit and complete change of character, and a 
humanity, and goodness, and gentleness in those individuals who do not feign themselves to be Christians 
for the sake of subsistence or the supply of any mortal wants, but who have honestly accepted the doctrine 
concerning God and Christ, and the judgment to come. 

CHAP. LXVIII. 

But after this, Celsus, having a suspicion that the great works performed by Jesus, of which we have named 
a few out of a great number, would be brought forward to view, affects to grant that those statements may be 
true which are made regarding His cures, or His resurrection, or the feeding of a multitude with a few loaves, 
from which many fragments remained over, or those other stories which Celsus thinks the disciples have 
recorded as of a marvellous nature; and he adds: "Well, let us believe that these were actually wrought by 
you." But then he immediately compares them to the tricks of jugglers, who profess to do more wonderful 
things, and to the feats performed by those who have been taught by Egyptians, who in the middle of the 
market-place, in return for a few obols, will impart the knowledge of their most venerated arts, and will expel 
demons from men, and dispel diseases, and invoke the souls of heroes, and exhibit expensive banquets, 
and tables, and dishes, and dainties having no real existence, and who will put in motion, as if alive, what 
are not really living animals, but which have only the appearance of life. And he asks, "Since, then, these 
persons can perform such feats, shall we of necessity conclude that they are 'sons of God,' or must we 
admit that they are the proceedings of wicked men under the influence of an evil spirit?" You see that by 
these expressions he allows, as it were, the existence of magic. I do not know, however, if he is the same 
who wrote several books against it. But, as it helped his purpose, he compares the (miracles) related of 
Jesus to the results produced by magic. There would indeed be a resemblance between them, if Jesus, 
like the dealers in magical arts, had performed His works only for show; but now there is not a single juggler 
who, by means of his proceedings, invites his spectators to reform their manners, or trains those to the fear 
of God who are amazed at what they see, nor who tries to persuade them so to live as men who are to be 
justified[2] by God. And jugglers do none of these things, because they have neither the power nor the will, 
nor any desire to busy themselves about the reformation of men, inasmuch as their own lives are full of the 
grossest and most notorious sins. But how should not He who, by the miracles which He did, induced those 
who beheld the excellent results to undertake the reformation of their characters, manifest Himself not only to 
His genuine disciples, but also to others, as a pattern of most virtuous life, in order that His disciples might 
devote themselves to the work of instructing men in the will of God, and that the others, after being more fully 
instructed by His word and character than by His miracles, as to how they were to direct their lives, might in 
all their conduct have a constant reference to the good pleasure of the universal God? And if such were the 
life of Jesus, how could any one with reason compare Him with the sect of impostors, and not, on the 
contrary, believe, according to the promise, that He was God, who appeared in human form to do good to 
our race? 

CHAP. LXIX. 

After this, Celsus, confusing together the Christian doctrine and the opinions of some heretical sect, and 
bringing them forward as charges that were applicable to all who believe in the divine word, says: "Such a 
body as yours could not have belonged to God." Now, in answer to this, we have to say that Jesus, on 
entering into the world, assumed, as one born of a woman, a human body, and one which was capable of 
suffering a natural death. For which reason, in addition to others, we say that He was also a great wrestler;[1] 
having, on account of His human body, been tempted in all respects like other men, but no longer as men, 
with sin as a consequence, but being altogether without sin. For it is distinctly clear to us that "He did no sin, 
neither was guile found in His mouth; and as one who knew no sin, "[2] God delivered Him up as pure for all 

who had sinned. Then Celsus says: "The body of god would not have been so generated as you, O Jesus, 
were." He saw, besides, that if, as it is written, it had been born. His body somehow might be even more 
divine than that of the multitude, and in a certain sense a body of god. But he disbelieves the accounts of 
His conception by the Holy Ghost, and believes that He was begotten by one Panthera, who corrupted the 
Virgin, "because a god's body would not have been so generated as you were." But we have spoken of 
these matters at greater length in the preceding pages. 

CHAP. LXX. 

He asserts, moreover, that "the body of a god is not nourished with such food (as was that of Jesus)," since 
he is able to prove from, the Gospel narratives both that He partook of food, and food of a particular kind. 
Well, be it so. Let him assert that He ate the passover with His disciples, when He not only used the words, 
"With desire have I desired to eat this passover with you," but also actually partook of the same. And let him 
say also, that He experienced the sensation of thirst beside the well of Jacob, and drank of the water of the 
well. In what respect do these facts militate against what we have said respecting the nature of His body? 
Moreover, it appears indubitable that after His resurrection He ate a piece offish; for, according to our view. 
He assumed a (true) body, as one born of a woman. "But," objects Celsus, "the body of a god does not 
make use of such a voice as that of Jesus, nor employ such a method of persuasion as he." These are, 
indeed, trifling and altogether contemptible objections. For our reply to him will be, that he who is believed 
among the Greeks to be a god, viz., the Pythian and Didymean Apollo, makes use of such a voice for his 
Pythian priestess at Delphi, and for his prophetess at Miletus; and yet neither the Pythian nor Didymean is 
charged by the Greeks with not being a god, nor any other Grecian deity whose worship is established in 
one place. And it was far better, surely, that a god should employ a voice which, on account of its being 
uttered with power, should produce an indescribable sort of persuasion in the minds of the hearers. 

CHAP. LXXI. 

Continuing to pour abuse upon Jesus as one who, on account of his impiety and wicked opinions, was, so to 
speak, hated by God, he asserts that "these tenets of his were those of a wicked and God-hated sorcerer." 
And yet, if the name and the thing be properly examined, it will be found an impossibility that man should be 
hated by God, seeing God loves all existing things, and "hateth nothing of what He has made," for He 
created nothing in a spirit of hatred. And if certain expressions in the prophets convey such an impression, 
they are to be interpreted in accordance with the general principle by which Scripture employs such 
language with regard to God as if He were subject to human affections. But what reply need be made to him 
who, while professing to bring foreward credible statements, thinks himself bound to make use of calumnies 
and slanders against Jesus, as if He were a wicked sorcerer? Such is not the procedure of one who seeks 
to make good his case, but of one who is in an ignorant and unphilosophic state of mind, inasmuch as the 
proper course is to state the case, and candidly to investigate it; and, according to the best of his ability, to 
bring forward what occurs to him with regard to it. But as the Jew of Celsus has, with the above remarks, 
brought to a close his charges against Jesus, so we also shall here bring to a termination the contents of our 
first book in reply to him. And if God bestow the gift of that truth which destroys all falsehood, agreeably to 
the words of the prayer, "Cut them off in thy truth, "[3] we shall begin, in what follows, the consideration of the 
second appearance of the Jew, in which he is represented by Celsus as addressing those who have 
become converts to Jesus. 

ORIGEN AGAINST CELSUS. 

BOOK II. 

CHAP. I. 

THE first book of our answer to the treatise of Celsus, entitled A True Discourse, wiiicii con-eluded with the 
representation of the Jew addressing Jesus, having now extended to a sufficient length, we intend the 
present part as a reply to the charges brought by him against those who have been converted from 
Judaism to Christianity. [1] And we call attention, in the first place, to this special question, viz., why Celsus, 
when he had once resolved upon the introduction of individuals upon the stage of his book, did not 
represent the Jew as addressing the converts from heathenism rather than those from Judaism, seeing that 
his discourse, if directed to us, would have appeared more likely to produce an impression. [2] But probably 
this claimant to universal knowledge does not know what is appropriate in the matter of such 
representations; and therefore let us proceed to consider what he has to say to the converts from Judaism. 
He asserts that "they have forsaken the law of their fathers, in consequence of their minds being led captive 
by Jesus; that they have been most ridiculously deceived, and that they have become deserters to another 
name and to another mode of life." Here he has not observed that the Jewish converts have not deserted 
the law of their fathers, inasmuch as they live according to its prescriptions, receiving their very name from 
the poverty of the law, according to the literal acceptation of the word; for Ebion signifies "poor" among the 
Jews, [3] and those Jews who have received Jesus as Christ are called by the name of Ebionites. Nay, 
Peter himself seems to have observed for a considerable time the Jewish observances enjoined by the 
law of Moses, not having yet learned from Jesus to ascend from the law that is regulated according to the 
letter, to that which is interpreted according to the spirit,-a fact which we learn from the Acts of the Apostles. 
For on the day after the angel of God appeared to Cornelius, suggesting to him "to send to Joppa, to Simon 
surnamed Peter," Peter "went up into the upper room to pray about the sixth hour. And he became very 
hungry, and would have eaten: but while they made ready he fell into a trance, and saw heaven opened, 
and a certain vessel descending unto him, as it had been a great sheet knit at the four corners, and let down 
to the earth; wherein were all manner of four-footed beasts, and creeping things of the earth, and fowls of the 
air. And there came a voice to him. Rise, Peter; kill, and eat. But Peter said. Not so. Lord; for I have never 
eaten anything that is common or unclean. And the voice spake unto him again the second time. What God 
hath cleansed, that call thou not common. "[4] Now observe how, by this instance, Peter is represented as 
still observing the Jewish customs respecting clean and unclean animals. And from the narrative that 
follows, it is manifest that he, as being yet a Jew, and living according to their traditions, and despising those 
who were beyond the pale of Judaism, stood in need of a vision to lead him to communicate to Cornelius 
(who was not an Israelite according to the flesh), and to those who were with him, the word of faith. Moreover, 
in the Epistle to the Galatians, Paul states that Peter, still from fear of the Jews, ceased upon the arrival of 
James to eat with the Gentiles, and "separated himself from them, fearing them that were of the 
circumcision;"[5] and the rest of the Jews, and Barnabas also, followed the same course. And certainly it 
was quite consistent that those should not abstain from the observance of Jewish usages who were sent to 
minister to the circumcision, when they who "seemed to be pillars" gave the right hand of fellowship to Paul 
and Barnabas, in order that, while devoting themselves to the circumcision, the latter might preach to the 
Gentiles. And why do I mention that they who preached to the circumcision withdrew and separated 
themselves from the heathen, when even Paul himself "became as a Jew to the Jews, that he might gain the 
Jews?" Wherefore also in the Acts of the Apostles it is related that he even brought an offering to the altar, 
that he might satisfy the Jews that he was no apostate from their law.[1] Now, if Celsus had been acquainted 
with all these circumstances, he would not have represented the Jew holding such language as this to the 
converts from Judaism: "What induced you, my fellow-citizens, to abandon the law of your fathers, and to 
allow your minds to be led captive by him with whom we have just conversed, and thus be most ridiculously 
deluded, so as to become deserters from us to another name, and to the practices of another life?" 

CHAP. II. 

Now, since we are upon the subject of Peter, and of the teachers of Christianity to the circumcision, I do not 

deem it out of place to quote a certain declaration of Jesus taken from the Gospel according to John, and to 
give the explanation of the same. For it is there related that Jesus said: "I have yet many things to say unto 
you, but ye cannot bear them now. Howbeit when He, the Spirit of truth, is come. He will guide you into all the 
truth: for He shall not speak of Himself; but whatsoever He shall hear, that shall He speak."[2] And when we 
inquire what were the "many things" referred to in the passage which Jesus had to say to His disciples, but 
which they were not then able to bear, I have to observe that, probably because the apostles were Jews, 
and had been trained up according to the letter of the Mosaic law. He was unable to tell them what was the 
true law, and how the Jewish worship consisted in the pattern and shadow of certain heavenly things, and 
how future blessings were foreshadowed by the injunctions regarding meats and drinks, and festivals, and 
new moons, and sabbaths. These were many of the subjects which He had to explain to them; but as He 
saw that it was a work of exceeding difficulty to root out of the mind opinions that have been almost born with 
a man, and amid which he has been brought up till he reached the period of maturity, and which have 
produced in those who have adopted them the belief that they are divine, and that it is an act of impiety to 
overthrow them; and to demonstrate by the superiority of Christian doctrine, that is, by the truth, in a manner 
to convince the hearers, that such opinions were but "loss and dung," He postponed such a task to a future 
season-to that, namely, which followed His passion and resurrection. For the bringing of aid unseasonably 
to those who were not yet capable of receiving it, might have overturned the idea which they had already 
formed of Jesus, as the Christ, and the Son of the living God. And see if there is not some well-grounded 
reason for such a statement as this, "I have many things to say unto you, but ye cannot hear them now;" 
seeing there are many points in the law which require to be explained and cleared up in a spiritual sense, 
and these the disciples were in a manner unable to bear, having been born and brought up amongst Jews. I 
am of opinion, moreover, that since these rites were typical, and the truth was that which was to be taught 
them by the Holy Spirit, these words were added, "When He is come who is the Spirit of truth. He will lead 
you into all the truth;" as if He had said, into all the truth about those things which, being to you but types, ye 
believed to constitute a true worship which ye rendered unto God. And so, according to the promise of 
Jesus, the Spirit of truth came to Peter, saying to him, with regard to the four-footed beasts, and creeping 
things of the earth, and fowls of the air: "Arise, Peter; kill, and eat." And the Spirit came to him while he was 
still in a state of superstitious ignorance; for he said, in answer to the divine command, "Not so Lord; for I 
have never yet eaten anything common or unclean." He instructed him, however, in the true and spiritual 
meaning of meats, by saying, "What God hath cleansed, that call not thou common." And so, after that 
vision, the Spirit of truth, which conducted Peter into all the truth, told him the many things which he was 
unable to bear when Jesus was still with him in the flesh. But I shall have another opportunity of explaining 
those matters, which are connected with the literal acceptation of the Mosaic law. 

CHAP. III. 

Our present object, however, is to expose the ignorance of Celsus, who makes this Jew of his address his 
fellow-citizen and the Israelitish converts in the following manner: "What induced you to abandon the law of 
your fathers?" etc. Now, how should they have abandoned the law of their fathers, who are in the habit of 
rebuking those who do not listen to its commands, saying, "Tell me, ye who read the law, do ye not hear the 
law? For it is written, that Abraham had two sons;" and so on, down to the place, "which things are an 
allegory, "[3] etc.? And how have they abandoned the law of their fathers, who are ever speaking of the 
usages of their fathers in such words as these: "Or does not the law say these things also? For it is written in 
the law of Moses, Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox thattreadeth out the corn. Doth God care for 
oxen? or saith He it altogether for our sakes? for for our sakes it was written," and so on?[1] Now, how 
confused is the reasoning of the Jew in regard to these matters (although he had it in his power to speak with 
greater effect) when he says: "Certain among you have abandoned the usages of our fathers under a 
pretence of explanations and allegories; and some of you, although, as ye pretend, interpreting them in a 
spiritual manner, nevertheless do observe the customs of our fathers; and some of you, without any such 
interpretation, are willing to accept Jesus as the subject of prophecy, and to keep the law of Moses 
according to the customs of the fathers, as having in the words the whole mind of the Spirit." Now how was 
Celsus able to see these things so clearly in this place, when in the subsequent parts of his work he makes 
mention of certain godless heresies altogether alien from the doctrine of Jesus, and even of others which 
leave the Creator out of account altogether, and does not appear to know that there are Israelites who are 
converts to Christianity, and who have not abandoned the law of their fathers? It was not his object to 
investigate everything here in the spirit of truth, and to accept whatever he might find to be useful; but he 
composed these statements in the spirit of an enemy, and with a desire to overthrow everything as soon as 
he heard it. 

CHAP. IV. 

The Jew, then, continues his address to converts from his own nation thus: "Yesterday and the day before, 
when we visited with punishment the man who deluded you, ye became apostates from the law of your 
fathers;" showing by such statements (as we have just demonstrated) anything but an exact knowledge of 
the truth. But what he advances afterwards seems to have some force, when he says: "How is it that you 
take the beginning of your system from our worship, and when you have made some progress you treat it 
with disrespect, although you have no other foundation to show for your doctrines than our law?" Now, 
certainly the introduction to Christianity is through the Mosaic worship and the prophetic writings; and after 
the introduction, it is in the interpretation and explanation of these that progress takes place, while those who 
are introduced prosecute their investigations into "the mystery according to revelation, which was kept 
secret since the world began, but now is made manifest in the Scriptures of the prophets, "[2] and by the 
appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ. But they who advance in the knowledge of Christianity do not, as ye 
allege, treat the things written in the law with disrespect. On the contrary, they bestow upon them greater 
honour, showing what a depth of wise and mysterious reasons is contained in these writings, which are not 
fully comprehended by the Jews, who treat them superficially, and as if they were in some degree even 
fabulous. [3] And what absurdity should there be in our system-that is, the Gospel-having the law for its 
foundation, when even the Lord Jesus Himself said to those who would not believe upon Him: "If ye had 
believed Moses, ye would have believed Me, for he wrote of Me. But if ye do not believe his writings, how 
shall ye believe My words?"[4] Nay, even one of the evangelists-Mark-says: "The beginning of the 
Gospel of Jesus Christ, as it is written in the prophet Isaiah, Behold, I send My messenger before Thy face, 
who shall prepare Thy way before Thee, "[5] which shows that the beginning of the Gospel is connected with 
the Jewish writings. What force, then, is there in the objection of the Jew of Celsus, that "if any one predicted 
to us that the Son of God was to visit mankind, he was one of our prophets, and the prophet of our God?" Or 
how is it a charge against Christianity, that John, who baptized Jesus, was a Jew? For although He was a 
Jew, it does not follow that every believer, whether a convert from heathenism or from Judaism, must yield a 
literal obedience to the law of Moses. 

CHAP. V. 

After these matters, although Celsus becomes tautological in his statements about Jesus, repeating for the 
second time that "he was punished by the Jews for his crimes," we shall not again take up the defence, 
being satisfied with what we have already said. But, in the next place, as this Jew of his disparages the 
doctrine regarding the resurrection of the dead, and the divine judgment, and of the rewards to be bestowed 
upon the just, and of the fire which is to devour the wicked, as being stale[6] opinions, and thinks that he will 
overthrow Christianity by asserting that there is nothing new in its teaching upon these points, we have to say 
to him, that our Lord, seeing the conduct of the Jews not to be at all in keeping with the teaching of the 
prophets, inculcated by a parable that the kingdom of God would be taken from them, and given to the 
converts from heathenism. For which reason, now, we may also see of a truth that all the doctrines of the 
Jews of the present day are mere trifles and fables, [1] since they have not the light that proceeds from the 
knowledge of the Scriptures; whereas those of the Christians are the truth, having power to raise and elevate 
the soul and understanding of man, and to persuade him to seek a citizenship, not like the earthly[2] Jews 
here below, but in heaven. And this result shows itself among those who are able to see the grandeur of the 
ideas contained in the law and the prophets, and who are able to commend them to others. 

CHAP. VI. 

But let it be granted that Jesus observed all the JewiSh usages, including even their sacrificial 
observances, what does that avail to prevent our recognising Him as the Son of God? Jesus, then, is the 
Son of God, who gave the law and the prophets; and we, who belong to the Church, do not transgress the 
law, but have escaped the mythologizings[3] of the Jews, and have our minds chastened and educated by 
the mystical contemplation of the law and the prophets. For the prophets themselves, as not resting the 
sense of these Words in the plain history which they relate, nor in the legal enactments taken according to 
the word and letter, express themselves somewhere, when about to relate histories, in words like this, "I will 
open my mouth in parables, I will utter hard sayings of old;"[4] and in another place, when offering up a 
prayer regarding the law as being obscure, and needing divine help for its comprehension, they offer up this 
prayer, "Open Thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of Thy law. "[5] 

CHAP. VII. 

Moreover, let them show where there is to be found even the appearance of language dictated by 

arrogance[6] and proceeding from Jesus. For how could an arrogant man thus express himself "Learn of 
Me, for I am meek and lowly of heart, and you shall find rest for your souls?"[7] or how can He be styled 
arrogant, who after supper laid aside His garments in the presence of His disciples, and, after girding 
Himself with a towel, and pouring water into a basin, proceeded to wash the feet of each disciple, and 
rebuked him who was unwilling to allow them to be washed, with the words, "Except I wash thee, thou hast no 
part with Me?[8] Or how could He be called such who said, "I was amongst you, not as he that sitteth at meat, 
but as he that serveth?"[9] And let any one show what were the falsehoods which He uttered, and let him 
point out what are great and what are small falsehoods, that he may prove Jesus to have been guilty of the 
former. And there is yet another way in which we may confute him. For as one falsehood is not less or more 
false than another, so one truth is not less or more true than another. And what charges of impiety he has to 
bring against Jesus, let the Jew of Celsus especially bring forward. Was it impious to abstain from corporeal 
circumcision, and from a literal Sabbath, and literal festivals, and literal new moons, and from clean and 
unclean meats, and to turn the mind to the good and true and spiritual law of God, while at the same time he 
who was an ambassador for Christ knew how to become to the Jews as a Jew, that he might gain the Jews, 
and to those who are under the law, as under the law, that he might gain those who are under the law? 

CHAP. VIII. 

He says, further, that "many other persons would appear such as Jesus was, to those who were willing to be 
deceived." Let this Jew of Celsus then show us, not many persons, nor even a few, but a single individual, 
such as Jesus was, introducing among the human race, with the power that was manifested in Him, a system 
of doctrine and opinions beneficial to human life, and which converts men from the practice of wickedness. 
He says, moreover, that this charge is brought against the Jews by the Christian converts, that they have not 
believed in Jesus as in God. Now on this point we have, in the preceding pages, offered a preliminary 
defence, showing at the same time in what respects we understand Him to be God, and in what we take Him 
to be man. "How should we," he continues, "who have made known to all men that there is to come from 
God one who is to punish the wicked, treat him with disregard when he came?" And to this, as an 
exceedingly silly argument, it does not seem to me reasonable to offer any answer. It is as if some one were 
to say, "How could we, who teach temperance, commit any act of licentiousness? or we, who are 
ambassadors for righteousness, be guilty of any wickedness?" For as these inconsistencies are found 
among men, so, to say that they believed the prophets when speaking of the future advent of Christ, and yet 
refused their belief to Him when He came, agreeably to prophetic statement, was quite in keeping with 
human nature. And since we must add another reason, we shall remark that this very result was foretold by 
the prophets. Isaiah distinctly declares: "Hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye 
shall see, and shall not perceive: for the heart of this people has become fat,"[1] etc. And let them explain 
why it was predicted to the Jews, that although they both heard and saw, they would not understand what 
was said, nor perceive what was seen as they ought. For it is indeed manifest, that when they beheld Jesus 
they did not see who He was; and when they heard Him, they did not understand from His words the divinity 
that was in Him, and which transferred God's providential care, hitherto exercised over the Jews, to His 
converts from the heathen. Therefore we may see, that after the advent of Jesus the Jews were altogether 
abandoned, and possess now none of what were considered their ancient glories, so that there is no 
indication of any Divinity abiding amongst them. For they have no longer prophets nor miracles, traces of 
which to a considerable extent are still found among Christians, and some of them more remarkable than 
any that existed among the Jews; and these we ourselves have witnessed, if our testimony may be 
received? But the Jew of Celsus exclaims: "Why did we treat him, whom we announced beforehand, with 
dishonour? Was it that we might be chastised more than others?" To which we have to answer, that on 
account of their unbelief, and the other insults which they heaped upon Jesus, the Jews will not only suffer 
more than others in that judgment which is believed to impend over the world, but have even already 
endured such sufferings. For what nation is an exile from their own metropolis, and from the place sacred to 
the worship of their fathers, save the Jews alone? And these calamities they have suffered, because they 
were a most wicked nation, which, although guilty of many other sins, yet has been punished so severely for 
none, as for those that were committed against our Jesus. 

CHAP. IX. 

The Jew continues his discourse thus: "How should we deem him to be a God, who not only in other 
respects, as was currently reported, performed none of his promises, but who also, after we had convicted 
him, and condemned him as. deserving of punishment, was found attempting to conceal himself, and 
endeavouring to escape in a most disgraceful manner, and who was betrayed by those whom he called 
disciples? And yet," he continues, "he who was a God could neither flee nor be led away a prisoner; and 

least of all could he be deserted and delivered up by those who had been his associates, and had shared 
all things in common, and had had him for their teacher, who was deemed to be a Saviour, and a son of the 
greatest God, and an angel." To which we reply, that even we do not suppose the body of Jesus, which was 
then an object of sight and perception, to have been God. And why do I say His body? Nay, not even His 
soul, of which it is related, "My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death. "[3] But as, according to the 
Jewish manner of speaking, "I am the Lord, the God of all flesh," and, "Before Me there was no God formed, 
neither shall there be after Me," God is believed to be He who employs the soul and body of the prophet as 
an instrument; and as, according to the Greeks, he who says, 

"I know both the number of the sand, and the measures of the sea. 
And I understand a dumb man, and hear him who does not speak,"[4] 

is considered to be a god when speaking, and making himself heard through the Pythian priestess; so, 
according to our view, it was the Logos God, and Son of the God of all things, who spake in Jesus these 
words, "I am the way, and the truth, and the life;" and these, "I am the door;" and these, "I am the living bread 
that came down from heaven;" and other expressions similar to these. We therefore charge the Jews with 
not acknowledging Him to be God, to whom testimony was borne in many passages by the prophets, to the 
effect that He was a mighty power, and a God next to[5] the God and Father of all things. For we assert that it 
was to Him the Father gave the command, when in the Mosaic account of the creation He uttered the words, 
"Let there be light," and "Let there be a firmament," and gave the injunctions with regard to those other 
creative acts which were performed; and that to Him also were addressed the words, "Let Us make man in 
Our own image and likeness;" and that the Logos, when commanded, obeyed all the Father's will. And we 
make these statements not from our own conjectures, but because we believe the prophecies circulated 
among the Jews, in which it is said of God, and of the works of creation, in express words, as follows: "He 
spake, and they were made; He commanded, and they were created. "[1] Now if God gave the command, 
and the creatures were formed, who, according to the view of the spirit of prophecy, could He be that was 
able to carry out such commands of the Father, save Him who, so to speak, is the living Logos and the 
Truth? And that the Gospels do not consider him who in Jesus said these words, "I am the way, and the truth, 
and the life," to have been of so circumscribed a nature? as to have an existence nowhere out of the soul 
and body of Jesus, is evident both from many considerations, and from a few instances of the following kind 
which we shall quote. John the Baptist, when predicting that the Son of God was to appear immediately, not 
in that body and soul, but as manifesting Himself everywhere, says regarding Him: "There stands in the 
midst of you One whom ye know not, who cometh after me. "[3] For if he had thought that the Son of God was 
only there, where was the visible body of Jesus, how could he have said, "There stands in the midst of you 
One whom ye know not?" And Jesus Himself, in raising the minds of His disciples to higher thoughts of the 
Son of God, says: "Where two or three are gathered together in My name, there am I in the midst of you. "[4] 
And of the same nature is His promise to His disciples: "Lo, I am with you alway, even to the end of the 
world. "[5] And we quote these passages, making no distinction between the Son of God and Jesus. For the 
soul and body of Jesus formed, after the <greek>oikonomia</greek>, one being with the Logos of God. 
Now if, according to Paul's teaching, "he that is joined unto the Lord is one spirit,"[6] every one who 
understands what being joined to the Lord is, and who has been actually joined to Him, is one spirit with the 
Lord; how should not that being be one in a far greater and more divine degree, which was once united with 
the Logos of God?[7] He, indeed, manifested Himself among the Jews as the power of God, by the miracles 
which He performed, which Celsus suspected were accomplished by sorcery, but which by the Jews of that 
time were attributed I know not why, to Beelzebub, in the words "He casteth out devils through Beelzebub, 
the prince of the devils. "[8] But these our Saviour convicted of uttering the greatest absurdities, from the fact 
that the kingdom of evil was not yet come to an end. And this will be evident to all intelligent readers of the 
Gospel narrative, which it is not now the time to explain. 

CHAP. X. 

But what promise did Jesus make which He did not perform? Let Celsus produce any instance of such, and 
make good his charge. But he will be unable to do so, especially since it is from mistakes, arising either 
from misapprehension of the Gospel narratives, or from Jewish stories, that he thinks to derive the charges 
which he brings against Jesus or against ourselves. Moreover, again, when the Jew says, "We both found 
him guilty, and condemned him as deserving of death," let them show how they who sought to concoct false 
witness against Him proved Him to be guilty. Was not the great charge against Jesus, which His accusers 
brought forward, this, that He said, "I am able to destroy the temple of God, and after three days to raise it up 
again?"[9] But in so saying. He spake of the temple of His body; while they thought, not being able to 
understand the meaning of the speaker, that His reference was to the temple of stone, which was treated by 

the Jews with greater respect than He was who ought to have been honoured as the true Temple of 
God-the Word, and the Wisdom, and the Truth. And who can say that "Jesus attempted to mal<e His 
escape by disgracefully concealing Himself?" Let any one point to an act deserving to be called 
disgraceful. And when he adds, "he was taken prisoner," I would say that, if to be taken prisoner implies an 
act done against one's will, then Jesus was not taken prisoner; for at the fitting time He did not prevent 
Himself falling into the hands of men, as the Lamb of God, that He might take away the sin of the world. For, 
knowing all things that were to come upon Him, He went forth, and said to them, "Whom seek ye?" and they 
answered, "Jesus of Nazareth;" and He said unto them, "I am He." And Judas also, who betrayed Him, was 
standing with them. When, therefore. He had said to them, "I am He," they went backwards and fell to the 
ground. Again He asked them, "Whom seek ye?" and they said again, "Jesus of Nazareth." Jesus said to 
them, "I told you I am He; if then ye seek Me, let these go away."[1 0] Nay, even to Him who wished to help 
Him, and who smote the high priest's servant, and cut off his ear. He said: "Put up thy sword into its sheath: 
for all they who draw the sword shall perish by the sword. Thinkest thou that I cannot even now pray to My 
Father, and He will presently give Me more than twelve legions of angels? But how then should the 
Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be?"[1] And if any one imagines these statements to be inventions of 
the writers of the Gospels, why should not those statements rather be regarded as inventions which 
proceeded from a spirit of hatred and hostility against Jesus and the Christians? and these the truth, which 
proceed from those who manifest the sincerity of their feelings towards Jesus, by enduring everything, 
whatever it may be, for the sake of His words? For the reception by the disciples of such power of 
endurance and resolution continued even to death, with a disposition of mind that would not invent regarding 
their Teacher what was not true, is a very evident proof to all candid judges that they were fully persuaded of 
the truth of what they wrote, seeing they submitted to trials so numerous and so severe, for the sake of Him 
whom they believed to be the Son of God. 

CHAP. XI. 

In the next place, that He was betrayed by those whom He called His disciples, is a circumstance which the 
Jew of Celsus learned from the Gospels; calling the one Judas, however, "many disciples," that he might 
seem to add force to the accusation. Nor did he trouble himself to take note of all that is related concerning 
Judas; how this Judas, having come to entertain opposite and conflicting opinions regarding his Master 
neither opposed Him with his whole soul, nor yet with his whole soul preserved the respect due by a pupil to 
his teacher. For be that betrayed Him gave to the multitude that came to apprehend Jesus, a sign, saying, 
"Whomsoever I shall kiss, it is he; seize ye him, "-retaining still some element of respect for his Master: for 
unless he had done so, he would have betrayed Him, even publicly, without any pretence of affection. This 
circumstance, therefore, will satisfy all with regard to the purpose of Judas, that along with his covetous 
disposition, and his wicked design to betray his Master, he had still a feeling of a mixed character in his 
mind, produced in him by the words of Jesus, which had the appearance (so to speak) of some remnant of 
good. For it is related that, "when Judas, who betrayed Him, knew that He was condemned, he repented, 
and brought back the thirty pieces of silver to the high priest and elders, saying, I have sinned, in that I have 
betrayed the innocent blood. But they said. What is that to us? see thou to that;"[2]-and that, having thrown 
the money down in the temple, he departed, and went and hanged himself. But if this covetous Judas, who 
also stole the money placed in the bag for the relief of the poor, repented, and brought back the thirty pieces 
of silver to the chief priests and elders, it is clear that the instructions of Jesus had been able to produce 
some feeling of repentance in his mind, and were not altogether despised and loathed by this traitor. Nay, 
the declaration, "I have sinned, in that I have betrayed the innocent blood," was a public acknowledgment of 
his crime. Observe, also, how exceedingly passionate[3] was the sorrow for his sins that proceeded from 
that repentance, and which would not suffer him any longer to live; and how, after he had cast the money 
down in the temple, he withdrew, and went away and hanged himself: for he passed sentence upon himself, 
showing what a power the teaching of Jesus had over this sinner Judas, this thief and traitor, who could not 
always treat with contempt what he had learned from Jesus. Will Celsus and his friends now say that those 
proofs which show that the apostasy of Judas was not a complete apostasy, even after his attempts against 
his Master, are inventions, and that this alone is true, viz., that one of His disciples betrayed Him; and will 
they add to the Scriptural account that he betrayed Him also with his whole heart? To act in this spirit of 
hostility with the same writings, both as to what we are to believe and what we are not to believe, is 
absurd. [4] And if we must make a statement regarding Judas which may overwhelm our opponents with 
shame, we would say that, in the book of Psalms, the whole of the 1 08th contains a prophecy about Judas, 
the beginning of which is this: "O God, hold not Thy peace before my praise; for the mouth of the sinner, and 
the mouth of the crafty man, are opened against me. "[5] And it is predicted in this psalm, both that Judas 
separated himself from the number of the apostles on account of his sins, and that another was selected in 
his place; and this is shown by the words: "And his bishopric let another take. "[6] But suppose now that He 

had been betrayed by some one of His disciples, wiio was possessed by a worse spirit tiian Judas, and 
wiio iiad completely poured out, as it were, all the words which he had heard from Jesus, what would this 
contribute to an accusation against Jesus or the Christian religion? And how will this demonstrate its doctrine 
to be false? We have replied in the preceding chapter to the statements which follow this, showing that 
Jesus was not taken prisoner when attempting to flee, but that He gave Himself up voluntarily for the sake of 
us all. Whence it follows, that even if He were bound. He was bound agreeably to His own will; thus teaching 
us the lesson that we should undertake similar things for the sake of religion in no spirit of unwillingness. 

CHAP. XII. 

And the following appear to me to be childish assertions, viz., that "no good general and leader of great 
multitudes was ever betrayed; nor even a wicked captain of robbers and commander of very wicked men, 
who seemed to be of any use to his associates; but Jesus, having been betrayed by his subordinates, 
neither governed like a good general, nor, after deceiving his disciples, produced in the minds of the 
victims of his deceit that feeling of good-will which, so to speak, would be manifested towards a brigand 
chief." Now one might find many accounts of generals who were betrayed by their own soldiers, and of 
robber chiefs who were captured through the instrumentality of those who did not keep their bargains with 
them. But grant that no general or robber chief was ever betrayed, what does that contribute to the 
establishment of the fact as a charge against Jesus, that one of His disciples became His betrayer? And 
since Celsus makes an ostentatious exhibition of philosophy, I would ask of him. If, then, it was a charge 
against Plato, that Aristotle, after being his pupil for twenty years, went away and assailed his doctrine of the 
immortality of the soul, and styled the ideas of Plato the merest trifling?[1] And if I were still in doubt, I would 
continue thus: Was Plato no longer mighty in dialectics, nor able to defend his views, after Aristotle had 
taken his departure; and, on that account, are the opinions of Plato false? Or may it not be, that while Plato is 
true, as the pupils of his philosophy would maintain, Aristotle was guilty of wickedness and ingratitude 
towards his teacher? Nay, Chrysippus also, in many places of his writings, appears to assail Cleanthes, 
introducing novel opinions opposed to his views, although the latter had been his teacher when he was a 
young man, and began the study of philosophy. Aristotle, indeed, is said to have been Plato's pupil for 
twenty years, and no inconsiderable period was spent by Chrysippus in the school of Cleanthes; while 
Judas did not remain so much as three years with Jesus. [2] But from the narratives of the lives of 
philosophers we might take many instances similar to those on which Celsus founds a charge against 
Jesus on account of Judas. Even the Pythagoreans erected cenotaphs[3] to those who, after betaking 
themselves to philosophy, fell back again into their ignorant mode of life; and yet neither was Pythagoras 
nor his followers, on that account, weak in argument and demonstration. 

CHAP. XIII. 

This Jew of Celsus continues, after the above, in the following fashion: "Although he could state many things 
regarding the events of the life of Jesus which are true, and not like those which are recorded by the 
disciples, he willingly omits them." What, then, are those true statements, unlike the accounts in the Gospels, 
which the Jew of Celsus passes by without mention? Or is he only employing what appears to be a figure of 
speech, [4] in pretending to have something to say, while in reality he had nothing to produce beyond the 
Gospel narrative which could impress the hearer with a feeling of its truth, and furnish a clear ground of 
accusation against Jesus and His doctrine? And he charges the disciples with having invented the 
statement that Jesus foreknew and foretold all that happened to Him; but the truth of this statement we shall 
establish, although Celsus may not like it, by means of many other predictions uttered by the Saviour, in 
which He foretold what would befall the Christians in after generations. And who is there who would not be 
astonished at this prediction: "Ye shall be brought before governors and kings for My sake, for a testimony 
against them and the Gentiles;"[5] and at any others which He may have delivered respecting the future 
persecution of His disciples? For what system of opinions ever existed among men on account of which 
others are punished, so that any one of the accusers of Jesus could say that, foreseeing the impiety or 
falsity of his opinions to be the ground of an accusation against them he thought that this would redound to 
his credit, that he had so predicted regarding it long before? Now if any deserve to be brought, on account 
of their opinions, before governors and kings, what others are they, save the Epicureans, who altogether 
deny the existence of providence? And also the Peripatetics, who say that prayers are of no avail, and 
sacrifices offered as to the Divinity? But some one will say that the Samaritans suffer persecution because 
of their religion. In answerto whom we shall state that the Sicarians,[6] on account of the practice of 
circumcision, as mutilating themselves contrary to the established laws and the customs permitted to the 
Jews alone, are put to death. And you never hear a judge inquiring whether a Sicarian who strives to live 
according to this established religion of his will be released from punishment if he apostatizes, but will be 

led away to death if he continues firm; for the evidence of the circumcision is sufficient to ensure the death of 
him who has undergone it. But Christians alone, according to the prediction of their Saviour, "Ye shall be 
brought before governors and kings for My sake," are urged up to their last breath by their judges to deny 
Christianity, and to sacrifice according to the public customs; and after the oath of abjuration, to return to their 
homes, and to live in safety. And observe whether it is not with great authority that this declaration is uttered: 
"Whosoever therefore shall confess Me before men, him will I confess also before My Father who is in 
heaven. And whosoever shall deny Me before men,"(1) etc. And go back with me in thought to Jesus when 
He uttered these words, and see His predictions not yet accomplished. Perhaps you will say, in a spirit of 
incredulity, that he is talking folly, and speaking to no purpose, for his words will have no fulfilment; or, being 
in doubt about assenting to his words, you will say, that if these predictions be fulfilled, and the doctrine of 
Jesus be established, so that governors and kings think of destroying those who acknowledge Jesus, then 
we shall believe that he utters these prophecies as one who has received great power from God to implant 
this doctrine among the human race, and as believing that it will prevail. And who will not be filled with 
wonder, when he goes back in thought to Him who then taught and said, "This Gospel shall be preached 
throughout the whole world, for a testimony against them and the Gentiles, "(2) and beholds, agreeably to 
His words, the Gospel of Jesus Christ preached in the whole world under heaven to Greeks and Barbarians, 
wise and foolish alike? For the word, spoken with power, has gained the mastery over men of all sorts of 
nature, and it is impossible to see any race of men which has escaped accepting the teaching of Jesus. But 
let this Jew of Celsus, who does not believe that He foreknew all that happened to Him, consider how, while 
Jerusalem was still standing, and the whole Jewish worship celebrated in it, Jesus foretold what would befall 
it from the hand of the Romans. For they will not maintain that the acquaintances and pupils of Jesus Himself 
handed down His teaching contained in the Gospels without committing it to writing, and left His disciples 
without the memoirs of Jesus contained in their works. (3) Now in these it is recorded, that "when ye shall see 
Jerusalem compassed about with armies, then shall ye know that the desolation thereof is nigh. "(4) But at 
that time there were no armies around Jerusalem, encompassing and enclosing and besieging it; for the 
siege began in the reign of Nero, and lasted till the government of Vespasian, whose son Titus destroyed 
Jerusalem, on account, as Josephus says, of James the Just, the brother of Jesus who was called Christ, 
but in reality, as the truth makes dear, on account of Jesus Christ the Son of God. 

CHAP. XIV. 

Celsus, however, accepting or granting that Jesus foreknew what would befall Him, might think to make light 
of the admission, as he did in the case of the miracles, when he alleged that they were wrought by means of 
sorcery; for he might say that many persons by means of divination, either by auspices, or auguries, or 
sacrifices, or nativities, have come to the knowledge of what was to happen. But this concession he would 
not make, as being too great a one; and although he somehow granted that Jesus worked miracles, he 
thought to weaken the force of this by the charge of sorcery. Now Phlegon, in the thirteenth or fourteenth 
book, I think, of his Chronicles, not only ascribed to Jesus a knowledge of future events (although falling into 
confusion about some things which refer to Peter, as if they referred to Jesus), but also testified that the result 
corresponded to His predictions. So that he also, by these very admissions regarding foreknowledge, as if 
against his will, expressed his opinion that the doctrines taught by the fathers of our system were not devoid 
of divine power. 

CHAP. XV. 

Celsus continues: "The disciples of Jesus, having no undoubted fact on which to rely, devised the fiction that 
he foreknew everything before it happened;" not observing, or not wishing to observe, the love of truth which 
actuated the writers, who acknowledged that Jesus had told His disciples beforehand, "All ye shall be 
offended because of Me this night,"-a statement which was fulfilled by their all being offended; and that He 
predicted to Peter, "Before the cock crow, thou shall deny Me thrice," which was followed by Peter's 
threefold denial. Now if they had not been lovers of truth, but, as Celsus supposes, inventors of fictions, they 
would not have represented Peter as denying, nor His disciples as being offended. For although these 
events actually happened, who could have proved that they turned out in that manner? And yet, according 
to all probability, these were matters which ought to have been passed over in silence by men who wished 
to teach the readers of the Gospels to despise death for the sake of confessing Christianity. But now, seeing 
that the word, by its power, will gain the mastery over men, they related those facts which they have done, 
and which, I know not how, were neither to do any harm to their readers, nor to afford any pretext for denial. 

CHAP. XVI. 

Exceedingly weak is iiis assertion, tiiat "tiie disciples of Jesus wrote such accounts regarding him, by way 
of extenuating the charges that told against him: as if," he says, "any one were to say that a certain person 
was a just man, and yet were to show that he was guilty of injustice; or that he was pious, and yet had 
committed murder; or that he was immortal, and yet was dead; subjoining to all these statements the remark 
that he had foretold all these things." Now his illustrations are at once seen to be inappropriate; for there is 
no absurdity in Him who had resolved that He would become a living pattern to men, as to the manner in 
which they were to regulate their lives, showing also how they ought to die for the sake of their religion, apart 
altogether from the fact that His death on behalf of men was a benefit to the whole world, as we proved in the 
preceding book. He imagines, moreover, that the whole of the confession of the Saviour's sufferings 
confirms his objection instead of weakening it. For he is not acquainted either with the philosophical remarks 
of Paul,(1) or the statements of the prophets, on this subject. And it escaped him that certain heretics have 
declared that Jesus underwent His sufferings in appearance, not in reality. For had he known, he would not 
have said: "For ye do not even allege this, that he seemed to wicked men to suffer this punishment, though 
not undergoing it in reality; but, on the contrary, ye acknowledge that he openly suffered." But we do not view 
His sufferings as having been merely in appearance, in order that His resurrection also may not be a false, 
but a real event. For he who really died, actually arose, if he did arise; whereas he who appeared only to 
have died, did not in reality arise. But since the resurrection of Jesus Christ is a subject of mockery to 
unbelievers, we shall quote the words of Plato, (2) that Erus the son of Armenius rose from the funeral pile 
twelve days after he had been laid upon it, and gave an account of what he had seen in Hades; and as we 
are replying to unbelievers, it will not be altogether useless to refer in this place to what Heraclides(3) 
relates respecting the woman who was deprived of life. And many persons are recorded to have risen from 
their tombs, not only on the day of their burial, but also on the day following. What wonder is it, then, if in the 
case of One who performed many marvellous things, both beyond the power of man and with such fulness 
of evidence, that he who could not deny their performance, endeavoured to calumniate them by comparing 
them to acts of sorcery, should have manifested also in His death some greater display of divine power, so 
that His soul, if it pleased, might leave its body, and having performed certain offices out of it, might return 
again at pleasure? And such a declaration is Jesus said to have made in the Gospel of John, when He 
said: "No man taketh My life from Me, but I lay it down of Myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have 
power to take it again. "(4) And perhaps it was on this account that He hastened His departure from the body, 
that He might preserve it, and that His legs might not be broken, as were those of the robbers who were 
crucified with Him. "For the soldiers brake the legs of the first, and of the other who was crucified with Him; but 
when they came to Jesus, and saw that He was dead, they brake not His legs. "(5) We have accordingly 
answered the question," How is it credible that Jesus could have predicted these things?" And with respect 
to this, "How could the dead man be immortal?" let him who wishes to understand know, that it is not the 
dead man who is immortal, but He who rose from the dead. So far, indeed, was the dead man from being 
immortal, that even the Jesus before His decease-the compound being, who was to suffer death-was not 
immortal. (6) For no one is immortal who is destined to die; but he is immortal when he shall no longer be 
subject to death. But "Christ, being raised from the dead, dieth no more: death hath no more dominion over 
Him;"(7) although those may be unwilling to admit this who cannot understand how such things should be 
said. 

CHAP. XVII. 

Extremely foolish also is his remark, "What god, or spirit, or prudent man would not, on foreseeing that such 
events were to befall him, avoid them if he could; whereas he threw himself headlong into those things which 
he knew beforehand were to happen?" And yet Socrates knew that he would die after drinking the hemlock, 
and it was in his power, if he had allowed himself to be persuaded by Crito, by escaping from prison, to 
avoid these calamities; but nevertheless he decided, as it appeared to him consistent with fight reason, that 
it was better for him to die as became a philosopher, than to retain his life in a manner unbecoming one. 
Leonidas also, the Lacedaemonian general, knowing that he was on the point of dying with his followers at 
Thermopylae, did not make any effort to preserve his life by disgraceful means but said to his companions, 
"Let us go to breakfast, as we shall sup in Hades." And those who are interested in collecting stories of this 
kind will find numbers of them. Now, where isthe wonder if Jesus, knowing all things that were to happen, did 
not avoid them, but encountered what He foreknew; when Paul, His own disciple, having heard what would 
befall him when he went up to Jerusalem, proceeded to face the danger, reproaching those who were 
weeping around him, and endeavouring to prevent him from going up to Jerusalem? Many also of our 
contemporaries, knowing well that if they made a confession of Christianity they would be put to death, but 
that if they denied it they would be liberated, and their property restored, despised life, and voluntarily 
selected death for the sake of their religion. 

CHAP. XVIII. 

After this the Jew makes another silly remark, saying, "How is it that, if Jesus pointed out beforehand both 
the traitor and the perjurer, they did not fear him as a God, and cease, the one from his intended treason, 
and the other from his perjury?" Here the learned Celsus did not see the contradiction in his statement: for if 
Jesus foreknew events as a God, then it was impossible for His foreknowledge to prove untrue; and 
therefore it was impossible for him who was known to Him as going to betray Him not to execute his 
purpose, nor for him who was rebuked as going to deny Him not to have been guilty of that crime. For if it 
had been possible for the one to abstain from the act of betrayal, and the other from that of denial, as having 
been warned of the consequences of these actions beforehand, then His words were no longer true, who 
predicted that the one would betray Him and the other deny Him. For if He had foreknowledge of the traitor. 
He knew the wickedness in which the treason originated, and this wickedness was by no means taken 
away by the foreknowledge. And, again, if He had ascertained that one would deny Him, He made that 
prediction from seeing the weakness out of which that act of denial would arise, and yet this weakness was 
not to be taken away thus at once, by the foreknowledge. But whence he derived the statement, "that these 
persons betrayed and denied him without manifesting any concern about him," I know not; for it was proved, 
with respect to the traitor, that it is false to say that he betrayed his master without an exhibition of anxiety 
regarding Him. And this was shown to be equally true of him who denied Him; for he went out, after the 
denial, and wept bitterly. 

CHAP. XIX. 

Superficial also is his objection, that "it is always the case when a man against whom a plot is formed, and 
who comes to the knowledge of it, makes known to the conspirators that he is acquainted with their design, 
that the latter are turned from their purpose, and keep upon their guard." For many have continued to plot 
even against those who were acquainted with their plans. And then, as if bringing his argument to a 
conclusion, he says: "Not because these things were predicted did they come to pass, for that is 
impossible; but since they have come to pass, their being predicted is shown to be a falsehood: for it is 
altogether impossible that those who heard beforehand of the discovery of their designs, should carry out 
their plans of betrayal and denial!" But if his premises are overthrown, then his conclusion also falls to the 
ground, viz., "that we are not to believe, because these things were predicted, that they have come to pass." 
Now we maintain that they not only came to pass as being possible, but also that, because they came to 
pass, the fact of their being predicted is shown to be true; for the truth regarding future events is judged of by 
results. It is false, therefore, as asserted by him, that the prediction of these events is proved to be untrue; 
and it is to no purpose that he says, "It is altogether impossible for those who heard beforehand that their 
designs were discovered, to carry out their plans of betrayal and denial." 

CHAP. XX. 

Let us see how he continues after this: "These events," he says, "he predicted as being a God, and the 
prediction must by all means come to pass. God, therefore, who above all others ought to do good to men, 
and especially to those of his own household, led on his own disciples and prophets, with whom he was in 
the habit of eating and drinking, to such a degree of wickedness, that they became impious and unholy 
men. Now, of a truth, he who shared a man's table would not be guilty of conspiring against him; but after 
banqueting with God, he became a conspirator. And, what is still more absurd, God himself plotted against 
the members of his own table, by converting them into traitors and villains!" Now, since you wish me to 
answer even those charges of Celsus which seem to me frivolous, (1) the following is our reply to such 
statements. Celsus imagines that an event, predicted through foreknowledge, comes to pass because it 
was predicted; but we do not grant this, maintaining that he who foretold it was not the cause of its 
happening, because he foretold it would happen; but the future event itself, which would have taken place 
though not predicted, afforded the occasion to him, who was endowed with foreknowledge, of foretelling its 
occurrence. Now, certainly this result is present to the foreknowledge of him who predicts an event, when it is 
possible that it may or may not happen, viz., that one or other of these things will take place. For we do not 
assert that he who foreknows an event, by secretly taking away the possibility of its happening or not, 
makes any such declaration as this: "This shall infallibly happen, and it is impossible that it can be 
otherwise." And this remark applies to all the foreknowledge of events dependent upon ourselves, whether 
contained in the sacred Scriptures or in the histories of the Greeks. Now, what is called by logicians an" idle 
argument, "(2) which is a sophism, will be no sophism as far as Celsus can help, but according to sound 
reasoning it is a sophism. And that this may be seen, I shall take from the Scriptures the predictions 
regarding Judas, or the foreknowledge of our Saviour regarding him as the traitor; and from the Greek 

histories tiie oracle tiiat was given to Laius, conceding for tiie present its trutii, since it does not affect tiie 
argument. Now, in Ps. cviii., Judas is spol<en of by tiie moutii of tiie Saviour, in words beginning tiius: "Hold 
not Thy peace, O God of my praise; for the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of the deceitful are opened 
against me." Now, if you carefully observe the contents of the psalm, you will find that, as it was foreknown 
that he would betray the Saviour, so also was he considered to be himself the cause of the betrayal, and 
deserving, on account of his wickedness, of the imprecations contained in the prophecy. For let him suffer 
these things," because," says the psalmist, "he remembered not to show mercy, but persecuted the poor 
and needy man." Wherefore it was possible for him to show mercy, and not to persecute him whom he did 
persecute. But although he might have done these things, he did not do them, but carried out the act of 
treason, so as to merit the curses pronounced against him in the prophecy. 

And in answer to the Greeks we shall quote the following oracular response to Laius, as recorded by the 
tragic poet, either in the exact words of the oracle or in equivalent terms. Future events are thus made known 
to him by the oracle: "Do not try to beget children against the will of the gods. For if you beget a son, your 
son shall murder you; and all your household shall wade in blood. "(3) Now from this it is clear that it was 
within the power of Laius not to try to beget children, for the oracle would not have commanded an 
impossibility; and it was also in his power to do the opposite, so that neither of these courses was 
compulsory. And the consequence of his not guarding against the begetting of children was, that he suffered 
from so doing the calamities described in the tragedies relating to (Edipus and Jocasta and their sons. Now 
that which is called the "idle argument," being a quibble, is such as might be applied, say in the case of a 
sick man, with the view of sophistically preventing him from employing a physician to promote his recovery; 
and it is something like this: "If it is decreed that you should recover from your disease, you will recover 
whether you call in a physician or not; but if it is decreed that you should not recover, you will not recover 
whether you call in a physician or no. But it is certainly decreed either that you should recover, or that you 
should not recover; and therefore it is in vain that you call in a physician." Now with this argument the 
following may be wittily compared: "If it is decreed that you should beget children, you will beget them, 
whether you have intercourse with a woman or not. But if it is decreed that you should not beget children, you 
will not do so, whether you have intercourse with a woman or no. Now, certainly, it is decreed either that you 
should beget children or not; therefore it is in vain that you have intercourse with a woman." For, as in the 
latter instance, intercourse with a woman is not employed in vain, seeing it is an utter impossibility for him 
who does not use it to beget children; so, in the former, if recovery from disease is to be accomplished by 
means of the healing art, of necessity the physician is summoned, and it is therefore false to say that "in vain 
do you call in a physician." We have brought forward all these illustrations on account of the assertion of this 
learned Celsus, that "being a God He predicted these things, and the predictions must by all means come 
to pass." Now, if by "by all means" he means "necessarily," we cannot admit this. For it was quite possible, 
also, that they might not come to pass. But if he uses "by all means" in the sense of "simple futurity, "(4) which 
nothing hinders from being true (although it was possible that they might not happen), he does not at all 
touch my argument; nor did it follow, from Jesus having predicted the acts of the traitor or the perjurer, that it 
was the same thing with His being the cause of such impious and unholy proceedings. For He who was 
amongst us, and knew what was in man, seeing his evil disposition, and foreseeing what he would attempt 
from his spirit of covetousness, and from his want of stable ideas of duty towards his Master, along with 
many other declarations, gave utterance to this also: "He that dippeth his hand with Me in the dish, the same 
shall betray Me."(1) 

CHAP. XXI. 

Observe also the superficiality and manifest falsity of such a statement of Celsus, when he asserts "that he 
who was partaker of a man's table would not conspire against him; and if he would not conspire against a 
man, much less would he plot against a God after banqueting with him." For who does not know that many 
persons, after partaking of the salt on the table, (2) have entered into a conspiracy against their entertainers? 
The whole of Greek and Barbarian history is full of such instances. And the Iambic poet of Pares, (3) when 
upbraiding Lycambes with having violated covenants confirmed by the salt of the table, says to him:- 

"But thou hast broken a mighty oath-that, viz., by the salt of the table." 

And they who are interested in historical learning, and who give themselves wholly to it, to the neglect of 
other branches of knowledge more necessary for the conduct of life, (4) can quote numerous instances, 
showing that they who shared in the hospitality of others entered into conspiracies against them. 

CHAP. XXII. 

He adds to this, as if lie iiad brougiit togetiier an argument witii conclusive demonstrations and 
consequences, tiie following: "And, which is still more absurd, God himself conspired against those who sat 
at his table, by converting them into traitors and impious men." But how Jesus could either conspire or 
convert His disciples into traitors or impious men, it would be impossible for him to prove, save by means of 
such a deduction as any one could refute with the greatest ease. 

CHAP. XXIII. 

He continues in this strain: "If he had determined upon these things, and underwent chastisement in 
obedience to his Father, it is manifest that, being a God, and submitting voluntarily, those things that were 
done agreeably to his own decision were neither painful nor distressing." But he did not observe that here 
he was at once contradicting himself. For if he granted that He was chastised because He had determined 
upon these things, and had submitted Himself to His Father, it is clear that He actually suffered punishment, 
and it was impossible that what was inflicted on Him by His chastisers should not be painful, because pain 
is an involuntary thing. But if, because He was willing to suffer. His inflictions were neither painful nor 
distressing, how did He grant that "He was chastised?" He did not perceive that when Jesus had once, by 
His birth, assumed a body. He assumed one which was capable both of suffering pains, and those 
distresses incidental to humanity, if we are to understand by distresses what no one voluntarily chooses. 
Since, therefore. He voluntarily assumed a body, not wholly of a different nature from that of human flesh, so 
along with His body He assumed also its sufferings and distresses, which it was not in His power to avoid 
enduring, it being in the power of those who inflicted them to send upon Him things distressing and painful. 
And in the preceding pages we have already shown, that He would not have come into the hands of men 
had He not so willed. But He did come, because He was willing to come, and because it was manifest 
beforehand that His dying upon behalf of men would be of advantage to the whole human race. 

CHAP. XXIV. 

After this, wishing to prove that the occurrences which befell Him were painful and distressing, and that it was 
impossible for Him, had He wished, to render them otherwise, he proceeds: "Why does he mourn, and 
lament, and pray to escape the fear of death, expressing himself in terms like these: 'O Father, if it be 
possible, let this cup pass from Me?"'(4) Now in these words observe the malignity of Celsus, how not 
accepting the love of truth which actuates the writers of the Gospels (who might have passed over in silence 
those points which, as Celsus thinks, are censurable, but who did not omit them for many reasons, which any 
one, in expounding the Gospel, can give in their proper place), he brings an accusation against the Gospel 
statement, grossly exaggerating the facts, and quoting what is not written in the Gospels, seeing it is 
nowhere found that Jesus lamented. And he changes the words in the expression, "Father, if it be possible, 
let this cup pass from Me," and does not give what follows immediately after, which manifests at once the 
ready obedience of Jesus to His Father, and His greatness of mind, and which runs thus: "Nevertheless, not 
as I will, but as Thou wilt."(1) Nay, even the cheerful obedience of Jesus to the will of His Father in those 
things which He was condemned to suffer, exhibited in the declaration, "If this cup cannot pass from Me 
except I drink it. Thy will be done," he pretends not to have observed, acting here like those wicked 
individuals who listen to the Holy Scriptures in a malignant spirit, and "who talk wickedness with lofty head." 
For they appear to have heard the declaration, "I kill, "(2) and they often make it to us a subject of reproach; 
but the words, "I will make alive," they do not remember,-the whole sentence showing that those who live 
amid public wickedness, and who work wickedly, are put to death by God, and that a better life is infused 
into them instead, even one which God will give to those who have died to sin. And so also these men have 
heard the words, "I will smite;" but they do not see these, "and I will heal," which are like the words of a 
physician, who cuts bodies asunder, and inflicts severe wounds, in order to extract from them substances 
that are injurious and prejudicial to health, and who does not terminate his work with pains and lacerations, 
but by his treatment restores the body to that state of soundness which he has in view. Moreover, they have 
not heard the whole of the announcement, "For He maketh sore, and again bindeth up;" but only this part, 
"He maketh sore." So in like manner acts this Jew of Celsus who quotes the words, "O Father, would that this 
cup might pass from Me;" but who does not add what follows, and which exhibits the firmness of Jesus, and 
His preparedness for suffering. But these matters, which afford great room for explanation from the wisdom 
of God, and which may reasonably be pondered over(3) by those whom Paul calls "perfect" when he said, 
"We speak wisdom among them who are perfect, "(4) we pass by for the present, and shall speak for a little 
of those matters which are useful for our present purpose. 

CHAP. XXV. 

We have mentioned in tiie preceding pages tiiattiiere are some of tiie declarations of Jesus wiiicii refer to 
tiiat Being in Him wiiicii was tiie "first-born of every creature," sucli as, "i am tiie way, and tiie trutli, and tiie 
iife," and sucli like; and others, again, which belong to that in Him which is understood to be man, such as, 
"But now ye seek to kill IVIe, a man that hath told you the truth which I have heard of the Father."(5) And here, 
accordingly, he describes the element of weakness belonging to human flesh, and that of readiness of spirit 
which existed in His humanity: the element of weakness in the expression, "Father, if it be possible, let this 
cup pass from IVIe;" the readiness of the spirit in this, "Nevertheless, not as I will, but as Thou wilt." And since 
it is proper to observe the order of our quotations, observe that, in the first place, there is mentioned only the 
single instance, as one would say, indicating the weakness of the flesh; and afterwards those other 
instances, greater in number, manifesting the willingness of the spirit. For the expression, "Father, if it be 
possible, let this cup pass from IVIe," is only one: whereas more numerous are those others, viz., "Not as I 
will, but as Thou wilt;" and, "O My Father, if this cup cannot pass from IVIe except I drink it. Thy will be done." It 
is to be noted also, that the words are not, "let this cup depart from IVIe;" but that the whole expression is 
marked by a tone of piety and reverence, "Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from IVIe." I know, 
indeed, that there is another explanation of this passage to the following effect:-The Saviour, foreseeing the 
sufferings which the Jewish people and the city of Jerusalem were to undergo in requital of the wicked 
deeds which the Jews had dared to perpetrate upon Him, from no other motive than that of the purest 
philanthropy towards them, and from a desire that they might escape the impending calamities, gave 
utterance to the prayer, "Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from IVIe." It is as if He had said, "Because 
of IVIy drinking this cup of punishment, the whole nation will be forsaken by Thee, I pray, if it be possible, that 
this cup may pass from IVIe, in order that Thy portion, which was guilty of such crimes against IVIe, may not 
be altogether deserted by Thee." But if, as Celsus would allege, "nothing at that time was done to Jesus 
which was either painful or distressing," how could men afterwards quote the example of Jesus as enduring 
sufferings for the sake of religion, if He did not suffer what are human sufferings, but only had the 
appearance of so doing? 

CHAP. XXVI. 

This Jew of Celsus still accuses the disciples of Jesus of having invented these statements, saying to them: 
"Even although guilty of falsehood, ye have not been able to give a colour of credibility to your inventions." 
In answer to which we have to say, that there was an easy method of concealing these occurrences,-that, 
viz., of not recording them at all. For if the Gospels had not contained the accounts of these things, who could 
have reproached us with Jesus having spoken such words during His stay upon the earth? Celsus, indeed, 
did not see that it was an inconsistency for the same persons both to be deceived regarding Jesus, 
believing Him to be God, and the subject of prophecy, and to invent fictions about Him, knowing manifestly 
that these statements were false. Of a truth, therefore, they were not guilty of inventing untruths, but such were 
their real impressions, and they recorded them truly; or else they were guilty of falsifying the histories, and 
did not entertain these views, and were not deceived when they acknowledged Him to be God. 

CHAP. XXVII. 

After this he says, that certain of the Christian believers, like persons who in a fit of drunkenness lay violent 
hands upon themselves, have corrupted the Gospel from its original integrity, to a threefold, and fourfold, 
and many-fold degree, and have remodelled it, so that they might be able to answer objections. Now I know 
of no others who have altered the Gospel, save the. followers of Marcion, and those of Valentinus, and, I 
think, also those of Lucian. But such an allegation is no charge against the Christian system, but against 
those who dared so to trifle with the Gospels. And as it is no ground of accusation against philosophy, that 
there exist Sophists, or Epicureans, or Peripatetics, or any others, whoever they may be, who hold false 
opinions; so neither is it against genuine Christianity that there are some who corrupt the Gospel histories, 
and who introduce heresies opposed to the meaning of the doctrine of Jesus. 

CHAP. XXVIII. 

And since this Jew of Celsus makes it a subject of reproach that Christians should make use of the 
prophets, who predicted the events of Christ's life, we have to say, in addition to what we have already 
advanced upon this head, that it became him to spare individuals, as he says, and to expound the 
prophecies themselves, and after admitting the probability of the Christian interpretation of them, to show 
how the use which they make of them may be overturned. [1] For in this way he would not appear hastily to 
assume so important a position on small grounds, and particularly when he asserts that the "prophecies 
agree with ten thousand other things more credibly than with Jesus." And he ought to have carefully met this 

powerful argument of the Christians, as being the strongest which they adduce, and to have demonstrated 
with regard to each particular prophecy, that it can apply to other events with greater probability than to 
Jesus. He did not, however, perceive that this was a plausible argument to be advanced against the 
Christians only by one who was an opponent of the prophetic writings; but Celsus has here put I in the mouth 
of a Jew an objection which a Jew would not have made. For a Jew will not admit that the prophecies may 
be applied to countless other things with greater probability than to Jesus; but he will endeavour, after giving 
what appears to him the meaning of each, to oppose the Christian interpretation, not indeed by any means 
adducing convincing reasons, but only attempting to do so. 

CHAP. XXIX. 

In the preceding pages we have already spoken of this point, viz., the prediction that there were to be two 
advents of Christ to the human race, so that it is not necessary for us to reply to the objection, supposed to 
be urged by a Jew, that "the prophets declare the coming one to be a mighty potentate. Lord of all nations 
and armies." But it is in the spirit of a Jew, I think, and in keeping with their bitter animosity, and baseless and 
even improbable calumnies against Jesus, that he adds: "Nor did the prophets predict such a 
pestilence. "[2] For neither Jews, nor Celsus, nor any other, can bring any argument to prove that a 
pestilence converts men from the practice of evil to a life which is according to nature, and distinguished by 
temperance and other virtues. 

CHAP. XXX. 

This objection also is cast in our teeth by Celsus: "From such signs and misinterpretations, and from proofs 
so mean, no one could prove him to be God, and the Son of God." Now it was his duty to enumerate the 
alleged misinterpretations, and to prove them to be such, and to show by reasoning the meanness of the 
evidence, in order that the Christian, if any of his objections should seem to be plausible, might be able to 
answer and confute his arguments. What he said, however, regarding Jesus, did indeed come to pass, 
because He was a mighty potentate, although Celsus refuses to see that it so happened, notwithstanding 
that the clearest evidence proves it true of Jesus. "For as the sun," he says, "which enlightens all other 
objects, first makes himself visible, so ought the Son of God to have done." We would say in reply, that so 
He did; for righteousness has arisen in His days, and there is abundance of peace, which took its 
commencement at His birth, God preparing the nations for His teaching, that they might be under one prince, 
the king of the Romans, and that it might not, owing to the want of union among the nations, caused by the 
existence of many kingdoms, be more difficult for the apostles of Jesus to accomplish the task enjoined 
upon them by their Master, when He said, "Go and teach all nations." Moreover it is certain that Jesus was 
born in the reign of Augustus, who, so to speak, fused together into one monarchy the many populations of 
the earth. Now the existence of many kingdoms would have been a hindrance to the spread of the doctrine 
of Jesus throughout the entire world; not only for the reasons mentioned, but also on account of the 
necessity of men everywhere engaging in war, and fighting on behalf of their native country, which was the 
case before the times of Augustus, and in periods still more remote, when necessity arose, as when the 
Peloponnesians and Athenians warred against each other, and other nations in like manner. How, then, was 
it possible for the Gospel doctrine of peace, which does not permit men to take vengeance even upon 
enemies, to prevail throughout the world, unless at the advent of Jesus[1] a milder spirit had been 
everywhere introduced into the conduct of things? 

CHAP. XXXI. 

He next charges the Christians with being "guilty of sophistical reasoning, in saying that the Son of God is 
the Logos Himself." And he thinks that he strengthens the accusation, because "when we declare the Logos 
to be the Son of God, we do not present to view a pure and holy Logos, but a most degraded man, who was 
punished by scourging and crucifixion." Now, on this head we have briefly replied to the charges of Celsus 
in the preceding pages, where Christ was shown to be the first-born of all creation, who assumed a body 
and a human soul; and that God gave commandment respecting the creation of such mighty things in the 
world, and they were created; and that He who received the command was God the Logos. And seeing it is 
a Jew who makes these statements in the work of Celsus, it will not be out of place to quote the declaration, 
"He sent His word, and healed them, and delivered them from their destruction, "[2]-a passage of which we 
spoke a little ago. Now, although I have conferred with many Jews who professed to be learned men, I 
never heard any one expressing his approval of the statement that the Logos is the Son of God, as Celsus 
declares they do, in putting into the mouth of the Jew such a declaration as this: "If your Logos is the Son of 
God, we also give out assent to the same." 

CHAP. XXXII. 

We have already shown that Jesus can be regarded neither as an arrogant man, nor a sorcerer; and 
therefore it is unnecessary to repeat our former arguments, lest, in replying to the tautologies of Celsus, we 
ourselves should be guilty of needless repetition. And now, in finding fault with our Lord's genealogy, there 
are certain points which occasion some difficulty even to Christians, and which, owing to the discrepancy 
between the genealogies, are advanced by some as arguments against their correctness, but which 
Celsus has not even mentioned. For Celsus, who is truly a braggart, and who professes to be acquainted 
with all matters relating to Christianity, does not know how to raise doubts in a skilful manner against the 
credibility of Scripture. But he asserts that the "framers of the genealogies, from a feeling of pride, made 
Jesus to be descended from the first man, and from the kings of the Jews." And he thinks that he makes a 
notable charge when he adds, that "the carpenters wife could not have been ignorant of the fact, had she 
been of such illustrious descent." But what has this to do with the question? Granted that she was not 
ignorant of her descent, how does that affect the result? Suppose that she were ignorant, how could her 
ignorance prove that she was not descended from the first man, or could not derive her origin from the 
Jewish kings? Does Celsus imagine that the poor must always be descended from ancestors who are 
poor, or that kings are always born of kings? But it appears folly to waste time upon such an argument as 
this, seeing it is well known that, even in our own days, some who are poorer than Mary are descended from 
ancestors of wealth and distinction, and that rulers of nations and kings have sprung from persons of no 
reputation. 

CHAP. XXXIII. 

"But," continues Celsus, "what great deeds did Jesus perform as being a God? Did he put his enemies to 
shame, or bring to a ridiculous conclusion what was designed against him?" Now to this question, although 
we are able to show the striking and miraculous character of the events which befell Him, yet from what other 
source can we furnish an answer than from the Gospel narratives, which state that "there was an earthquake, 
and that the rocks were split asunder, and the tombs opened, and the veil of the temple rent in twain from top 
to bottom, and that darkness prevailed in the day-time, the sun failing to give light?"[1] But if Celsus believe 
the Gospel accounts when he thinks that he can find in them matter of charge against the Christians, and 
refuse to believe them when they establish the divinity of Jesus, our answer to him is: "Sir,[2] either 
disbelieve all the Gospel narratives, and then no longer imagine that you can found charges upon them; or, 
in yielding your belief to their statements, look in admiration on the Logos of God, who became incarnate, 
and who desired to confer benefits upon the whole human race. And this feature evinces the nobility of the 
work of Jesus, that, down to the present time, those whom God wills are healed by His name. [3] And with 
regard to the eclipse in the time of Tiberius Caesar, in whose reign Jesus appears to have been crucified, 
and the great earthquakes which then took place, Phlegon too, I think, has written in the thirteenth or 
fourteenth book of his Chronicles. "[4] 

CHAP. XXXIV. 

This Jew of Celsus, ridiculing Jesus, as he imagines, is described as being acquainted with the Bacchae of 
Euripides, in which Dionysus says:- 

"The divinity himself will liberate me whenever I wish. "[5] 

NOW the Jews are not much acquainted with Greek literature; but suppose that there was a Jew so well 
versed in it (as to make such a quotation on his part appropriate), how (does it follow) that Jesus could not 
liberate Himself, because He did not do so? For let him believe from our own Scriptures that Peter obtained 
his freedom after having been bound in prison, an angel having loosed his chains; and that Paul, having 
been bound in the stocks along with Silas in Philippi of Macedonia, was liberated by divine power, when the 
gates of the prison were opened. But it is probable that Celsus treats these accounts with ridicule, or that he 
never read them; for he would probably say in reply, that there are certain sorcerers who are able by 
incantations to unloose chains and to open doors, so that he would liken the events related in our histories 
to the doings of sorcerers. "But," he continues, "no calamity happened even to him who condemned him, as 
there did to Pentheus, viz., madness or discerption."[6] And yet he does not know that it was not so much 
Pilate that condemned Him (who knew that "for envy the Jews had delivered Him"), as the Jewish nation, 
which has been condemned by God, and rent in pieces, and dispersed over the whole earth, in a degree 
far beyond what happened to Pentheus. Moreover, why did he intentionally omit what is related of Pilate's 

wife, who beheld a vision, and who was so moved by it as to send a message to her husband, saying: 
"Have thou nothing to do with that just man; for I have suffered many things this day in a dream because of 
Him?"[7] And again, passing by in silence the proofs of the divinity of Jesus, Celsus endeavours to cast 
reproach upon Him from the narratives in the Gospel, referring to those who mocked Jesus, and put on Him 
the purple robe, and the crown of thorns, and placed the reed in His hand. From what source now, Celsus, 
did you derive these statements, save from the Gospel narratives? And did you, accordingly, see that they 
were fit matters for reproach; while they who recorded them did not think that you, and such as you, would 
turn them into ridicule; but that others would receive from them an example how to despise those who 
ridiculed and mocked Him on account of His religion, who appropriately laid down His life for its sake? 
Admire rather their love of truth, and that of the Being who bore these things voluntarily for the sake of men, 
and who endured them with all constancy and long-suffering. For it is not recorded that He uttered any 
lamentation, or that after His condemnation He either did or uttered anything unbecoming. 

CHAP. XXXV. 

But in answer to this objection, "If not before, yet why now, at least, does he not give some manifestation of 
his divinity, and free himself from this reproach, and take vengeance upon those who insult both him and his 
Father?" We have to reply, that it would be the same thing as if we were to say to those among the Greeks 
who accept the doctrine of providence, and who believe in portents. Why does God not punish those who 
insult the Divinity, and subvert the doctrine of providence? For as the Greeks would answer such objections, 
so would we, in the same, or a more effective manner. There was not only a portent from heaven-the 
eclipse of the sun-but also the other miracles, which show that the crucified One possessed something that 
was divine, and greater than was possessed by the majority of men. 

CHAP. XXXVI. 

Celsus next says: "What is the nature of the ichor in the body of the crucified Jesus? Is it 'such as flows in the 
bodies of the immortal gods?"'[8] He puts this question in a spirit of mockery; but we shall show from the 
serious narratives of the Gospels, although Celsus may not like it, that it was no mythic and Homeric ichor 
which flowed from the body of Jesus, but that, after His death, "one of the soldiers with a spear pierced His 
side, and there came there-out blood and water. And he that saw it bare record, and his record is true, and 
he knoweth that he saith the truth. "[1] Now, in other dead bodies the blood congeals, and pure water does 
not flow forth; but the miraculous feature in the case of the dead body of Jesus was, that around the dead 
body blood and water flowed forth from the side. But if this Celsus, who, in order to find matter of accusation 
against Jesus and the Christians, extracts from the Gospel even passages which are incorrectly interpreted, 
but passes over in silence the evidences of the divinity of Jesus, would listen to divine portents, let him read 
the Gospel, and see that even the centurion, and they who with him kept watch over Jesus, on seeing the 
earthquake, and the events that occurred, were greatly afraid, saying, "This man was the Son of God. "[2] 

CHAP. XXXVII. 

After this, he who extracts from the Gospel narrative those statements on which he thinl<s he can found an 
accusation, mal<es the vinegar and the gall a subject of reproach to Jesus, saying that "he rushed with open 
mouth[3] to drink of them, and could not endure his thirst as any ordinary man frequently endures it." Now this 
matter admits of an explanation of a peculiar and figurative kind; but on the present occasion, the statement 
that the prophets predicted this very incident may be accepted as the more common answer to the 
objection. For in the sixty-ninth Psalm there is written, with reference to Christ: "And they gave me gall for my 
meat, and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink,"[4] Now, let the Jews say who it is that the prophetic 
writing represents as uttering these words; and let them adduce from history one who received gall for his 
food, and to whom vinegar was given as drink. Would they venture to assert that the Christ whom they 
expect still to come might be placed in such circumstances? Then we would say. What prevents the 
prediction from having been already accomplished? For this very prediction was uttered many ages 
before, and is sufficient, along with the other prophetic utterances, to lead him who fairly examines the whole 
matter to the conclusion that Jesus is He who was prophesied of as Christ, and as the Son of God. 

CHAP. XXXVIII. 

The few next remarks: "You, O sincere believers, [5] find fault with us, because we do not recognise this 
individual as God, nor agree with you that he endured these (sufferings) for the benefit of mankind, in order 
that we also might despise punishment." Now, in answer to this, we say that we blame the Jews, who have 
been brought up under the training of the law and the prophets (which foretell the coming of Christ), because 
they neither refute the arguments which we lay before them to prove that He is the Messiah, [6] adducing 
such refutation as a defence of their unbelief; nor yet, while not offering any refutation, do they believe in Him 
who was the subject of prophecy, and who clearly manifested through His disciples, even after the period of 
His appearance in the flesh, that He underwent these things for the benefit of mankind; having, as the object 
of His first advent, not to condemn men and their actions[7] before He had instructed them, and pointed out 
to them their duty, [8] nor to chastise the wicked and save the good, but to disseminate His doctrine in an 
extraordinary[9] manner, and with the evidence of divine power, among the whole human race, as the 
prophets also have represented these things. And we blame them, moreover, because they did not believe 
in Him who gave evidence of the power that was in Him, but asserted that He cast out demons from the 
souls of men through Beelzebub the prince of the demons; and we blame them because they slander the 
philanthropic character of Him, who overlooked not only no city, but not even a single village in Judea, that 
He might everywhere announce the kingdom of God, accusing Him of leading the wandering life of a 
vagabond, and passing an anxious existence in a disgraceful body. But there is no disgrace in enduring 
such labours for the benefit of all those who may be able to understand Him. 

CHAP. XXXIX. 

And how can the following assertion of this Jew of Celsus appear anything else than a manifest falsehood, 
viz., that Jesus, "having gained over no one during his life, not even his own disciples, underwent these 
punishments and sufferings?" For from what other source sprang the envy which was aroused against Him 
by the Jewish high priests, and elders, and scribes, save from the fact that multitudes obeyed and followed 
Him, and were led into the deserts not only by the persuasive[1] language of Him whose words were 
always appropriate to His hearers, but who also by His miracles made an impression on those who were 
not moved to belief by His words? And is it not a manifest falsehood to say that "he did not gain over even 
his own disciples," who exhibited, indeed, at that time some symptoms of human weakness arising from 
cowardly fear-for they had not yet been disciplined to the exhibition of full courage-but who by no means 
abandoned the judgments which they had formed regarding Him as the Christ? For Peter, after his denial, 
perceiving to what a depth of wickedness he had fallen, "went out and wept bitterly;" while the others, 
although stricken with dismay on account of what had happened to Jesus (for they still continued to admire 
Him), had, by His glorious appearance, [2] their belief more firmly established than before that He was the 
Son of God. 

CHAP. XL. 

It is, moreover, in a very unpiiilosopiiical spirit tiiat Celsus imagines our Lord's pre-eminence among men to 
consist, not in tiie preaciiing of salvation and in a pure morality, but in acting contrary to the character of that 
personality which He had taken upon Him, and in not dying, although He had assumed mortality; or, if dying, 
yet at least not such a death as might serve as a pattern to those who were to learn by that very act how to 
die for the sake of religion, and to comport themselves boldly through its help, before those who hold 
erroneous views on the subject of religion and irreligion, and who regard religious men as altogether 
irreligious, but imagine those to be most religious who err regarding God, and who apply to everything 
rather than to God the ineradicable[3] idea of Him (which is implanted in the human mind), and especially 
when they eagerly rush to destroy those who have yielded themselves up with their whole soul (even unto 
death), to the clear evidence of one God who is over all things. 

CHAP. XL!. 

In the person of the Jew, Celsus continues to find fault with Jesus, alleging that "he did not show himself to be 
pure from all evil." Let Celsus state from what "evil" our Lord did not, show Himself to be pure. If he means 
that. He was not pure from what is properly termed "evil," let him clearly prove the existence of any wicked 
work in Him. But if he deems poverty and the cross to be evils, and conspiracy on the part of wicked men, 
then it is clear that he would say that evil had happened also to Socrates, who was unable to show himself 
pure from evils. And how great also the other band of poor men is among the Greeks, who have given 
themselves to philosophical pursuits, and have voluntarily accepted a life of poverty, is known to many 
among the Greeks from what is recorded of Democritus, who allowed his property to become pasture for 
sheep; and of Crates, who obtained his freedom by bestowing upon the Thebans the price received for the 
sale of his possessions. Nay, even Diogenes himself, from excessive poverty, came to live in a tub; and 
yet, in the opinion of no one possessed of moderate understanding, was Diogenes on that account 
considered to be in an evil (sinful) condition. 

CHAP. XL!!. 

But further, since Celsus will have it that "Jesus was not irreproachable," let him instance any one of those 
who adhere to His doctrine, who has recorded anything that could truly furnish ground of reproach against 
Jesus; or if it be not from these that he derives his matter of accusation against Him, let him say from what 
quarter he has learned that which has induced him to say that He is not free from reproach. Jesus, however, 
performed all that He promised to do, and by which He conferred benefits upon his adherents. And we, 
continually seeing fulfilled all that was predicted by Him before it happened, viz., that this Gospel of His 
should be preached throughout the whole world, and that His disciples should go among all nations and 
announce His doctrine; and, moreover, that they should be brought before governors and kings on no other 
account than because of His teaching; we are lost in wonder at Him, and have our faith in Him daily 
confirmed. And I know not by what greater or more convincing proofs Celsus would have Him confirm His 
predictions; unless, indeed, as seems to be the case, not understanding that the Logos had become the 
man Jesus, he would have Him to be subject to no human weakness, nor to become an illustrious pattern to 
men of the manner in which they ought to bear the calamities of life, although these appear to Celsus to be 
most lamentable and disgraceful occurrences, seeing that he regards labour[4] to be the greatest of evils, 
and pleasure the perfect good,-a view accepted by none of those philosophers who admit the doctrine of 
providence, and who allow that courage, and fortitude, and magnanimity are virtues. Jesus, therefore, by 
His sufferings cast no discredit upon the faith of which He was the object; but rather confirmed the same 
among those who would approve of manly courage, and among those who were taught by Him that what 
was truly and properly the happy life was not here below, but was to be found in that which was called, 
according to His own words, the "coming world;" whereas in what is called the "present world" life is a 
calamity, or at least the first and greatest struggle of the soul.[1] 

CHAP. XL!!!. 

Celsus next addresses to us the following remark: "You will not, I suppose, say of him, that, after failing to 
gain over those who were in this world, he went to Hades to gain over those who were there." But whether he 
like it or not, we assert that not only while Jesus was in the body did He win over not a few persons merely, 
but so great a number, that a conspiracy was formed against Him on account of the multitude of His 
followers; but also, that when He became a soul, without the covering of the body. He dwelt among those 
souls which were without bodily covering, converting such of them as were willing to Himself, or those whom 

He saw, for reasons known to Him alone, to be better adapted to such a course. [2] 

CHAP. XLIV. 

Celsus in tiie next place says, with indescribable silliness: "If, after inventing defences which are absurd, 
and by which ye were ridiculously deluded, ye imagine that you really make a good defence, what prevents 
you from regarding those other individuals who have been condemned, and have died a miserable death, 
as greater and more divine messengers of heaven (than Jesus)?" Now, that manifestly and clearly there is 
no similarity between Jesus, who suffered what is described, and those who have died a wretched death on 
account of their sorcery, or whatever else be the charge against them, is patent to every one. For no one 
can point to any acts of a sorcerer which turned away souls from the practice of the many sins which prevail 
among men, and from the flood of wickedness (in the world). [3] But since this Jew of Celsus compares Him 
to robbers, and says that "any similarly shameless fellow might be able to say regarding even a robber and 
murderer whom punishment had overtaken, that such an one was not a robber, but a god, because he 
predicted to his fellow-robbers that he would suffer such punishment as he actually did suffer," it might, in the 
first place, be answered, that it is not because He predicted that He would suffer such things that we 
entertain those opinions regarding Jesus which lead us to have confidence in Him, as one who has come 
down to us from God. And, in the second place, we assert that this very comparison[4] has been somehow 
foretold in the Gospels; since God was numbered with the transgressors by wicked men, who desired rather 
a "murderer" (one who for sedition and murder had been cast into prison) to be released unto them, and 
Jesus to be crucified, and who crucified Him between two robbers. Jesus, indeed, is ever crucified with 
robbers among His genuine disciples and witnesses to the truth, and suffers the same condemnation which 
they do among men. And we say, that if those persons have any resemblance to robbers, who on account 
of their piety towards God suffer all kinds of injury and death, that they may keep it pure and unstained, 
according to the teaching of Jesus, then it is clear also that Jesus, the author of such teaching, is with good 
reason compared by Celsus to the captain of a band of robbers. But neither was He who died for the 
common good of mankind, nor they who suffered because of their religion, and alone of all men were 
persecuted because of what appeared to them the right way of honouring God, put to death in accordance 
with justice, nor was Jesus persecuted without the charge of impiety being incurred by His persecutors. 

CHAP. XLV. 

But observe the superficial nature of his argument respecting the former disciples of Jesus, in which he 
says: "In the next place, those who were his associates while alive, and who listened to his voice, and 
enjoyed his instructions as their teacher, on seeing him subjected to punishment and death, neither died 
with him, nor for him, nor were even induced to regard punishment with contempt, but denied even that they 
were his disciples, whereas now ye die along with him." And here he believes the sin which was committed 
by the disciples while they were yet beginners and imperfect, and which is recorded in the Gospels, to have 
been actually committed, in order that he may have matter of accusation against the Gospel; but their 
upright conduct after their transgression, when they behaved with courage before the Jews, and suffered 
countless cruelties at their hands, and at last suffered death for the doctrine of Jesus, he passes by in 
silence. For he would neither hear the words of Jesus, when He predicted to Peter, "When thou shalt be old, 
thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, "[5] etc., to which the Scripture adds, "This spake He, signifying by what 
death he should glorify God;" nor how James the brother of John-an apostle, the brother of an apostle-was 
slain with the sword by Herod for the doctrine of Christ; nor even the many instances of boldness displayed 
by Peter and the other apostles because of the Gospel, and "how they went forth from the presence of the 
Sanhedrim after being scourged, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for His name,"[1] 
and so surpassing many of the instances related by the Greeks of the fortitude and courage of their 
philosophers. From the very beginning, then, this was inculcated as a precept of Jesus among His hearers, 
which taught men to despise the life which is eagerly sought after by the multitude, but to be earnest in living 
the life which resembles that of God. 

CHAP. XLVI. 

But how can this Jew of Celsus escape the charge of falsehood, when he says that Jesus, "when on earth, 
gained over to himself only ten sailors and tax-gatherers of the most worthless character, and not even the 
whole of these?" Now it is certain that the Jews themselves would admit that He drew over not ten persons 
merely, nor a hundred, nor a thousand, but on one occasion five thousand at once, and on another four 
thousand; and that He attracted them to such a degree that they followed Him even into the deserts, which 
alone could contain the assembled multitude of those who believed in God through Jesus, and where He 

not only addressed to them discourses, but also manifested to them His works. And now, through his 
tautology, he compels us also to be tautological, since we are careful to guard against being supposed to 
pass over any of the charges advanced by him; and therefore, in reference to the matter before us following 
the order of his treatise as we have it, be says: "Is it not the height of absurdity to maintain, that if, while he 
himself was alive, he won over not a single person to his views, after his death any who wish are able to 
gain over such a multitude of individuals?" Whereas he ought to have said, in consistency with truth, that if, 
after His death, not simply those who will, but they who have the will and the power, can gain over so many 
proselytes, how much more consonant to reason is it, that while He was alive He should, through the greater 
power of His words and deeds, have won over to Himself manifold greater numbers of adherents? 

CHAP. XLVII. 

He represents, moreover, a statement of his own as if it were an answer to one of his questions, in which be 
asks: "By what train of argument were you led to regard him as the Son of God?" For he makes us answer 
that "we were won over to him, because[2] we know that his punishment was undergone to bring about the 
destruction Of the father of evil." Now we were won over to His doctrine by innumerable other 
considerations, of which we have stated only the smallest part in the preceding pages; but, if God permit, we 
shall continue to enumerate them, not only while dealing with the so-called True Discourse of Celsus, but 
also on many other occasions. And, as if we said that we consider Him to be the Son of God because He 
suffered punishment, he asks: "What then? have not many others, too, been punished, and that not less 
disgracefully?" And here Celsus acts like the most contemptible enemies of the Gospel, and like those who 
imagine that it follows as a consequence from our history of the crucified Jesus, that we should worship 
those who have undergone crucifixion! 

CHAP. XLVIII. 

Celsus, moreover, unable to resist the miracles which Jesus is recorded to have performed, has already on 
several occasions spoken of them slanderously as works of sorcery; and we also on several occasions 
have, to the best of our ability, replied to his statements. And now he represents us as saying that "we 
deemed Jesus to be the Son of God, because he healed the lame and the blind." And he adds: "Moreover, 
as you assert, he raised the dead." That He healed the lame and the blind, and that therefore we hold Him 
to be the Christ and the Son of God, is manifest to us from what is contained in the prophecies: "Then the 
eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall hear; then shall the lame man leap as an 
hart."[3] And that He also raised the dead, and that it is no fiction of those who composed the Gospels, is 
shown by this, that if it had been a fiction, many individuals would have been represented as having risen 
from the dead, and these, too, such as had been many years in their graves. But as it is no fiction, they are 
very easily counted of whom this is related to have happened; viz., the daughter of the ruler of the 
synagogue (of whom I know not why He said, "She is not dead, but sleepeth," stating regarding her 
something which does not apply to all who die); and the only son of the widow, on whom He took 
compassion and raised him up, making the bearers of the corpse to stand still; and the third instance, that of 
Lazarus, who had been four days in the grave. Now, regarding these cases we would say to all persons of 
candid mind, and especially to the Jew, that as there were many lepers in the days of Elisha the prophet, 
and none of them was healed save Naaman the Syrian, and many widows in the days of Elijah the prophet, 
to none of whom was Elijah sent save to Sarepta in Sidonia (for the widow there had been deemed worthy 
by a divine decree of the miracle which was wrought by the prophet in the matter of the bread); so also there 
were many dead in the days of Jesus, but those only rose from the grave whom the Logos knew to be fitted 
for a resurrection, in order that the works done by the Lord might not be merely symbols of certain things, but 
that by the very acts themselves He might gain over many to the marvellous doctrine of the Gospel. I would 
say, moreover, that, agreeably to the promise of Jesus, His disciples performed even greater works than 
these miracles of Jesus, which were perceptible only to the senses. [1] For the eyes of those who are blind 
in soul are ever opened; and the ears of those who were deaf to virtuous words, listen readily to the doctrine 
of God, and of the blessed life with Him; and many, too, who were lame in the feet of the "inner man," as 
Scripture calls it, having now been healed by the word, do not simply leap, but leap as the hart, which is an 
animal hostile to serpents, and stronger than all the poison of vipers. And these lame who have been 
healed, receive from Jesus power to trample, with those feet in which they were formerly lame, upon the 
serpents and scorpions of wickedness, and generally upon all the power of the enemy; and though they 
tread upon it, they sustain no injury, for they also have become stronger than the poison of all evil and of 
demons. 

CHAP. XLIX. 

Jesus, accordingly, in turning away tiie minds of His disciples, not merely from giving heed to sorcerers in 
general, and those who profess in any other manner to work miracles-for His disciples did not need to be 
so warned-but from such as gave themselves out as the Christ of God, and who tried by certain apparent[2] 
miracles to gain over to them the disciples of Jesus, said in a certain passage: "Then, if any man shall say 
unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there; believe it not. For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and 
shall show great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect. 
Behold, I have told you before. Wherefore, if they shall say unto you. Behold, he is in the desert, go not forth; 
behold, he is in the secret chambers, believe it not. For as the lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth 
even to the west, so also shall the coming of the Son of man be. "[3] And in another passage: "Many will say 
unto Me in that day. Lord, Lord, have we not eaten and drunk in Thy name, and by Thy name have cast out 
demons, and done many wonderful works? And then will I say unto them. Depart from Me, because ye are 
workers of iniquity ."[4] But Celsus, wishing to assimilate the miracles of Jesus to the works of human sorcery, 
says in express terms as follows: "O light and truth! he distinctly declares, with his own voice, as ye 
yourselves have recorded, that there will come to you even others, employing miracles of a similar kind, 
who are wicked men, and sorcerers; and he calls him who makes use of such devices, one Satan. So that 
Jesus himself does not deny that these works at least are not at all divine, but are the acts of wicked men; 
and being compelled by the force of truth, he at the same time not only laid open the doings of others, but 
convicted himself of the same acts. Is it not, then, a miserable inference, to conclude from the same works 
that the one is God and the other sorcerers? Why ought the others, because of these acts, to be accounted 
wicked rather than this man, seeing they have him as their witness against himself? For he has himself 
acknowledged that these are not the works of a divine nature, but the inventions of certain deceivers, and of 
thoroughly wicked men." Observe, now, whether Celsus is not clearly convicted of slandering the Gospel by 
such statements, since what Jesus says regarding those who are to work signs and wonders is different 
from what this Jew of Celsus alleges it to be. For if Jesus had simply told His disciples to be on their guard 
against those who professed to work miracles, without declaring what they would give themselves out to be, 
then perhaps there would have been some ground for his suspicion. But since those against whom Jesus 
would have us to be on our guard give themselves out as the Christ-which is not a claim put forth by 
sorcerers-and since He says that even some who lead wicked lives will perform miracles in the name of 
Jesus, and expel demons out of men, sorcery in the case of these individuals, or any suspicion of such, is 
rather, if we may so speak, altogether banished, and the divinity of Christ established, as well as the divine 
missions of His disciples; seeing that it is possible that one who makes use of His name, and who is 
wrought upon by some power, in some way unknown, to make the pretence that he is the Christ, should 
seem to perform miracles like those of Jesus, while others through His name should do works resembling 
those of His genuine disciples. 

Paul, moreover, in the second Epistle to the Thessalonians, shows in what manner there will one day be 
revealed "the man of sin, the son of perdition, who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called 
God, orthat is wor-shipped; so that he sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God."[1] And 
again he says to the Thessalonians: "And now ye know what withholdeth that he might be revealed in his 
time. For the mystery of iniquity doth already work: only he who now letteth will let, until he be taken out of the 
way: and then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord will consume with the spirit of His mouth, and 
shall destroy with the brightness of His coming: even him, whose cunning is after the working of Satan, with 
all power, and signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that 
perish. "[2] And in assigning the reason why the man of sin is permitted to continue in existence, he says: 
"Because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. And for this cause God shall send 
them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie; that they all might be damned who believed not the truth, 
but had pleasure in unrighteousness. "[3] Let any one now say whether any of the statements in the Gospel, 
or in the writings of the apostle, could give occasion for the suspicion that there is therein contained any 
prediction of sorcery. Any one, moreover, who likes may find the prophecy in Daniel respecting antichrist. [4] 
But Celsus falsities the words of Jesus, since He did not say that others would come working similar 
miracles to Himself, but who are wicked men and sorcerers, although Celsus asserts that He uttered such 
words. For as the power of the Egyptian magicians was not similar to the divinely-bestowed grace of 
Moses, but the issue clearly proved that the acts of the former were the effect of magic, while those of Moses 
were wrought by divine power; so the proceedings of the antichrists, and of those who feign that they can 
work miracles as being the disciples of Christ, are said to be lying signs and wonders, prevailing with all 
deceivableness of unrighteousness among them that perish; whereas the works of Christ and His disciples 
had for their fruit, not deceit, but the salvation of human souls. And who would rationally maintain that an 
improved moral life, which daily lessened the number of a man's offences, could proceed from a system of 
deceit? 

CHAP. LI. 

Celsus, indeed, evinced a sligiit l<nowledge of Scripture wiien lie made Jesus say, tiiat it is "a certain Satan 
wiio contrives sucii devices;" altiiougii lie begs tiie question s wiien lie asserts tliat "Jesus did not deny tliat 
tiiese worl<s iiave in tliem notliing of divinity, but proceed from wicl<ed men," for lie mal<es tilings wliicli differ 
in l<ind to be tlie same. Now, as a wolf is not of tlie same species as a dog, altiiougii it may appear to have 
some resemblance in the figure of its body and in its voice, nor a common wood-pigeon [6] the same as a 
dove, [7] so there is no resemblance between what is done by the power of God and what is the effect of 
sorcery. And we might further say, in answer to the calumnies of Celsus, Are those to be regarded as 
miracles which are wrought through sorcery by wicked demons, but those not which are performed by a 
nature that is holy and divine? and does human life endure the worse, but never receive the better? Now it 
appears to me that we must lay it down as a general principle, that as, wherever anything that is evil would 
make itself to be of the same nature with the good, there must by all means be something that is good 
opposed to the evil; so also, in opposition to those things which are brought about by sorcery, there must 
also of necessity be some things in human life which are the result of divine power. And it follows from the 
same, that we must either annihilate both, and assert that neither exists, or, assuming the one, and 
particularly the evil, admit also the reality of the good. Now, if one were to lay it down that works are wrought 
by means of sorcery, but would not grant that there are also works which are the product of divine power, he 
would seem to me to resemble him who should admit the existence of sophisms and plausible arguments, 
which have the appearance of establishing the truth, although really undermining it, while denying that truth 
had anywhere a home among men, or a dialectic which differed from sophistry. But if we once admit that it is 
consistent with the existence of magic and sorcery (which derive their power from evil demons, who are 
spell-bound by elaborate incantations, and become subject to sorcerers) that some works must be found 
among men which proceed from a power that is divine, why shall we not test those who profess to perform 
them by their lives and morals, and the consequences of their miracles, viz., whether they tend to the injury of 
men or to the reformation of conduct? What minister of evil demons, e.g., can do such things? and by means 
of what incantations and magic arts? And who, on the other hand, is it that, having his soul and his spirit, and I 
imagine also his body, in a pure and holy state, receives a divine spirit, and performs such works in order to 
benefit men, and to lead them to believe on the true God? But if we must once investigate (without being 
carded away by the miracles themselves) who it is that performs them by help of a good, and who by help 
of an evil power, so that we may neither slander all without discrimination, nor yet admire and accept all as 
divine, will it not be manifest, from what occurred in the times of IVIoses and Jesus, when entire nations were 
established in consequence of their miracles, that these men wrought by means of divine power what they 
are recorded to have performed? For wickedness and sorcery would not have led a whole nation to rise not 
only above idols and images erected by men, but also above all created things, and to ascend to the 
uncreated origin of the God of the universe. 

CHAP. Lll. 

But since it is a Jew who makes these assertions in the treatise of Celsus, we would say to him: Pray, friend, 
why do you believe the works which are recorded in your writings as having been performed by God 
through the instrumentality of IVIoses to be really divine, and endeavour to refute those who slanderously 
assert that they were wrought by sorcery, like those of the Egyptian magicians; while, in imitation of your 
Egyptian opponents, you charge those which were done by Jesus, and which, you admit, were actually 
performed, with not being divine? For if the final result, and the founding of an entire nation by the miracles of 
Moses, manifestly demonstrate that it was God who brought these things to pass in the time of IVIoses the 
Hebrew lawgiver, why should not such rather be shown to be the case with Jesus, who accomplished far 
greater works than those of IVIoses? For the former took those of his own nation, the descendants of 
Abraham, who had observed the rite of circumcision transmitted by tradition, and who were careful 
observers of the Abrahamic usages, and led them out of Egypt, enacting for them those laws which you 
believe to be divine; whereas the latter ventured upon a greater undertaking, and superinduced upon the 
pre-existing constitution, and upon ancestral customs and modes of life agreeable to the existing laws, a 
constitution in conformity with the Gospel. And as it was necessary, in order that IVIoses should find credit not 
only among the elders, but the common people, that there should be performed those miracles which he is 
recorded to have performed, why should not Jesus also, in order that He may be believed on by those of 
the people who had learned to ask for signs and wonders, need[1] to work such miracles as, on account of 
their greater grandeur and divinity (in comparison with those of IVIoses), were able to convert men from 
Jewish fables, and from the human traditions which prevailed among them, and make them admit that He 
who taught and did such things was greater than the: prophets? For how was not He greater than the 
prophets, who was proclaimed by them to be the Christ, and the Saviour of the human race? 

CHAP. Llll. 

All the arguments, indeed, which this Jew of Celsus advances against those who believe on Jesus, may, by 
parity of reasoning, be urged as ground of accusation against Moses: so that there is no difference in 
asserting that the sorcery practised by Jesus and that by Moses were similar to each other, [2]-both of them, 
so far as the language of this Jew of Celsus is concerned, being liable to the same charge; as, e.g., when 
this Jew says of Christ, "But, O light and truth! Jesus with his own voice expressly declares, as you 
yourselves have recorded, that there will appear among you others also, who will perform miracles like 
mine, but who are wicked men and sorcerers," some one, either Greek or Egyptian, or any other party who 
disbelieved the Jew, might say respecting Moses, "But, O light and truth! Moses with his own voice 
expressly declares, as ye also have recorded, that there will appear among you others also, who will 
perform miracles like mine, but who are wicked men and sorcerers. For it is written in your law, 'If there arise 
among you a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and giveth thee a sign or a wonder, and the sign or wonder 
come to pass whereof he spake unto thee, saying. Let us go after other gods which thou hast not known, 
and let us serve them; thou shall not hearken to the words of that prophet, or dreamer of dreams,"' etc. 
Again, perverting the words of Jesus, he says, "And he terms him who devises such things, one Satan;" 
while one, applying this to Moses, might say, "And he terms him who devises such things, a prophet who 
dreams." And as this Jew asserts regarding Jesus, that "even he himself does not deny that these works 
have in them nothing of divinity, but are the acts of wicked men;" so any one who disbelieves the writings of 
Moses might say, quoting what has been already said, the same thing, viz., that, "even Moses does not 
deny that these works have in them nothing of divinity, but are the acts of wicked men." And he will do the 
same thing also with respect to this: "Being compelled by the force of truth, Moses at the same time both 
exposed the doings of others, and convicted himself of the same." And when the Jew says, "Is it not a 
wretched inference from the same acts, to conclude that the one is a God, and the others sorcerers?" one 
might object to him, on the ground of those words of Moses already quoted, "Is it not then a wretched 
inference from the same acts, to conclude that the one is a prophet and servant of God, and the others 
sorcerers?" But when, in addition to those comparisons which I have already mentioned, Celsus, dwelling 
upon the subject, adduces this also: "Why from these works should the others be accounted wicked, rather 
than this man, seeing they have him as a witness against himself?"-we, too, shall adduce the following, in 
addition to what has been already said: "Why, from those passages in which Moses forbids us to believe 
those who exhibit signs and wonders, ought we to consider such persons as wicked, rather than Moses, 
because he calumniates some of them in respect of their signs and wonders?" And urging more to the 
same effect, that he may appear to strengthen his attempt, he says: "He himself acknowledged that these 
were not the works of a divine nature, but were the inventions of certain deceivers, and of very wicked men." 
Who, then, is "himself?" You O Jew, say that it is Jesus; but he who accuses you as liable to the same 
charges, will transfer this "himself to the person of Moses. 

CHAP. LIV. 

After this, forsooth, the Jew of Celsus, to keep up the character assigned to the Jew from the beginning, in his 
address to those of his countrymen who had become believers, says: "By what, then, were you induced (to 
become his followers)? Was it because he foretold that after his death he would rise again?" Now this 
question, like the others, can be retorted upon Moses. For we might say to the Jew "By what, then, were you 
induced (to become the follower of Moses)? Was it because he put on record the following statement about 
his own death: 'And Moses, the servant of the LORD died there, in the land of Moab, according to the word 
of the Loud; and they buried him in Moab, near the house of Phogor: and no one knoweth his sepulchre until 
this day?'"[1] For as the Jew casts discredit upon the statement, that "Jesus foretold that after His death He 
would rise again," another person might make a similar assertion about Moses, and would say in reply, that 
Moses also put on record (for the book of Deuteronomy is his composition) the statement, that "no one 
knoweth his sepulchre until this day," in order to magnify and enhance the importance of his place of burial, 
as being unknown to mankind. 

CHAP. LV. 

The Jew continues his address to those of his countrymen who are converts, as follows: "Come now, let us 
grant to you that the prediction was actually uttered. Yet how many others are there who practise such 
juggling tricks, in order to deceive their simple hearers, and who make gain by their deception?-as was the 
case, they say, with Zamolxis[2] in Scythia, the slave of Pythagoras; and with Pythagoras himself in Italy; 
and with Rhampsinitus[3] in Egypt (the latter of whom, they say, played at dice with Demeter in Hades, and 

returned to the upper world with a golden napkin which he had received from her as a gift); and also with 
Orpheus[4] among the Odrysians, and Protesilaus in Thessaly, and Hercules[4] at Cape Taenarus, and 
Theseus. But the question is, whether any one who was really dead ever rose with a veritable body. [5] Or 
do you imagine the statements of others not only to be myths, but to have the appearance of such, while you 
have discovered a becoming and credible termination to your drama in the voice from the cross, when he 
breathed his last, and in the earthquake and the darkness? That while alive he was of no assistance to 
himself, but that when dead he rose again, and showed the marks of his punishment, and how his hands 
were pierced with nails: who beheld this? A half-frantic[6] woman, as you state, and some other one, 
perhaps, of those who were engaged in the same system of delusion, who had either dreamed so, owing to 
a peculiar state of mind, [7] or under the influence of a wandering imagination bad formed to himself an 
appearance according to his own wishes, [8] which has been the case with numberless individuals; or, which 
is most probable, one who desired to impress others with this portent, and by such a falsehood to furnish an 
occasion to impostors like himself." 

Now, since it is a Jew who makes these statements, we shall conduct the defence of our Jesus as if we were 
replying to a Jew, still continuing the comparison derived from the accounts regarding Moses, and saying to 
him: "How many others are there who practise similar juggling tricks to those of Moses, in order to deceive 
their silly hearers, and who make gain by their deception?" Now this objection would be more appropriate in 
the mouth of one who did not believe in Moses (as we might quote the instances of Zamolxis and 
Pythagoras, who were engaged in such juggling tricks) than in that of a Jew, who is not very learned in the 
histories of the Greeks. An Egyptian, moreover, who did not believe the miracles of Moses, might credibly 
adduce the instance of Rhampsinitus, saying that it was far more credible that he had descended to Hades, 
and had played at dice with Demeter, and that after stealing from her a golden napkin he exhibited it as a 
sign of his having been in Hades, and of his having returned thence, than that Moses should have recorded 
that he entered into the darkness, where God was, and that he alone, above all others, drew near to God. 
For the following is his statement: "Moses alone shall come near the LORD; but the rest shall not come 
nigh."[1] We, then, who are the disciples of Jesus, say to the Jew who urges these objections: "While 
assailing our belief in Jesus, defend yourself, and answer the Egyptian and the Greek objectors: what will 
you say to those charges which you brought against our Jesus, but which also might be brought against 
Moses first? And if you should make a vigorous effort to defend Moses, as indeed his history does admit of 
a clear and powerful defence, you will unconsciously, in your support of Moses, be an unwilling assistant in 
establishing the greater divinity of Jesus." 

CHAP. LVI. 

But since the Jew says that these histories of the alleged descent of heroes to Hades, and of their return 
thence, are juggling impositions, [2] maintaining that these heroes disappeared for a certain time, and 
secretly withdrew themselves from the sight of all men, and gave themselves out afterwards as having 
returned from Hades,-for such is the meaning which his words seem to convey respecting the Odrysian 
Orpheus, and the Thessalian Protesilaus, and the Taenarian Hercules, and Theseus also, -let us 
endeavour to show that the account of Jesus being raised from the dead cannot possibly be compared to 
these. For each one of the heroes respectively mentioned might, had he wished, have secretly withdrawn 
himself from the sight of men, and returned again, if so determined, to those whom he had left; but seeing 
that Jesus was crucified before all the Jews, and His body slain in the presence of His nation, how can they 
bring themselves to say that He practised a similar deception[3] with those heroes who are related to have 
gone down to Hades, and to have returned thence? But we say that the following consideration might be 
adduced, perhaps, as a defence of the public crucifixion of Jesus, especially in connection with the 
existence of those stories of heroes who are supposed to have been compelled[4] to descend to Hades: 
that if we were to suppose Jesus to have died an obscure death, so that the fact of His decease was not 
patent to the whole nation of the Jews, and afterwards to have actually risen from the dead, there would, in 
such a case, have been ground for the same suspicion entertained regarding the heroes being also 
entertained regarding Himself. Probably, then, in addition to other causes for the crucifixion of Jesus, this 
also may have contributed to His dying a conspicuous death upon the cross, that no one might have it in his 
power to say that He voluntarily withdrew from the sight of men, and seemed only to die, without really doing 
so; but, appearing again, made a juggler's trick s of the resurrection from the dead. But a clear and 
unmistakeable proof of the fact I hold to be the undertaking of His disciples, who devoted themselves to the 
teaching of a doctrine which was attended with danger to human life,-a doctrine which they would not have 
taught with such courage had they invented the resurrection of Jesus from the dead; and who also, at the 
same time, not only prepared others to despise death, but were themselves the first to manifest their 
disregard for its terrors. 

CHAP. LVII. 

But observe whether this Jew of Celsus does not talk very blindly, in saying that it is impossible for any one 
to rise from the dead with a veritable body, his language being: "But this is the question, whether any one 
who was really dead ever rose again with a veritable body?" Now a Jew would not have uttered these 
words, who believed what is recorded in the third and fourth books of Kings regarding little children, of whom 
the one was raised up by Elijah, [6] and the other by Elisha.[7] And on this account, too, I think it was that 
Jesus appeared to no other nation than the Jews, who had become accustomed to miraculous 
occurrences; so that, by comparing what they themselves believed with the works which were done by Him, 
and with what was related of Him, they might confess that He, in regard to whom greater things were done, 
and by whom mightier marvels were performed, was greater than all those who preceded Him. 

CHAP. LVIII. 

Further, after these Greek stories which the Jew adduced respecting those who were guilty of juggling 
practices, [1] and who pretended to have risen from the dead, he says to those Jews who are converts to 
Christianity: "Do you imagine the statements of others not only to be myths, but to have the appearance of 
such, while you have discovered a becoming and credible termination to your drama in the voice from the 
cross, when he breathed his last?" We reply to the Jew: "What you adduce as myths, we regard also as 
such; but the statements of the Scriptures which are common to us both, in which not you only, but we also, 
take pride, we do not at all regard as myths. And therefore we accord our belief to those who have therein 
related that some rose from the dead, as not being guilty of imposition; and to Him especially there 
mentioned as having risen, who both predicted the event Himself, and was the subject of prediction by 
others. And His resurrection is more miraculous than that of the others in this respect, that they were raised 
by the prophets Elijah and Elisha, while He was raised by none of the prophets, but by His Father in heaven. 
And therefore His resurrection also produced greater results than theirs. For what great good has accrued 
to the world from the resurrection of the children through the instrumentality of Elijah and Elisha, such as has 
re-suited from the preaching of the resurrection of Jesus, accepted as an article of belief, and as effected 
through the agency of divine power?" 

CHAP. LIX. 

He imagines also that both the earthquake and the darkness were an invention; [2] but regarding these, we 
have in the preceding pages, made our defence, according to our ability, adducing the testimony of 
Phlegon, who relates that these events took place at the time when our Saviour suffered. [3] And he goes on 
to say, that "Jesus, while alive, was of no assistance to himself, but that he arose after death, and exhibited 
the marks of his punishment, and showed how his hands had been pierced by nails." We ask him what he 
means by the expression, "was of no assistance to himself?" For if he means it to refer to want of virtue, we 
reply that He was of very great assistance. For He neither uttered nor committed anything that was 
improper, but was truly "led as a sheep to the slaughter, and was dumb as a lamb before the shearer;" [4] 
and the Gospel testifies that He opened not His mouth. But if Celsus applies the expression to things 
indifferent and corporeal, [5] (meaning that in such Jesus could render no help to Himself,) we say that we 
have proved from the Gospels that He went voluntarily to encounter His sufferings. Speaking next of the 
statements in the Gospels, that after His resurrection He showed the marks of His punishment, and how His 
hands had been pierced, he asks, "Who beheld this?" And discrediting the narrative of Mary Magdalene, 
who is related to have seen Him, he replies, "A half-frantic woman, as ye state." And because she is not the 
only one who is recorded to have seen the Saviour after His resurrection, but others also are mentioned, 
this Jew of Celsus calumniates these statements also in adding, "And some one else of those engaged in 
the same system of deception!" 

CHAP. LX. 

In the next place, as if this were possible, viz., that the image of a man who was dead could appear to 
another as if he were still living, he adopts this opinion as an Epicurean, and says, "That some one having 
so dreamed owing to a peculiar state of mind, or having, under the influence of a perverted imagination, 
formed such an appearance as he himself desired, reported that such had been seen; and this," he 
continues, "has been the case with numberless individuals." But even if this statement of his seems to have 
a considerable degree offeree, it is nevertheless only fitted to confirm a necessary doctrine, that the soul of 
the dead exists in a separate state (from the body); and he who adopts such an opinion does not believe 
without good reason in the immortality, or at least continued existence, of the soul, as even Plato says in his 

treatise on the Soul that shadowy phantoms of persons already dead have appeared to some around their 
sepulchres. Now the phantoms which exist about the soul of the dead are produced by some substance, 
and this substance is in the soul, which exists apart in a body said to be of splendid appearance. [6] But 
Celsus, unwilling to admit any such view, will have it that some dreamed a waking dream, [7] and, under the 
influence of a perverted imagination, formed to themselves such an image as they desired. Now it is not 
irrational to believe that a dream may take place while one is asleep; but to suppose a waking vision in the 
case of those who are not altogether out of their senses, and under the influence of delirium or 
hypochondria, is incredible. And Celsus, seeing this, called the woman "half-mad,"- a statement which is 
not made by the history recording the fact, but from which he took occasion to charge the occurrences with 
being untrue. 

CHAP. LXI. 

Jesus accordingly, as Celsus imagines, exhibited after His death only the appearance of wounds received 
on the cross, and was not in reality so wounded as He is described to have been; whereas, according to 
the teaching of the Gospel-some portions of which Celsus arbitrarily accepts, in order to find ground of 
accusation, and other parts of which he rejects-Jesus called to Him one of His disciples who was sceptical, 
and who deemed the miracle an impossibility. That individual had, indeed, expressed his belief in the 
statement of the woman who said that she had seen Him, because he did not think it impossible that the soul 
of a dead man could be seen; but he did not yet consider the report to be true that He had been raised in a 
body, which was the antitype of the former. [1] And therefore he did not merely say, "Unless I see, I will not 
believe;" but he added, "Unless I put my hand into the print of the nails, and lay my hands upon His side, I 
will not believe." These words were spoken by Thomas, who deemed it possible that the body of the soul 
[2] might be seen by the eye of sense, resembling in all respects its former appearance, 
"Both in size, and in beauty of eyes. And in voice;" 
and frequently, too, 

"Having, also, such garments around the person [3] (as when alive)." 

Jesus accordingly, having called Thomas, said, "Reach hither thy finger, and behold My hands; and reach 
hither thy hand, and thrust it into My side: and be not faithless, but believing." [4] 

CHAP. LXII. 

Now it followed from all the predictions which were uttered regarding Him -amongst which was this 
prediction of the resurrection -and, from all that was done by Him, and from all the events which befell Him, 
that this event should be marvellous above all others. For it had been said beforehand by the prophet in the 
person of Jesus: "My flesh shall rest in hope, and Thou wilt not leave my soul in Hades, and wilt not suffer 
Thine Holy One to see corruption." [5] And truly, after His resurrection. He existed in a body intermediate, as 
it were, between the grossness of that which He had before His sufferings, and the appearance of a soul 
uncovered by such a body. And hence it was, that when His disciples were together, and Thomas with them, 
there "came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said. Peace be unto you. Then saith 
He to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger," [6] etc. And in the Gospel of Luke also, while Simon and Cleopas 
were conversing with each other respecting all that had happened to them, Jesus "drew near, and went with 
them. And their eyes were holden, that they should not know Him. And He said unto them. What manner of 
communications are these that ye have one to another, as ye walk?" And when their eyes were opened, 
and they knew Him, then the Scripture says, in express words, "And He vanished out of their sight." [7] And 
although Celsus may wish to place what is told of Jesus, and of those who saw Him after His resurrection, on 
the same level with imaginary appearances of a different kind, and those who have invented such, yet to 
those who institute a candid and intelligent examination, the events will appear only the more miraculous. 

CHAP. LXIII. 

After these points, Celsus proceeds to bring against the Gospel narrative a charge which is not to be lightly 
passed over, saying that "if Jesus desired to show that his power was really divine, he ought to have 
appeared to those who had ill-treated him, and to him who had condemned him, and to all men universally." 
For it appears to us also to be true, according to the Gospel account, that He was not seen after His 
resurrection in the same manner as He used formerly to show Himself-publicly, and to all men. But it is 
recorded in the Acts, that "being seen during forty days," He expounded to His disciples "the things 
pertaining to the kingdom of God." [8] And in the Gospels [9] it is not stated that He was always with them; 
but that on one occasion He appeared in their midst, after eight days, when the doors were shut, and on 
another in some similar fashion. And Paul also, in the concluding portions of the first Epistle to the 

Corinthians, in reference to His not iiaving publicly appeared as He did in the period before He suffered, 
writes as follows: "For I delivered unto you first of all that which I also received, how that Christ died for our 
sins according to the Scriptures; and that He was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve: after that He was seen 
of above five hundred brethren at once, of whom the greater part remain unto the present time, but some are 
fallen asleep. After that He was seen of James, then of all the apostles. And last of all He was seen of me 
also, as of one born out of due time." [1 0] I am of opinion now that the statements in this passage contain 
some great and wonderful mysteries, which are beyond the grasp not merely of the great multitude of 
ordinary believers, but even of those who are far advanced (in Christian knowledge), and that in them the 
reason would be explained why He did not show Himself, after His resurrection from the dead, in the same 
manner as before that event. And in a treatise of this nature, composed in answer to a work directed against 
the Christians and their faith, observe whether we are able to adduce a few rational arguments out of a 
greater number, and thus make an impression upon the hearers of this apology. 

CHAP. LXIV. 

Although Jesus was only a single individual. He was nevertheless more things than one, according to the 
different standpoint from which He might be regarded; [1] nor was He seen in the same way by all who 
beheld Him. Now, that He was more things than one, according to the varying point of view, is clear from this 
statement, "I am the way, and the truth, and the life;" and from this, "I am the bread;" and this, "I am the door," 
and innumerable others. And that when seen He did not appear in like fashion to all those who saw Him, but 
according to their several ability to receive Him, will be clear to those who notice why, at the time when He 
was about to be transfigured on the high mountain. He did not admit all His apostles (to this sight), but only 
Peter, and James, and John, because they alone were capable of beholding His glory on that occasion, 
and of observing the glorified appearance of Moses and Elijah, and of listening to their conversation, and to 
the voice from the heavenly cloud. I am of opinion, too, that before He ascended the mountain where His 
disciples came to Him alone, and where He taught them the beatitudes, when He was somewhere in the 
lower part of the mountain, and when, as it became late. He healed those who were brought to Him, freeing 
them from all sickness and disease. He did not appear the same person to the sick, and to those who 
needed His healing aid, as to those who were able by reason of their strength to go up the mountain along 
with Him. Nay, even when He interpreted privately to His own disciples the parables which were delivered 
to the multitudes without, from whom the explanation was withheld, as they who heard them explained were 
endowed with higher organs of hearing than they who heard them without explanation, so was it altogether 
the same with the eyes of their soul, and, I think, also with those of their body. [2] And the following statement 
shows that He had not always the same appearance, viz., that Judas, when about to betray Him, said to the 
multitudes who were setting out with him, as not being acquainted with Him, "Whomsoever I shall kiss, the 
same is He." [3] And I think that the Saviour Himself indicates the same thing by the words: "I was daily with 
you, teaching in the temple, and ye laid no hold on Me." [4] Entertaining, then, such exalted views regarding 
Jesus, not only with respect to the Deity within, and which was hidden from the view of the multitude, but with 
respect to the transfiguration of His body, which took place when and to whom He would, we say, that before 
Jesus had "put off the governments and powers," [5] and while as yet He was not dead unto sin, all men 
were capable of seeing Him; but that, when He had "put off the governments and powers," and had no 
longer anything which was capable of being seen by the multitude, all who had formerly seen Him were not 
now able to behold Him. And therefore, sparing them. He did not show Himself to all after His resurrection 
from the dead. 

CHAP. LXV. 

And why do I say "to all?" For even with His own apostles and disciples He was not perpetually present, nor 
did He constantly show Himself to them, because they were not able without intermission [6] to receive His 
divinity. For His deity was more resplendent after lie had finished the economy [7] (of salvation): and this 
Peter, surnamed Cephas, the first-fruits as it were of the apostles, was enabled to behold, and along with 
him the twelve (Matthias having been substituted in room of Judas); and after them He appeared to the five 
hundred brethren at once, and then to James, and subsequently to all the others besides the twelve 
apostles, perhaps to the seventy also, and lastly to Paul, as to one born out of due time, and who knew well 
how to say, "Unto me, who am less than the least of all saints, is this grace given;" and probably the 
expression "least of all" has the same meaning with "one born out of due time." For as no one could 
reasonably blame Jesus for not having admitted all His apostles to the high mountain, but only the three 
already mentioned, on the occasion of His transfiguration, when He was about to manifest the splendour 
which appeared in His garments, and the glory of Moses and Ellas talking with Him, so none could 
reasonably object to the statements of the apostles, who introduce the appearance of Jesus after His 

resurrection as having been made not to all, but to those only whom He knew to have received eyes 
capable of seeing His resurrection. I think, moreover, that the following statement regarding Him has an 
apologetic value [1] in reference to our subject, viz.: "For to this end Christ died, and rose again, that He 
might be Lord both of the 'dead and living." [2] For observe, it is conveyed in these words, that Jesus died 
that He might be Lord of the dead; and that He rose again to be Lord not only of the dead, but also of the 
living. And the apostle understands, undoubtedly, by the dead over whom Christ is to be Lord, those who 
are so called in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, "For the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised 
incorruptible; " [3] and by the living, those who are to be changed, and who are different from the dead who 
are to be raised. And respecting the living the words are these, "And we shall be changed ;" an expression 
which follows immediately after the statement, "The dead shall be raised first." [4] Moreover, in the first 
Epistle to the Thessalonians, describing the same change in different words, he says, that they who sleep 
are not the same as those who are alive; his language being, "I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, 
concerning them who are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope. For if we believe 
that Jesus died, and rose again, even so them also that sleep in Jesus will God bring with Him. For this we 
say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we who are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not 
prevent them that are asleep." [5] The explanation which appeared to us to be appropriate to this passage, 
we gave in the exegetical remarks which we have made on the first Epistle to the Thessalonians. 

CHAP. LXVI. 

And be not surprised if all the multitudes who have believed on Jesus do not behold His resurrection, when 
Paul, writing to the Corinthians, can say to them, as being incapable of receiving greater matters, "For I 
determined not to know anything among you, save Jesus Christ, and Him crucified;" [6] which is the same as 
saying, "Hitherto ye were not able, neither yet now are ye able, for ye are still carnal." [7] The Scripture, 
therefore, doing everything by appointment of God, has recorded of Jesus, that before His sufferings He 
appeared to all indifferently, but not always; while after His sufferings He no longer appeared to all in the 
same way, but with a certain discrimination which measured out to each his due. And as it is related that 
"God appeared to Abraham," or to one of the saints, and this "appearance" was not a thing of constant 
occurrence, but took place at intervals, and not to all, so understand that the Son of God appeared in the 
one case on the same principle that God appeared to the latter. [8] 

CHAP. LXVII. 

To the best of our ability, therefore, as in a treatise of this nature, we have answered the objection, that "if 
Jesus had really wished to manifest his divine power, he ought to have shown himself to those who 
ill-treated him, and to the judge who condemned him, and to all without reservation." There was, however, no 
obligation on Him to appear either to the judge who condemned Him, or to those who ill-treated Him. For 
Jesus spared both the one and the other, that they might not be smitten with blindness, as the men of Sodom 
were when they conspired against the beauty of the angels entertained by Lot. And here is the account of 
the matter: "But the men put forth their hand, and pulled Lot into the house to them, and shut to the door. And 
they smote the men who were at the door of the house with blindness, both small and great; so that they 
wearied themselves to find the door." [9] Jesus, accordingly, wished to show that His power was divine to 
each one who was capable of seeing it, and according to the measure of His capability. And I do not 
suppose that He guarded against being seen on any other ground than from a regard to the fitness of those 
who were incapable of seeing Him. And it is in vain for Celsus to add, "For he had no longer occasion to 
fear any man after his death, being, as you say, a God; nor was he sent into the world at all for the purpose 
of being hid." Yet He was sent into the world not only to become known, but also to be hid. For all that He 
was, was not known even to those to whom He was known, but a certain part of Him remained concealed 
even from them; and to some He was not known at all. And He opened the gates of light to those who were 
the sons of darkness and of night, and had devoted themselves to becoming the sons of light and of the 
day. For our Saviour Lord, like a good physician, came rather to us who were full of sins, than to those who 
were righteous. 

CHAP. LXVIII. 

But let us observe how this Jew of Celsus asserts that, "if this at least would have helped to manifest his 
divinity, he ought accordingly to have at once disappeared from the cross." Now this seems to me to be like 
the argument of those who oppose the doctrine of providence, and who arrange things differently from what 
they are, and allege that the world would be better if it were as they arrange it. Now, in those instances in 
which their arrangement is a possible one, they are proved to make the world, so far as depends upon 

them, worse by their arrangement than it actually is; while in those cases in which they do not portray things 
worse than they really are, they are shown to desire impossibilities; so that in either case they are deserving 
of ridicule. And here, accordingly, that them was no impossibility in His coming, as a being of diviner nature, 
in order to disappear when He chose, is clear from the very nature of the case; and is certain, moreover, 
from what is recorded of Him, in the judgment of those who do not adopt certain portions merely of the 
narrative that they may have ground for accusing Christianity, and who consider other portions to be fiction. 
For it is related in St. Luke's Gospel, that Jesus after His resurrection took bread, and blessed it, and 
breaking it, distributed it to Simon and Cleopas; and when they had received the bread, "their eyes were 
opened, and they knew Him, and He vanished out of their sight," [1] 

CHAP. LXIX. 

But we wish to show that His instantaneous bodily disappearance from the cross was not better fitted to 
serve the purposes of the whole economy of salvation (than His remaining upon it was). For the mere letter 
and narrative of the events which happened to Jesus do not present the whole view of the truth. For each 
one of them can be shown, to those who have an intelligent apprehension of Scripture, to be a symbol of 
something else. Accordingly, as His crucifixion contains a truth, represented in the words, "I am crucified with 
Christ," and intimated also in these, "God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, by whom the world is crucified to me, and I unto the world; " [2] and as His death was necessary, 
because of the statement, "For in that He died. He died unto sin once," [3] and this, "Being made 
conformable to His death,' [4] and this, "For if we be dead with Him, we shall also live with Him:" [5] so also 
His burial has an application to those who have been made conformable to His death, who have been both 
crucified with Him, and have died with Him; as is declared by Paul, "For we were buried with Him by 
baptism, and have also risen with Him." [6] These matters, however, which relate to His burial, and His 
sepulchre, and him who buried Him, we shall expound at greater length on a more suitable occasion, when 
it will be our professed purpose to treat of such things. But, for the present, it is sufficient to notice the clean 
linen in which the pure body of Jesus was to be enwrapped, and the new tomb which Joseph had hewn out 
of the rock, where "no one was yet lying," [7] or, as John expresses it, "wherein was never man yet laid." [8] 
And observe whether the harmony of the three evangelists here is not fitted to make an impression: for they 
have thought it right to describe the tomb as one that was "quarried or hewn out of the rock;" so that be who 
examines the words of the narrative may see something worthy of consideration, both in them and in the 
newness of the tomb,-a point mentioned by Matthew and John [9]- and in the statement of Luke and John, 
[10] that no one had ever been interred therein before. For it became Him, who was unlike other dead men 
(but who even in death manifested signs of life in the water and the blood), and who was, so to speak, a new 
dead man, to be laid in a new and clean tomb, in order that, as His birth was purer than any other (in 
consequence of His being born, not in the way of ordinary generation, but of a virgin). His burial also might 
have the purity symbolically indicated in His body being deposited in a sepulchre which was new, not built 
of stones gathered from various quarters, and having no natural unity, but quarried and hewed out of one 
rock, united together in all its parts. Regarding the explanation, however, of these points, and the method of 
ascending from the narratives themselves to the things which they symbolized, one might treat more 
profoundly, and in a manner more adapted to their divine character, on a more suitable occasion, in a work 
expressly devoted to such subjects. The literal narrative, however, one might thus explain, viz., that it was 
appropriate for Him who had resolved to endure suspension upon the cross, to maintain all the 
accompaniments of the character He had assumed, in order that He who as a man had been put to death, 
and who as a man had died, might also as a man be buried. But even if it had been related in the Gospels, 
according to the view of Celsus, that Jesus had immediately disappeared from the cross, he and other 
unbelievers would have found fault with the narrative, and would have brought against it some such 
objection as this: "Why, pray, did he disappear after he had been put upon the cross, and not disappear 
before he suffered?" If, then, after learning from the Gospels that He did not at once disappear from the 
cross, they imagine that they can find fault with the narrative, because it did not invent, as they consider it 
ought to have done, any such instantaneous disappearance, but gave a true account of the matter, is it not 
reasonable that they should accord their faith also to His resurrection, and should believe that He, 
according to His pleasure, on one occasion, when the doors were shut, stood in the midst of His disciples, 
and on another, after distributing bread to two of His acquaintances, immediately disappeared from view, 
after He had spoken to them certain words? 

CHAP. LXX. 

But how is it that this Jew of Celsus could say that Jesus concealed Himself? For his words regarding Him 
are these: "And who that is sent as a messenger ever conceals himself when he ought to make known his 

message?" Now, He did not conceal Himself, who said to those who sought to apprehend Him, "I was daily 
teaching openly in the temple, and ye laid no hold upon Me." Bat having once already answered this 
charge of Celsus, now again repeated, we shall content ourselves with what we have formerly said. We 
have answered, also, in the preceding pages, this objection, that "while he was in the body, and no one 
believed upon him, he preached to ail without intermission; but when he might have produced a powerful 
belief in himself after rising from the dead, he showed himself secretly only to one woman, and to his own 
boon companions." [1] Now it is not true that He showed Himself only to one woman; for it is stated in the 
Gospel according to Matthew, that "in the end of the Sabbath, as it began to dawn towards the first day of the 
week, came Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary, to see the sepulchre. And, behold, there had been a 
great earthquake: for the angel of the Lord had descended from heaven, and come and rolled back the 
stone." [2] And, shortly after, Matthew adds: "And, behold, Jesus met them" - clearly meaning the 
afore-mentioned Marys -"saying. All hail. And they came and held Him by the feet, and worshipped Him." [3] 
And we answered, too, the charge, that "while undergoing his punishment he was seen by all, but after his 
resurrection only by one," when we offered our defence of the fact that "He was not seen by all." And now we 
might say that His merely human attributes were visible to all men but those which were divine in their nature 
- I speak of the attributes not as related, but as distinct [4]- were not capable of being received by all But 
observe here the manifest contradiction into which Celsus falls. For having said, a little before, that Jesus 
had appeared secretly to one woman and His own boon companions, he immediately subjoins: "While 
undergoing his punishment he was seen by all men, but after his resurrection by one, whereas the opposite 
ought to have happened." And let us hear what he means by "ought to have happened." The being seen by 
all men while undergoing His punishment, but after His resurrection only by one individual, are opposites. 
[5] Now, so far as his language conveys a meaning, he would have that to take place which is both 
impossible and absurd, viz., that while undergoing His punishment He should be seen only by one 
individual, but after His resurrection by all men! or else how will you explain his words, "The opposite ought 
to have happened?" 

CHAP. LXXI. 

Jesus taught us who it was that sent Him, in the words, "None knoweth the Father but the Son;" [6] and in 
these, "No man hath seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, He 
hath declared Him." [7] He, treating of Deity, stated to His true disciples the doctrine regarding God; and we, 
discovering traces of such teaching in the Scripture narratives, take occasion from such to aid our 
theological conceptions, [8] hearing it declared in one passage, that "God is light, and in Him there is no 
darkness at all;" [9] and in another, "God is a Spirit, and they that worship Him must worship Him in spirit and 
in truth." [10] But the purposes for which the Father sent Him are innumerable; and these any one may 
ascertain who chooses, partly from the prophets who prophesied of Him, and partly from the narratives of 
the evangelists. And not a few things also will he learn from the apostles, and especially from Paul. 
Moreover, those who are pious He leadeth to the light, and those who sin He will punish, - a circumstance 
which Celsus not observing, has represented Him "as one who will lead the pious to the light, and who will 
have mercy on others, whether they sin or repent." [1 1] 

CHAP. LXXII. 

After the above statements, he continues: "If he wished to remain hid, why was there heard a voice from 
heaven proclaiming him to be the Son of God? And if he did not seek to remain concealed, why was he 
punished? or why did he die?" Now, by such questions he thinks to convict the histories of discrepancy, not 
observing that Jesus neither desired all things regarding Himself to be known to all whom He happened to 
meet, nor yet all things to be unknown. Accordingly, the voice from heaven which proclaimed Him to be the 
Son of God, in the words, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased," (1) is not stated to have 
been audible to the multitudes, as this Jew of Celsus supposed. The voice from the cloud on the high 
mountain, moreover, was heard only by those who had gone up with Him. For the divine voice is of such a 
nature, as to be heard only by those whom the speaker wishes to hear it. And I maintain, that the voice of 
God which is referred to, is neither air which has been struck, nor any concussion of the air, nor anything else 
which is mentioned in treatises on the voice; (2) and therefore it is heard by a better and more divine organ 
of hearing than that of sense. And when the speaker will not have his voice to be heard by all; he that has the 
finer ear hears the voice of God, while he who has the ears of his soul deadened does not perceive that it is 
God who speaks. These things I have mentioned because of his asking, "Why was there heard a voice 
from heaven proclaiming him to be the Son of God?" while with respect to the query, "Why was he punished, 
if he wished to remain hid?" what has been stated at greater length in the preceding pages on the subject of 
His suffering may suffice. 

CHAP. LXXIII. 

The Jew proceeds, after this, to state as a consequence what does not follow from the premises; for it does 
not follow from "His having wished, by the punishments which He underwent, to teach us also to despise 
death," that after His resurrection He should openly summon all men to the light, and instruct them in the 
object of His coming. For He had formerly summoned all men to the light in the words, "Come unto Me, all ye 
that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." (3) And the object of His coming had been 
explained at great length in His discourses on the beatitudes, and in the announcements which followed 
them, and in the parables, and in His conversations with the scribes and Pharisees. And the instruction 
afforded us by the Gospel of John, shows that the eloquence of Jesus consisted not in words, but in deeds; 
while it is manifest from the Gospel narratives that His speech was "with power," on which account also they 
marvelled at Him. 

CHAP. LXXIV. 

In addition to all this, the Jew further says: "All these statements are taken from your own books, in addition 
to which we need no other witness; for ye fail upon your own swords." (4) 

Now we have proved that many foolish assertions, opposed to the narratives of our Gospels, occur in the 
statements of the Jew, either with respect to Jesus or ourselves. And I do not think that he has,shown that 
"we fall upon our own swords;" but he only so imagines. And when the Jew adds, in a general way, this to his 
former remarks: "O most high and heavenly one! what God, on appearing to men, is received with 
incredulity?" we must say to him, that according to the accounts in the law of Moses, God is related to have 
visited the Hebrews in a most public manner, not only in the signs and wonders performed in Egypt, and 
also in the passage of the Red Sea, and in the pillar of fire and cloud of light, but also when the Decalogue 
was announced to the whole people, and yet was received with incredulity by those who saw these things: 
for had they believed what they saw and heard, they would not have fashioned the calf, nor changed their 
own glory into the likeness of a grass-eating calf; nor would they have said to one another with reference to 
the calf, "These be thy gods, O Israel, who brought thee up out of the land of Egypt." (5) And observe 
whether it is not entirely in keeping with the character of the same people, who formerly refused to believe 
such wonders and such appearances of divinity, throughout the whole period of wandering in the 
wilderness, as they are recorded in the law of the Jews to have done, to refuse to be convinced also, on 
occasion of the glorious advent of Jesus, by the mighty words which were spoken by Him with authority, and 
the marvels which He performed in the presence of all the people. 

CHAP. LXXV. 

I think what has been stated is enough to convince any one that the unbelief of the Jews with regard to Jesus 
was in keeping with what is related of this people from the beginning. For I would say in reply to this Jew of 
Celsus, when he asks, "What God that appeared among men is received with incredulity, and that, too, 
when appearing to those who expect him? or why, pray, is he not recognized by those who have been long 
looking for him?" what answer friends, would you have us return to your questions? Which class of miracles, 
in your judgment, do you regard as the greater? Those which were wrought in Egypt and the wilderness, or 
those which we declare that Jesus performed among you? For if the former are in your opinion greater than 
the latter, does it not appear from this very fact to be in conformity with the character of those who 
disbelieved the greater to despise the less? And this is the opinion entertained with respect to our accounts 
of the miracles of Jesus. But if those related of Jesus are considered to be as great as those recorded of 
Moses, what strange thing has come to pass among a nation which has manifested incredulity with regard 
to the commencement of both dispensations? (2) For the beginning of the legislation was in the time of 
Moses, in whose work are recorded the sins of the unbelievers and wicked among you, while the 
commencement of our legislation and second covenant is admitted to have been in the time of Jesus. And 
by your unbelief of Jesus ye show that ye are the sons of those who in the desert discredited the divine 
appearances; and thus what was spoken by our Saviour will be applicable also to you who believed not on 
Him: "Therefore ye bear witness that ye allow the deeds of your fathers." (3) And there is fulfilled among you 
also the prophecy which said: "Your life shall hang in doubt before your eyes, and you will have no 
assurance of your life." (4) For ye did not believe in the life which came to visit the human race. 

CHAP. LXXVI. 

Celsus, in adopting the character of a Jew, could not discover any objections to be urged against the 

Gospel which might not be retorted on him as liable to be brought also against the law and the prophets. For 
he censures Jesus in such words as the following: "He makes use of threats, and reviles men on light 
grounds, when he says, 'Woe unto you,' and 'I tell you beforehand.' For by such expressions he manifestly 
acknowledges his inability to persuade; and this would not be the case with a God, or even a prudent man." 
Observe, now, whether these charges do not manifestly recoil upon the Jew. For in the writings of the law 
and the prophets God makes use of threats and revilings, when He employs language of not less severity 
than that found in the Gospel, such as the following expressions of Isaiah: "Woe unto them that join house to 
house, and lay field to field;" (5) and, "Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning that they may follow 
strong drink;" (6) and, "Woe unto them that draw their sins after them as with a long rope;" (7) and, "Woe unto 
them that call evil good, and good evil;" (8) and, "Woe unto those of you who are mighty to drink wine;" (9) 
and innumerable other passages of the same kind. And does not the following resemble the threats of 
which he speaks: "Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evildoers, children that are 
corrupters?" (10) and so on, to which he subjoins such threats as are equal in severity to those which, he 
says, Jesus made use of. For is it not a threatening, and a great one, which declares, "Your country is 
desolate, your cities are burned with fire: your land, strangers devour it in your presence, and it is desolate, 
as overthrown by strangers?" (11) And are there not revilings in Ezekiel directed against the people, when 
the Lord says to the prophet, "Thou dwellest in the midst of scorpions?" (12) Were you serious, then, Celsus, 
in representing the Jew as saying of Jesus, that "he makes use of threats and revilings on slight grounds, 
when he employs the expressions, 'Woe unto you,' and 'I tell you beforehand?'" Do you not see that the 
charges which this Jew of yours brings against Jesus might be brought by him against God? For the God 
who speaks in the prophetic writings is manifestly liable to the same accusations, as Celsus regards them, 
of inability to persuade. I might, moreover, say to this Jew, who thinks that he makes a good charge against 
Jesus by such statements, that if he undertakes, in support of the scriptural account, to defend the numerous 
curses recorded in the books of Leviticus and Deuteronomy, we should make as good, or better, a defence 
of the revilings and threatenings which are regarded as having been spoken by Jesus. And as respects the 
law of Moses itself, we are in a position to make a better defence of it than the Jew is, because we have 
been taught by Jesus to have a more intelligent apprehension of the writings of the law. Nay, if the Jew 
perceive the meaning of the prophetic Scriptures, he will be able to show that it is for no light reason that 
God employs threatenings and revilings, when He says, "Woe unto you," and "I tell you beforehand." And 
how should God employ such expressions for the conversion of men, which Celsus thinks that even a 
prudent man would not have recourse to? But Christians, who know only one God-the same who spoke in 
the prophets and in the Lord (Jesus)-can prove the reasonableness of those threatenings and revilings, as 
Celsus considers and entitles them. And here a few remarks shall be addressed to this Celsus, who 
professes both to be a philosopher, and to be acquainted with all our system. How is it, friend, when 
Hermes, in Homer, says to Odysseus, 

"Why, now, wretched man, do you come wandering alone over the mountain-tops?" (1) 

that you are satisfied with the answer, which explains that the Homeric Hermes addresses such language to 
Odysseus to remind him of his duty, (2) because it is characteristic of the Sirens to flatter and to say pleasing 
things, around whom 

"Is a huge heap of bones," (3) and who say, 

"Come hither, much landed Odysseus, great glory of the Greeks;" (4) 

whereas, if our prophets and Jesus Himself, in order to turn their hearers from evil, make use of such 
expressions as "Woe unto you," and what you regard as revilings, there is no condescension in such 
language to the circumstances of the hearers, nor any application of such words to them as healing (5) 
medicine? Unless, indeed, you would have God, or one who partakes of the divine nature, when conversing 
with men, to have regard to His own nature alone, and to what is worthy of Himself, but to have no regard to 
what is fitting to be brought before men who are under the dispensation and leading of His word, and with 
each one of whom He is to converse agreeably to his individual character. And is it not a ridiculous 
assertion regarding Jesus, to say that He was unable to persuade men, when you compare the state of 
matters not only among the Jews, who have many such instances recorded in the prophecies, but also 
among the Greeks, among whom all of those who have at-rained great reputation for their wisdom have 
been unable to persuade those who conspired against them, or to induce their judges or accusers to cease 
from evil, and to endeavour to attain to virtue by the way of philosophy? 

CHAP. LXXVII. 

After this the Jew remarks, manifestly in accordance with the Jewish belief: "We certainly hope that there will 
be a bodily resurrection, and that we shall enjoy an eternal life; and the example and archetype of this will 
be He who is sent to us, and who will show that nothing is impossible with God." We do not know, indeed, 
whether the Jew would say of the expected I Christ, that He exhibits in Himself an example of the 
resurrection; but let it be supposed that he both thinks and says so. We shall give this answer, then, to him 
who has told us that he drew his information from our own writings: "Did you read those writings, friend, in 
which you think you discover matter of accusation against us, and not find there the resurrection of Jesus, 
and the declaration that He was the first-born from the dead? Or because you will not allow such things to 
have been recorded, were they not actually recorded?" But as the Jew still admits the resurrection of the 
body, I do not consider the present a suitable time to discuss the subject with one who both believes and 
says that there is a bodily resurrection, whether he has an articulate (6) understanding of such a topic, and is 
able to plead well on its behalf, (7) or not, but has only given his assent to it as being of a legendary 
character. (8) Let the above, then, be our reply to this Jew of Celsus. And when he adds, "Where, then, is he, 
that we may see him and believe upon him?" we answer: Where is He now who spoke in the prophecies, 
and who wrought miracles, that we may see and believe that He is part of God? Are you to be allowed to 
meet the objection, that God does not perpetually show Himself to the Hebrew nation, while we are not to be 
permitted the same defence with regard to Jesus, who has both once risen Himself, and led His disciples to 
believe in His resurrection, and so thoroughly persuaded them of its truth, that they show to all men by their 
sufferings how they are able to laugh at all the troubles of life, beholding the life eternal and the resurrection 
clearly demonstrated to them both in word and deed? 

CHAP. LXXVIII. 

The Jew continues: "Did Jesus come into the world for this purpose, that we should not believe him?" To 
which we immediately answer, that He did not come with the object of producing incredulity among the 
Jews; but knowing beforehand that such would be the result. He foretold it, and made use of their unbelief for 
the calling of the Gentiles. For through their sin salvation came to the Gentiles, respecting whom the Christ 
who speaks in the prophecies says, "A people whom I did not know became subject to Me: they were 
obedient to the hearing of My ear;" (9) and, "I was found of them who sought Me not; I became manifest to 
those who inquired not after Me." (1) It is certain, moreover, that the Jews were punished even in this present 
life, after treating Jesus in the manner in which they did. And let the Jews assert what they will when we 
charge them with guilt, and say, "Is not the providence and goodness of God most wonderfully displayed in 
your punishment, and in your being deprived of Jerusalem, and of the sanctuary, and of your splendid 
worship?" For whatever they may say in reply with respect to the providence of God, we shall be able more 
effectually to answer it by remarking, that the providence of God was wonderfully manifested in using the 
transgression of that people for the purpose of calling into the kingdom of God, through Jesus Christ, those 
from among the Gentiles who were strangers to the covenant and aliens to the promises. And these things 
were foretold by the prophets, who said that, on account of the transgressions of the Hebrew nation, God 
would make choice, not of a nation, but of individuals chosen from all lands; (2) and, having selected the 
foolish things of the world, would cause an ignorant nation to become acquainted with the divine teaching, 
the kingdom of God being taken from the one and given to the other. And out of a larger number it is 
sufficient on the present occasion to adduce the prediction from the song in Deuteronomy regarding the 
calling of the Gentiles, which is as follows, being spoken in the person of the Lord "They have moved Me to 
jealousy with those who are not gods; they have provoked Me to anger with their idols: and I will move them 
to jealousy with those who are not a people; I will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation." (3) 

The conclusion of all these arguments regarding Jesus is thus stated by the Jew: "He was therefore a man, 
and of such a nature, as the truth itself proves, and reason demonstrates him to be." I do not know, however, 
whether a man who had the courage to spread throughout the entire world his doctrine of religious worship 
and teaching, (4) could accomplish what he wished without the divine assistance, and could rise superior to 
all who withstood the progress of his doctrine-kings and rulers, and the Roman senate, and governors in all 
places, and the common people. And how could the nature of a man possessed of no inherent excellence 
con-yen so vast a multitude? For it would not be wonderful if it were only the wise who were so convened; but 
it is the most irrational of men, and those devoted to their passions, and who, by reason of their irrationality, 
change with the greater difficulty so as to adopt a more temperate course of life. And yet it is because Christ 
was the power of God and the wisdom of the Father that He accomplished, and still accomplishes, such 
results, although neither the Jews nor Greeks who disbelieve His word will so admit. And therefore we shall 
not cease to believe in God, according to the precepts of Jesus Christ, and to seek to convert those who 
are blind on the subject of religion, although it is they who are truly blind themselves that charge us with 
blindness: and they, whether Jews or Greeks, who lead astray those that follow them, accuse us of seducing 

men-a good seduction, truly!-that they may become temperate instead of dissolute, or at least may make 
advances to temperance; may become just instead of unjust, or at least may tend to become so; prudent 
instead of foolish, or be on the way to become such; and instead of cowardice, meanness, and timidity, may 
exhibit the virtues of fortitude and courage, especially displayed in the struggles undergone for the sake of 
their religion towards God, the Creator of all things. Jesus Christ therefore came announced beforehand, not 
by one prophet, but by all; and it was a proof of the ignorance of Celsus, to represent a Jew as saying that 
one prophet only had predicted the advent of Christ. But as this Jew of Celsus, after being thus introduced, 
asserting that these things were indeed in conformity with his own law, has somewhere here ended his 
discourse, with a mention of other matters not worthy of remembrance, I too shall here terminate this second 
book of my answer to his treatise. But if God permit, and the power of Christ abide in my soul, I shall 
endeavour in the third book to deal with the subsequent statements of Celsus.
