Polycarp to the Philippians
Translation: Ante-Nicene Fathers, Roberts & Donaldson (1885), public domain
Source: https://archive.org/details/EarlyChurchFathers38Volumes

Polycarp, and the presbyters(2) with him, to the Church of God sojourning at Philippi: Mercy to you, and 
peace from God Almighty, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, our Saviour, be multiplied. 

CHAP. I. -PRAISE OF THE PHILIPPIANS. 

I have greatly rejoiced with you in our Lord Jesus Christ, because ye have followed the example(3) of true 
love [as displayed by God], and have accompanied, as became you, those who were bound in chains, the 
fitting ornaments of saints, and which are indeed the diadems of the true elect of God and our Lord; and 
because the strong root of your faith, spoken of in days(4) long gone by, endureth even until now, and 
bringeth forth fruit to our Lord Jesus Christ, who for our sins suffered even unto death, [but] "whom God raised 
froth the dead, having loosed the bands of the grave. "(5) "In whom, though now ye see Him not, ye believe, 
and believing, rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory; "(6) into which joy many desire to enter, 
knowing that "by grace ye are saved, not of works, "(7) but by the will of God through Jesus Christ. 

CHAP. II. -AN EXHORTATION TO VIRTUE. 

"Wherefore, girding up your loins, "(8) "serve the Lord in fear"(9) and truth, as those who have forsaken the 
vain, empty talk and error of the multitude, and "believed in Him who raised up our Lord Jesus Christ from 
the dead, and gave Him glory, "(10) and a throne at His right hand. To Him all things" in heaven and on earth 
are subject. Him every spirit serves. He comes as the Judge of the living and the dead. (12) His blood will 
God require of those who do not believe in Him. (13) But He who raised Him up from the dead will raise(14) 
up us also, if we do His will, and walk in His commandments, and love what He loved, keeping ourselves 
from all unrighteousness, covetousness, love of money, evil speaking, falsewitness; "not rendering evil for 
evil, or railing for railing, "(15) or blow for blow, or cursing for cursing, but being mindful of what the Lord said in 
His teaching: "Judge not, that ye be notjudged;(16) forgive, and it shall be forgiven untoyou;(17) be merciful, 
that ye may obtain mercy;(1 8) with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again;(1 9) and once 
more, "Blessed are the poor, and those that are persecuted for righteousness' sake, for theirs is the 
kingdom of God."(20) 

CHAP. III. -EXPRESSIONS OR PERSONAL UNWORTHINESS. 

These things, brethren, I write to you concerning righteousness, not because I take anything upon myself, 
but because ye have invited me to do so. For neither I , nor any other such one, can come up to the wisdom" 
of the blessed and glorified Paul. He, when among you, accurately and stedfastly taught the word of truth in 
the presence of those who were then alive. And when absent from you, he wrote you a letter,(22) which, if you 
carefully study, you will find to be the means of building you up in that faith which has been given you, and 
which, being followed by hope, and preceded by love towards God, and Christ, and our neighbour, "is the 
mother of us all. "(23) For if any one be inwardly possessed of these graces, he hath fulfilled the command of 
righteousness, since he that hath love is far from all sin. 

CHAP. IV. -VARIOUS EXHORTATIONS. 

"But the love of money is the root of all evils. "(1) Knowing, therefore, that "as we brought nothing into the 
world, so we can carry nothing out,"(2) let us arm ourselves with the armour of righteousness;(3) and let us 
teach, first of all, ourselves to walk in the commandments of the Lord. Next, [teach] your wives [to walk] in the 
faith given to them, and in love and purity tenderly loving their own husbands in all truth, and loving all 
[others] equally in all chastity; and to train up their children in the knowledge and fear of God. Teach the 
widows to be discreet as respects the faith of the Lord, praying continually(4) for all, being far from all 
slandering, evil-speaking, false-witnessing, love of money, and every kind of evil; knowing that they are the 
altar s of God, that He clearly perceives all things, and that nothing is hid from Him, neither reasonings, nor 
reflections, nor any one of the secret things of the heart. 

CHAP. V.-THE DUTIES OF DEACONS, YOUTHS, AND VIRGINS. 

Knowing, then, that "God is not mocked, "(6) we ought to walk worthy of His commandment and glory. In like 
manner should the deacons be blameless before the face of His righteousness, as being the servants of 
God and Christ,(7) and not of men. They must not be slanderers, double-tongued, (8) or lovers of money, but 
temperate in all things, compassionate, industrious, walking according to the truth of the Lord, who was the 
servant(9) of all. If we please Him in this present world, we shall receive also the future world, according as 
He has promised to us that He will raise us again from the dead, and that if we live(10) worthily of Him, "we 
shall also reign together with Him,"(1 1) provided only we believe. In like manner, let the young men also be 
blameless in all things, being especially careful to preserve purity, and keeping themselves in, as with a 
bridle, from every kind of evil. For it is well that they should be cut off from(12) the lusts that are in the world, 
since "every lust warreth against the spirit; "(13) and "neither fornicators, nor effeminate, nor abusers of 
themselves with mankind, shall inherit the kingdom of God, "(14) nor those who do things inconsistent and 
unbecoming. Wherefore, it is needful to abstain from all these things, being subject to the presbyters and 
deacons, as unto God and Christ. The virgins also must walk in a blameless and pure conscience. 

CHAP. VI. --THE DUTIES OF PRESBYTERS AND OTHERS. 

And let the presbyters be compassionate and merciful to all, bringing back those that wander, visiting all the 
sick, and not neglecting the widow, the orphan, or the poor, but always "providing for that which is becoming 
in the sight of God and man ; "(15) abstaining from all wrath, respect of persons, and unjust judgment; 
keeping far off from . all covetousness, not quickly crediting [an evil re port] against any one, not severe in 
judgment, as knowing that we are all under a debt of sin. If then we entreat the Lord to forgive us, we ought 
also ourselves to forgive;(16) for we are before the eyes of our Lord and God, and "we must all appear at 
the judgment-seat of Christ, and must every one give an account of himself."(1 7) Let us then serve Him in 
fear, and with all reverence, even as He Himself has commanded us, and as the apostles who preached 
the Gospel unto us, and the prophets who proclaimed beforehand the coming of the Lord [have alike taught 
us]. Let us be zealous in the pursuit of that which is good, keeping ourselves from causes of offence, from 
false brethren, and from those who in hypocrisy bear the name of the Lord, and draw away vain men into 
error. 

CHAP. VII. --AVOID THE DOCETAE, AND PERSEVERE IN FASTING AND PRAYER. 

"For whosoever does not confess that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh, is antichrist;"(1 8) and whosoever 
does not confess the testimony of the cross, (19) is of the devil; and whosoever perverts the oracles of the 
Lord to his own lusts, and says that there is neither a resurrection nor a judgment, he is the first-born of 
Satan. (20) Wherefore, forsaking the vanity of many, and their false doctrines, let us return to the word which 
has been handed down to us from(21) the beginning; "watching unto prayer,"(22) and persevering in fasting; 
beseeching in our supplications the all-seeing God "not to lead us into temptation, "(1) as the Lord has said: 
"The spirit truly is willing, but the flesh is weak."(2) 

CHAP. VIM. --PERSEVERE IN HOPE AND PATIENCE. 

Let us then continually persevere in our hope, and the earnest of our righteousness, which is Jesus Christ, 
"who bore our sins in His own body on the tree, "(3) "who did no sin, neither was guile found in His mouth, "(4) 
but endured all things for us, that we might live in Him. (5) Let us then be imitators of His patience; and if we 
suffer(6) for His name's sake, let us glorify Him. (7) For He has set us this example s in Himself, and we have 
believed that such is the case. 

CHAP. IX. -PATIENCE INCULCATED. 

I exhort you all, therefore, to yield obedience to the word of righteousness, and to exercise all patience, such 
as ye have seen [set] before your eyes, not only in the case of the blessed Ignatius, and Zosimus, and 
Rufus, but also in others among yourselves, and in Paul himself, and the rest of the apostles. [This do] in the 
assurance that all these have not run(9) in vain, but in faith and righteousness, and that they are [now] in their 
due place in the presence of the Lord, with whom also they suffered. For they loved not this present world, 
but Him who died for us, and for our sakes was raised again by God from the dead. 

CHAP. X. -EXHORTATION TO THE PRACTICE OF VIRTUE. (10) 

Stand fast, therefore, in these things, and follow the example of the Lord, being firm and unchangeable in the 
faith, loving the brotherhood, (1 1) and being attached to one another, joined together in the truth, exhibiting 

the meekness of the Lord in your intercourse with one another, and despising no one. When you can do 
good, defer it not, because "alms delivers from death."" Be all of you subject one to another? having your 
conduct blameless among the Gentiles, "(14) that ye may both receive praise for your good works, and the 
Lord may not be blasphemed through you. But woe to him by whom the name of the Lord is 
blasphemed !(1 5) Teach, therefore, sobriety to all, and manifest it also in your own conduct. 

CHAP. XI. -EXPRESSION OF GRIEF ON ACCOUNT OF VALENS. 

I am greatly grieved for Valens, who was once a presbyter among you, because he so little understands the 
place that was given him [in the Church]. I exhort you, therefore, that ye abstain from covetousness,(16) and 
that ye be chaste and truthful. "Abstain from every form of evil."(1 7) For if a man cannot govern himself in 
such matters, how shall he enjoin them on others ? If a man does not keep himself from covetousness,(16) 
he shall be defiled by idolatry, and shall be judged as one of the heathen. But who of us are ignorant of the 
judgment of the Lord ? "Do we not know that the saints shall judge the world ?"(1 8) as Paul teaches. But I 
have neither seen nor heard of any such thing among you, in the midst of whom the blessed Paul laboured, 
and who are commended(19) in the beginning of his Epistle. For he boasts of you in all those Churches 
which alone then knew the Lord; but we [of Smyrna] had not yet known Him. I am deeply grieved, therefore, 
brethren, for him (Valens) and his wife; to whom may the Lord grant true repentance! And be ye then 
moderate in regard to this matter, and "do not count such as enemies, "(20) but call them back as suffering 
and straying members, that ye may save your whole body. For by so acting ye shall edify yourselves. (21) 

CHAP. XII. -EXHORTATION TO VARIOUS GRACES. 

For I trust that ye are well versed in the Sacred Scriptures, and that nothing is hid from you; but to me this 
privilege is not yet granted. (23) It is declared then in these Scriptures, "Be ye angry, and sin not, "(23) and, 
"Let not the sun go down upon your wrath. "(24) Happy is he who remembers(25) this, which I believe to be 
the case with you. But may the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and Jesus Christ Himself, who is the 
Son of God, and our everlasting High Priest, build you up in faith and truth, and in all meekness, gentleness, 
patience, long-suffering, forbearance, and purity; and may He bestow on you a lot and portion among His 
saints, and on us with you, and on all that are under heaven, who shall believe in our Lord Jesus Christ, and 
in His Father, who "raised Him from the dead.(1) Pray for all the saints. Pray also for kings, (2) and 
potentates, and princes, and for those that persecute and hate you, (3) and for the enemies of the cross, that 
your fruit may be manifest to all, and that ye may be perfect in Him. 

CHAP. XIII. -CONCERNING THE TRANSMISSION OF EPISTLES. 

Both you and lgnatius(4) wrote to me, that if any one went [from this] into Syria, he should carry your letter(5) 
with him; which request I will attend to if I find a fitting opportunity, either personally, or through some other 
acting for me, that your desire may be fulfilled. The Epistles of Ignatius written by him(6) to us, and all the rest 
[of his Epistles] which we have by us, we have sent to you, as you requested. They are subjoined to this 
Epistle, and by them ye may be greatly profited; for they treat of faith and patience, and all things that tend to 
edification in our Lord. Any(7) more certain information you may have obtained respecting both Ignatius 
himself, and those that were(8) with him, have the goodness to make known(9) to us. 

CHAP. XIV.-CONCLUSION. 

These things I have written to you by Crescens, whom up to the present(10) time I have recommended unto 
you, and do now recommend. For he has acted blamelessly among us, and I believe also among you. 
Moreover, ye will hold his sister in esteem when she comes to you. Be ye safe in the Lord Jesus Christ. 
Grace be with you all.(1 1) Amen.
