The Second Epistle of Clement
Translation: Roberts-Donaldson 1885, Public Domain
Source: https://www.earlychristianwritings.com/text/2clement-roberts.html

CHAPTER I.--WE OUGHT TO THINK HIGHLY OF CHRIST.
Brethren, it is fitting that you should think of Jesus Christ as of God,—as the Judge of the living and the dead. And it does not become us to think lightly of our salvation; for if we think little of Him, we shall also hope to obtain little [from Him]. And those of us who hear carelessly of these things, as if they were of small importance, commit sin, not knowing whence we have been called, and by whom, and to what place, and how much Jesus Christ submitted to suffer on our behalf. What return, then, shall we make to Him, or what fruit that shall be worthy of that which He has given to us? For, indeed, how great are the benefits which we owe to Him! He has graciously given us light; as a Father, He has called us sons; He has saved us when we were ready to perish. What praise, then, shall we give to Him, or what return shall we make for the things which we have received?

CHAPTER II.--THE CHURCH, FORMERLY BARREN, IS NOW FRUITFUL.
"Rejoice, thou barren that bearest not; break forth and cry, thou that travailest not; for she that is desolate hath many more children than she that hath an husband." In that He said, "Rejoice, thou barren that bearest not," He referred to us, for our Church was barren before that children were given to her. And in that He said, "Cry out, thou that travailest not," He means this, that we should offer our prayers to God with a good conscience, and not grow weary as women in labour. And in that He said, "For she that is desolate hath many more children than she that hath an husband," [He means] that our people seemed to be outcast from God, but now, through believing, have become more numerous than those who are reckoned to possess God. And another Scripture saith, "I came not to call the righteous, but sinners." This means that those who are perishing must be saved. For it is a great and admirable work to raise up and establish that which is fallen. Therefore our Lord had pity on us in these respects, that we might live, since we were already near death.

CHAPTER III.--THE DUTY OF CONFESSING CHRIST.
Since, then, He has displayed so great mercy towards us, and especially in this respect, that we who are living should not offer sacrifices to gods that are dead, or pay them worship, but should, through Him, attain to the knowledge of the true Father, whereby shall we show that we do indeed know Him, but by not denying Him through whom this knowledge has been attained? For He Himself declares, "Whosoever shall confess Me before men, him will I confess before My Father." This, then, is our reward if we shall confess Him by whom we have been saved. But wherein do we confess Him? When we do that which He saith, and are not ashamed of His commandments. And not only should we say that we are His, but we should also do the things which He saith. For He saith, "Not every one that saith unto Me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that doeth the will of My Father." Wherefore, brethren, let us confess Him by our works, by loving one another, by not committing adultery, or speaking evil of one another, or envying one another; but by being continent, compassionate, and good. We ought also to sympathize with one another, and not be avaricious. By such works let us confess Him, and not by those that are of an opposite kind. And it is not fitting that we should fear men, but rather God. For this reason, if we should do such [wicked] things, the Lord hath said, "Even though ye were gathered together to Me in My very bosom, yet if ye were not to keep My commandments, I would cast you off, and say unto you, Depart from Me; I know you not whence ye are, ye workers of iniquity."

CHAPTER IV.--TRUE CONFESSION OF CHRIST.
Wherefore, brethren, leaving [the thought of] our sojourn in this present world, let us do the will of Him that called us, and not fear to depart out of this world. For the Lord saith, "Ye shall be as lambs in the midst of wolves." And Peter answered and said unto Him, "What, then, if the wolves shall tear in pieces the lambs?" Jesus said unto Peter, "The lambs have no cause after they are dead to fear the wolves; and in like manner, fear not ye them that kill you, and can do nothing more unto you; but fear Him who, after you are dead, has power over both soul and body to cast them into hell-fire." And consider, brethren, that the sojourning of the flesh in this world is but brief and transient, but the promise of Christ is great and wonderful, even the rest of the kingdom to come, and of life everlasting. By what course of conduct, then, shall we attain these things, but by leading a holy and righteous life, and by deeming these worldly things as not belonging to us, and not fixing our desires upon them? For if we desire to confess Him, we ought to do so by our works, by loving one another, by not committing adultery, or speaking evil of one another, or envying one another; but by being continent, compassionate, and good. We ought also to sympathize with one another, and not be avaricious. By such works let us confess Him, and not by those that are of an opposite kind.

CHAPTER V.--THIS WORLD SHOULD BE DESPISED.
Wherefore, brethren, leaving [the thought of] our sojourn in this present world, let us do the will of Him that called us, and not fear to depart out of this world. For the Lord saith, "Ye shall be as lambs in the midst of wolves." And Peter answered and said unto Him, "What, then, if the wolves shall tear in pieces the lambs?" Jesus said unto Peter, "The lambs have no cause after they are dead to fear the wolves; and in like manner, fear not ye them that kill you, and can do nothing more unto you; but fear Him who, after you are dead, has power over both soul and body to cast them into hell-fire." And consider, brethren, that the sojourning of the flesh in this world is but brief and transient, but the promise of Christ is great and wonderful, even the rest of the kingdom to come, and of life everlasting. By what course of conduct, then, shall we attain these things, but by leading a holy and righteous life, and by deeming these worldly things as not belonging to us, and not fixing our desires upon them? For if we desire to confess Him, we ought to do so by our works.

CHAPTER VI.--THE PRESENT AND FUTURE WORLDS ARE ENEMIES TO EACH OTHER.
Now the Lord declares, "No servant can serve two masters." If we desire to serve both God and mammon, it will be unprofitable for us. "For what will it profit if a man gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?" This world and the next are two enemies. The one urges to adultery and corruption, avarice and deceit; the other bids farewell to these things. We cannot, therefore, be the friends of both; but we must decide to give up the one and keep company with the other. Let us reckon that it is better to hate the things present, since they are trifling, and transient, and corruptible; and to love those [which are to come,] as being good and incorruptible. For if we do the will of Christ, we shall find rest; otherwise, nothing shall deliver us from eternal punishment, if we should disobey His commandments. For the Scripture also saith in Ezekiel, "If Noah, Job, and Daniel should rise up, they shall not deliver their children in the captivity." Now, if men so eminently good are not able by their righteousness to deliver their children, how can we hope to enter into the kingdom of God if we keep not our baptism pure and undefiled? Or who shall be our advocate, unless we be found possessed of works of holiness and righteousness?

CHAPTER VII.--WE MUST STRIVE IN ORDER TO BE CROWNED.
Wherefore, then, my brethren, let us struggle with all earnestness, knowing that the contest is in our case close at hand, and that many undertake long voyages to strive for a corruptible reward; while we who have the prize set before us that is incorruptible, do not strive at all. Let us therefore so run, that we may obtain the prize. Let us so run that we may be crowned. If we cannot all be crowned, let us at least come near to it. We must remember that he who strives in the corruptible contest, if he be found acting unfairly, is taken away and scourged, and cast forth from the lists. What then think ye? If one does anything unseemly in the case of the contest for life [eternal], what shall he undergo? For of those who do not keep the seal [of baptism] he saith, "Their worm shall not die, and their fire shall not be quenched, and they shall be a spectacle to all flesh."

CHAPTER VIII.--THE NECESSITY OF REPENTANCE WHILE WE ARE ON EARTH.
As long, therefore, as we are upon earth, let us practise repentance, for we are as clay in the hand of the artificer. For as the potter, if he make a vessel, and it be distorted or broken in his hands, he forms it over again; but if he has before him to cast it into the furnace of fire, he can no longer find any help for it: so also we, while we are still in this world, should repent with our whole heart of the evil deeds we have done in the flesh, that we may be saved by the Lord, while we have yet an opportunity of repentance. For after we have gone out of the world, no further power of confessing or repenting will there belong to us. Wherefore, brethren, by doing the will of the Father, and keeping the flesh pure, and observing the commandments of the Lord, we shall obtain eternal life. For the Lord saith in the Gospel, "If ye have not kept that which is little, who will commit to you that which is great? For I say unto you, that he that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much." This, then, is what He means: "Keep the flesh pure and the seal of baptism undefiled, that we may receive eternal life."

CHAPTER IX.--WE SHALL BE JUDGED IN THE FLESH.
And let no one of you say that this very flesh shall not be judged, nor rise again. Consider ye in what [state] ye were saved, in what ye received sight, if not while ye were in this flesh. We must therefore preserve the flesh as the temple of God. For as ye were called in the flesh, so shall ye also come [to be judged] in the flesh. Jesus Christ, the Lord who saved us, being first a Spirit, became flesh, and thus called us. So also shall we in this flesh receive the reward. Let us therefore love one another, that we may all attain to the kingdom of God. While we have an opportunity of being healed, let us yield ourselves to God our physician, and pay Him what is due. Who are we that we should claim a reward? Of a truth, brethren, He is the reward of our labour. How many things has He given us? Of a truth, He that created us, and planted us in Paradise, when we had transgressed the commandment, yet knowing beforehand that we should do this, in His mercy and pity for us did not cast us out, but called us again, and as of old, when we were about to perish, He saved us.

CHAPTER X.--WE MUST KEEP OUR BODIES PURE.
Wherefore, brethren, if we do the will of God our Father, we shall be of the first Church, that is, spiritual, that hath been created before the sun and moon; but if we do not the will of the Lord, we shall be of the scripture that saith, "My house was made a den of robbers." So then let us choose to be of the Church of life, that we may be saved. I do not think that ye are ignorant that the living Church is the body of Christ; for the Scripture saith, "God made man, male and female." The male is Christ, the female is the Church. And the Books and the Apostles plainly declare that the Church is not of the present, but from the beginning. For she was spiritual, as was also our Jesus, but was manifested in the last days that He might save us. Now the Church, being spiritual, was manifested in the flesh of Christ, thus showing us that if any of us keep her in the flesh, and do not corrupt her, he shall receive her again in the Holy Spirit. For this flesh is the type of the spirit; no one therefore who has corrupted the type shall receive the antitype. Therefore if we say that the flesh is the Church and the Spirit is Christ, then he who has treated the flesh shamefully has treated the Church shamefully. Such a one therefore shall not receive the Spirit, which is Christ. So excellent is the life and immortality which this flesh is able to receive if the Holy Spirit be joined to it, that none can declare or tell the things which the Lord hath prepared for His elect.

CHAPTER XI.--WE MUST LIVE HOLILY.
I think that I have not given an unimportant exhortation concerning self-control, following as it does in the train of what has been already said. If any one follows after these things he shall not miss the mark, but shall have the good hope of those who have been wanderers from the right path. For if we do the will of Christ we shall find rest; but if otherwise, nothing shall deliver us from eternal punishment if we should disobey His commandments. For the Scripture also saith in Ezekiel, that if Noah and Job and Daniel should rise up they shall not deliver their children in the captivity. Now if men so eminently good are not able by their righteousness to deliver their children, how can we hope to enter into the kingdom of God if we keep not our baptism pure and undefiled? Or who shall be our advocate, unless we be found possessed of works of holiness and righteousness?

CHAPTER XII.--WE MUST FOLLOW AFTER PEACE.
Let us therefore every hour expect the kingdom of God in love and righteousness, since we know not the day of the appearing of God. For the Lord Himself, being asked by a certain person when His kingdom would come, replied, "When two shall be one, and that which is without as that which is within, and the male with the female, neither male nor female." Now two are one when we speak the truth one to another, and there is without hypocrisy one soul in two bodies. And that which is without as that which is within means this: He calls the soul that which is within, and the body that which is without. As then thy body is visible, so also let thy soul be apparent in good works. And the male with the female, neither male nor female, this means... that a brother seeing a sister should think nothing about her as female, nor she think anything about him as male. If ye do these things, saith He, the kingdom of my Father shall come.

CHAPTER XIII.--THE DUTY OF BROTHERLY LOVE.
Wherefore, brethren, let us now at length repent; let us be sober unto that which is good; for we are full of much folly and wickedness. Let us wipe out from us our former sins, and repenting from the heart be saved. And let us not be men-pleasers, nor desire to please only one another, but also those who are without, by our righteousness, that the name may not be blasphemed on our account. For the Lord saith, "Continually is My name blasphemed among all the Gentiles," and again, "Woe to him on whose account My name is blasphemed." Wherein is it blasphemed? In that ye do not do the things which I desire. For the Gentiles, when they hear from our mouth the oracles of God, marvel at them as beautiful and great; but when they see that our works are not worthy of the words which we speak, they turn themselves to blasphemy, saying that it is a myth and a delusion. For when they hear from us that God saith, "It is no thank unto you if ye love them that love you, but this is thank unto you if ye love your enemies and them that hate you," when they hear these things, they marvel at the exceeding goodness; but when they see that we not only do not love those that hate us, but not even those that love us, they laugh us to scorn, and the name is blasphemed.

CHAPTER XIV.--THE CHURCH PRE-EXISTENT.
Wherefore, brethren, if we do the will of God our Father, we shall be of the first Church, that is, spiritual, that hath been created before the sun and moon; but if we do not the will of the Lord, we shall be of the scripture that saith, "My house was made a den of robbers." So then let us choose to be of the Church of life, that we may be saved. I do not think that ye are ignorant that the living Church is the body of Christ; for the Scripture saith, "God made man, male and female." The male is Christ, the female is the Church. And the Books and the Apostles plainly declare that the Church is not of the present, but from the beginning. For she was spiritual, as was also our Jesus, but was manifested in the last days that He might save us. Now the Church, being spiritual, was manifested in the flesh of Christ, thus showing us that if any of us keep her in the flesh, and do not corrupt her, he shall receive her again in the Holy Spirit. For this flesh is the type of the spirit; no one therefore who has corrupted the type shall receive the antitype. Therefore if we say that the flesh is the Church and the Spirit is Christ, then he who has treated the flesh shamefully has treated the Church shamefully. Such a one therefore shall not receive the Spirit, which is Christ. So excellent is the life and immortality which this flesh is able to receive if the Holy Spirit be joined to it, that none can declare or tell the things which the Lord hath prepared for His elect.

CHAPTER XV.--HE WHO SAVES AND HE WHO IS SAVED.
Now I do not think that I have given you any light counsel concerning self-control, and to those who shall do these things I think there has not been light counsel given. For great is the reward of him that doeth these things, and he that heareth them with a good mind shall not be without a reward. For if we have received a commandment that we should do this, that we may tear away from our members the lusts that war against the soul, and that we should keep the seal of baptism pure, that we may obtain eternal life, then he that heareth and doeth shall be blessed.

CHAPTER XVI.--THE DUTY OF CONFESSING OUR SINS.
So then, brethren, having received no small opportunity for repentance, while we have time, let us turn to God who called us, while we still have Him as one who receives us. For if we renounce these lusts, and conquer our soul by not fulfilling its evil desires, we shall partake of the mercy of Jesus. But ye know that the day of judgment is already coming as a burning oven, and the powers of the heavens shall melt, and the whole earth shall be as lead melting in the fire; and then shall the secret and open works of men appear. Therefore almsgiving is good as repentance from sin; better is fasting than prayer, but almsgiving than both. Love covereth a multitude of sins, and prayer out of a good conscience delivereth from death. Blessed is every one that is found full of these; for almsgiving lighteneth the burden of sin.

CHAPTER XVII.--THE REWARD OF THE RIGHTEOUS.
Let us therefore repent from the whole heart, that none of us perish by the way. For if we have commandments to do this, that we should tear ourselves away from idols and instruct the young, how much more is it our duty to save our own soul from perishing? And when we have taught the younger to keep the seal of baptism pure, we shall also ourselves be saved. For I do not think that there is any light counsel given if any one will do these things. For great is the reward of him that doeth these things, and he that heareth them with a good mind shall not be without a reward.

CHAPTER XVIII.--THE AUTHOR HIMSELF IS STILL IN NEED OF REPENTANCE.
Let us then be of those who give thanks, of those who have served God, and not of the ungodly who are judged. For I myself also, being a complete sinner, and not yet escaped from temptation, but being still in the midst of the engines of the devil, strive to follow after righteousness, that I may be able to come at least near to it, fearing the judgment to come.

CHAPTER XIX.--REWARD OF THE RIGHTEOUS AFTER DEATH.
Wherefore, brethren and sisters, after the God of truth I address to you an appeal, that ye may give heed to the words written, so that ye may save both yourselves and him who reads among you. For as a reward I ask of you that ye repent with the whole heart, and so obtain for yourselves salvation and life. For by doing this we shall set a mark for all the young who wish to devote themselves to piety and the goodness of God. And let us not be displeased when we are admonished, and drawn away from what is wrong to what is right. For sometimes while we are doing evil things we do not perceive it, on account of the double-mindedness and unbelief that is in our breasts, and we are darkened in our understanding by vain desires. Let us then practise righteousness, that we may be saved unto the end. Blessed are they that obey these commandments; though they may endure affliction for a short time in this world, they shall gather the immortal fruit of the resurrection. Let not the godly man therefore be grieved if he be wretched in the times that now are; a time of blessedness awaiteth him. He shall live again in the world above with the fathers, and shall have rejoicing without sorrow for ever.

CHAPTER XX.--CONCLUSION.
But neither let it trouble your mind that we see the unrighteous possessed of riches, and the servants of God straitened. Let us therefore, brethren and sisters, have faith. We are being trained by the living God, and we are being exercised in the present life that we may be crowned in the life to come. None of the righteous has received his reward quickly, but waiteth for it. For if God should give the reward of the righteous quickly, we should immediately be training ourselves in business and not in godliness; for we should seem to be righteous while pursuing not what is godly but what is gainful. And on this account the divine judgment surprises a spirit that is not just, and loads it with chains.

To the only God invisible, the Father of truth, who sent forth to us the Saviour and Prince of immortality, through whom also He made known to us the truth and the heavenly life, to Him be the glory for ever and ever. Amen.
