The Shepherd of Hermas
Translation: Roberts-Donaldson / Lightfoot public domain renderings
Source: Apostolic Fathers collections (public domain)

THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS

VISION 1
1. He who had brought me up, sold me to one Rhode in Rome. Many years after this I recognised her, and I began to love her as a sister. Some time after, I saw her bathe in the river Tiber; and I gave her my hand, and drew her out of the river. The sight of her beauty made me think with myself, “I should be a happy man if I could but get such a one for a wife.” This was the only thought that passed through me: this and nothing more.

2. A short time after this, as I was walking on my road to the villages, and magnifying the creatures of God, and thinking how magnificent, and beautiful, and powerful they are, I fell asleep. And the Spirit carried me away, and took me through a pathless place, through which a man could not travel, for it was situated between two mountains of an extreme height, and overhung by the shadow of rocks. And when I was past the river, I came into the level country, and then I fell on my knees, and began to pray to the Lord, and to confess my sins. And as I was praying, the heavens were opened, and I see the woman whom I had desired saluting me from the sky, and saying, “Hail, Hermas!”

3. And looking up to her, I said, “Lady, what doest thou here?” And she answered me, “I have been taken up here to accuse you of your sins before the Lord.” “Lady,” said I, “are you to be the subject of my accusation?” “No,” said she, “but hear the words which I am going to speak to you. God, who dwells in the heavens, and made out of nothing the things that exist, and multiplied and increased them on account of His holy Church, is angry with you for having sinned against me.” I answered her, “Lady, have I sinned against you? How? or when spoke I an unseemly word to you? Did I not always think of you as a lady? Did I not always respect you as a sister? Why do you falsely accuse me of this wickedness and impurity?” With a smile she said to me, “The desire of wickedness arose within your heart. Is it not your opinion that a righteous man commits sin when an evil desire arises in his heart? There is sin in such a case, and the sin is great,” said she; “for the thoughts of a righteous man should be righteous. For by thinking righteously his character is established in the heavens, and he has the Lord merciful to him in every business. But such as entertain wicked thoughts in their minds are bringing upon themselves death and captivity; and especially is this the case with those who set their affections on this world, and glory in their riches, and look not forward to the blessings of the life to come. For many will their regrets be; for they have no hope. But do thou pray to God, and He will heal the sins of thee, and of all thy house, and of all the saints.”

[Core of the first Vision provided. The full Shepherd consists of 5 Visions, 12 Mandates, and 10 Similitudes. Complete clean public-domain text continues to be expanded.]
