Theodoret, The Letters
Translation: Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Schaff et al. (1886-1900), Public Domain
Source: https://archive.org/details/EarlyChurchFathers38Volumes

LETTERS OF THE BLESSED THEODORET, BISHOP OF CYRUS 

I. To an unknown correspondent. 

In the words of the prophet we find the wise hearer mentioned with the excellent councillor.[1] I, however, 
send the book I have written on the divine Apostle, not as much to a wise hearer as to a just and clever 
judge. When goldsmiths wish to find out if their gold is refined and unalloyed, they apply it to the touchstone; 
and just so I sent my book to your reverence, for I wish to know whether it is what it should be, or needs 
some fining down. You have read it and returned it, but have said nothing to me on this point. Your silence 
leads me to conjecture that the judge has given sentence of condemnation, but is unwilling to hurt my 
feelings by telling me so. Pray dismiss any such idea, and do not hesitate to tell me your opinion about the 
book. 

II. To the same. 

When men love warmly, I doubt whether in the case of the children of those whom they love, they can be 
impartial judges. Justice is carried away by affection. Fathers fancy that their ugly boys are beautiful, and 
sons do not see the uncomeliness of their fathers. Brother looks at brother in the light of affection rather than 
of nature. It is thus that I am afraid your holiness has judged what I have written, and that the sentence has 
been delivered by warmth of feeling. For truly the power of love is very great, and not seldom it keeps out of 
sight considerable errors in our friends. It is because you have so much of it, my dear friend, that you have 
wreathed what I have written with your kindly praises. All I can do is to ask your piety to beseech the good 
Lord to ratify your eulogy, and make the man you have praised something like the picture painted in the 
words of his admirers. 

III. To Bishop lrenoeus.[2] 

Comparisons of this kind are forbidden by the divine Apostle. In his Epistle to the Romans he writes 
"Therefore judge nothing before the time until the Lord come who both will bring to light the hidden things of 
darkness and will make manifest the counsels of the heart: and then shall every man have praise of 
God."[1] And he is quite right; for we can see only outward deeds, but the God of all knows also the intention 
of the doers, and when He delivers his sentence judges not so much the work as the will. So He will crown 
the divine Apostle who became to the Jews as a Jew, to them that were under the law as under the law, and 
to them that were without law as without law[2] for his object in thus assuming an actor's mask was that he 
might do good to mankind. His was no time-server's career. The gain he got was loss, but he secured the 
good of them whom he taught. As I said, then, the divine Paul bids us wait for the judgment of God. But we 
are venturing on high themes; we are handling a theology passing understanding and words; not like the 
unholy heretics, seeking blasphemous positions, but endeavouring to confute their impiety, and as far as in 
us lies to give praise to the Creator; we shall therefore do nothing unreasonable in attempting to reply to 
your enquiry. 

You have suggested the case of an impious judge giving to two athletes of piety the alternative of 
sacrificing to demons, or flinging themselves into the sea. You describe the one as choosing the latter and 
plunging without hesitation into the deep, while the other, refusing both, shews quite as much abhorrence of 
the worship of idols as his companion, but declines to commit himself to the waves, and waits for this fate to 
be violently forced upon him. You have suggested these circumstances, and you ask which of these two 
took the better course. I think that you will agree with me that the latter was the more praiseworthy. No one 
ought to withdraw himself from life unbidden, but should await either a natural or a violent death. Our Lord 
gave us this lesson when He bade those that are persecuted in one city flee to another and again 
commanded them to quit even this and depart to another.[3] In obedience to this teaching the divine Apostle 
escaped the violence of the governor of the city, and had no hesitation in speaking of the manner of his 
flight, but spoke of the basket, the wall, and the window, and boasted and glorified in the act.[1] For what 
looks discreditable is made honourable by the divine command. In the same manner the Apostle called 

himself at one time a Pharisee[2] and at another a Roman, [3] not because he was afraid of death, but acting 
quite fairly in right.[4] In the same way when he had learnt the Jews' plot against him he appealed to 
Caesar[5] and sent his sister's son to the chief captain to report the designs hatched against him, not 
because he clung to this present life, but in obedience to the divine law. For assuredly our Lord does not 
wish us to throw ourselves into obvious peril; and this is taught us by deed as well as by word, for more than 
once He avoided the murderous violence of the Jews. And the great Peter, first of the Apostles, when he 
was loosed from his chains and had escaped from the hands of Herod, came to the house of John, who 
was surnamed Mark, and after removing the anxiety of his friends by his visit and bidding them maintain 
silence, betook himself to another house in the endeavour to conceal himself more effectually by the 
removal. [6] And we shall find just the same kind of wisdom in the old Testament, for the famous Moses, after 
playing the man in his struggle with the Egyptian and finding out the next day that the homicide had become 
known, ran away, travelled a long journey, and arrived at the land of Midian.[7] In like mariner the great Elias 
when he had learnt Jezebel's threats did not give himself up to them which wished to kill him, but left the 
world and hurried to the desert.[8] And if it is right and agreeable to God to escape the violence of our 
enemies, surely it is much more right to refuse to obey them when they order a man to become his own 
murderer. Our Lord did not give in to the devil when he bade Him throw Himself down, [9] and when he had 
armed against Him the hands of the Jews by means of the scourge and the thorns and the nails, and the 
creature was urging Him to bring wholesale destruction on His wicked foes, the Lord Himself forbade, 
because He knew that His Passion was bringing salvation to the world, and it was for this reason that just 
before His Passion He said to His Apostles "Pray that ye enter not into temptation, "[1] and taught us to pray 
"Lead us not into temptation. "[2] Now let us shift our ground a little, and we shall see our way more clearly. 
Let us eliminate the sea from the argument, and suppose the judge to have given each of the martyrs a 
sword, and ordered the one who refused to sacrifice to cut off his own head; who in his senses would have 
endured to redden his hand with his own blood, become his own headsman, lift his hand against himself, in 
obedience to the judge's order? 

Clearly your second martyr deserves the higher praise. The former indeed deserves credit for his zeal, bat 
the latter is adorned by right judgment as well. 

I have answered you according to the measure of the wisdom given me; He who knows thoughts as well as 
acts, will shew which of the two was right in the day of His appearing. 

IV. Festal. 

The Creator of oar souls and bodies has given His bounty to both, and at one and the same time has 
overwhelmed us with good things that both heart and senses can feel. At the time of the sacred feast He has 
given us the rain we so much longed for, that our celebration might be clear of sadness. We have praised 
oar bountiful Lord, and now as we are wont write a festal letter and address your piety with the request that 
you will aid us with your prayers. 

V. Festal. 

The God who made us gives us care and sorrow after our sin. But He has furnished us with divine 
occasions of consolation by appointing divine feasts. The thoughts they suggest both remind us of God's 
gifts to us, and promise complete freedom from all our troubles. Enjoying these good things and filled with 
cheerfulness, we address your magnificence, and, according to the custom of the festival, pay friendship's 
debt. 

VI. Festal. 

Our loving Lord has allowed us, with the zeal of folks who love the Christ, to celebrate the divine feast of 
salvation and enjoy the fruit of the spiritual blessing that flows from it. Since we know the disposition of your 
Piety toward us, we write to tell yon this. For they who have friendly thoughts to others are always pleased to 
hear cheering intelligence of them. 

VII. To Theonilla. 

Had I heard of the death of your dignity's most honourable husband I should have written long ago, and now 
my object in writing is not to lull your great sorrow to sleep by consolatory words. They are unnecessary. 
They who have learnt the wisdom of philosophers and consider what this life is, find reason strong enough 
to meet and break griefs rising surge. And even while you are remembering your long companionship, 
reason recognises the divine decrees, and to meet the forces of the tears of sorrow marshals at once the 

course of nature, the law of God, and the hope of the resurrection. Knowing this as I do, there is no necessity 
to use many words. I only beseech you to avail yourself of good sense in the hour of need. Think of the 
death of him who is gone as no more than a long journey, and wait for the promise of our God and Saviour. 
For He who promised the resurrection cannot lie, and is the fount of truth. 

VIM. To Eugraphia. 

It is needless for me to bring once more to bear upon your grief the spells of the spirit. The mere mention of 
the sufferings that wrought oar salvation is enough to quench distress, even at its worst. Those sufferings 
were all undergone for humanity. Our Lord did not destroy death to make one body victorious over death, 
hut through that one body to effect our common resurrection, and make our hope of it a sure and certain 
hope. And if even while our holy celebrations are bringing you manifold refreshment of soul, you cannot 
overcome your sense of sorrow, let me beg you, my honoured friend, to read the very words of the marriage 
contract which follow on the mention of the dowry, and to see how the wedding is preceded by the reminder 
of death. Knowing as we do that men are mortal, and be thinking us of the peace of survivors, it is customary 
to lay down what are called conditions, and for no hesitation to be shewn at the mention of death before the 
joining together in marriage. These are the plain words "If the husband should die first it is agreed that so 
and so be done; if this lot should first fall to the wife, so and so." We knew all this before the wedding; we are 
waiting for it so to say every day. Why then take it amiss? The union must needs be broken either by the 
death of the husband or the departure of the wife. Such is the course of life. You know, my excellent friend, 
alike God's will and human nature; dispel then your despondency and wait for the fulfilment of the common 
hope of the just. 

IX. To an anonymous correspondent. 

Your piety is annoyed and distressed at the sentence passed on me unjustly and without a trial. I am 
comforted that you are so feeling. Had I been justly condemned I should have been sorry at having given 
my judges reasonable grounds for what they have done, but, as it is, my conscience is quite clear, and I feel 
joyful and exultant and look forward to the remission of other sins on account of this injustice. Naboth lives in 
men's memories only because he suffered that unjust death. Only pray that we be not abandoned of God 
and let the enemy continue to do his worst. God's good will is enough to make me very cheerful and if He is 
on my side I despite all my troubles as trifles. [1] 

X. To the learned Elias. 

Legislators have made laws in aid of the oppressed, and advocates bare practised the orator's arts to help 
them that stand in need of fair defence. You, my friend, have studied eloquence and the law. Now put your 
art in practice, and by it put down the oppressors, help them that are put down by them, and defend them 
with the law as with a shield. Let no guilty client enjoy the benefit of your advocacy, even though he be your 
friend. 

Now one of these guilty men is that villain Abraham. After being settled for a considerable time on an estate 
belonging to the church, he then took several partners in his rascality, and has bad no hesitation in owning 
his proceedings. I have sent him to you with an account of his doings, the parties be has wronged, and the 
reverend sub-deacon Gerontius. I do not want you to deliver the guilty man to the authorities, but in the hope 
that when his victims have told you all they have bad to put up with, and have made you, my learned friend, 
feel sympathy for their case, you may be induced to compel the wicked fellow to restore what he has stolen. 

XI. To Flavianus bishop of Constantinople. 

The Creator and Guide of the Universe has made you a luminary of the world, and changed the deep 
moonless night into clear noon. Just as by the haven's side, the beacon light shews sailors in the night time 
the harbour mouth, so shines the bright ray of your holiness to give great comfort to all that are attacked for 
true religion's sake, and shews them the safe port of the Apostles' faith. They that know it already are filled 
with comforts and they that knew it not are saved from being dashed upon the rocks. I indeed am especially 
bound to praise the giver of all good, because I have found a noble champion who drives away fear of men 
by the power of the fear of God, fights heartily in the front rank for the doctrines of the Gospel, and gladly 
bears the brunt of the apostolic war. So to-day every tongue is moved in eulogy of your holiness, for it is not 
only the nurslings of true religion who admire the purity of your faith, but the praises of your courage are sung 
even by the enemies of the truth. Falsehood vanishes at truth's lightning flash. 
I write thus knowing that the very reverend and pious Hypatius the reader, both readily obeys the bidding of 

your holiness, and constantly, my Lord, mentions your laudable deeds. I salute you as holy and right dear to 
God. I exhort you to support us with your prayers that we may lead the rest of our lives according to God's 
laws. 

XII. To the bishop lrenaeus.(1) 

Job, that famous tower of adamant and noble champion of goodness, was not shaken even by blows of 
continuous troubles of every sort and kind, but stood impregnable and firm. At the end however of all his 
trials the righteous Law-giver explained the reason of them in the words, "Dost thou think that I answered 
thee for any other reason than that thou mightest appear just?"(2) I think that these words are known to your 
piety which is able to support the many and various attacks of troubles and anxieties, and so far from 
shrinking from them, exhibits the strength and stability of your administration. So the bountiful Lord, seeing 
the bravery and holiness of your soul, has refused to keep a worthy champion in concealment, and has 
brought him forth to the contest to adorn your venerable head with a crown of victory, and give your 
struggles as a high example of good service to the rest. So, my dear friend, conquer in this battle too, and 
bear bravely the death of your son-in-law, my own dear friend. Conquer in your wisdom the claims of 
kinsmanship and the memory of a noble and generous character, a memory which must always recall 
something beyond painters art or rhetorician's skill. Repel the assault of sorrow by the thought of Him who 
wisely administers all the affairs of men, with perfect knowledge of the future and right guidance of it for our 
good. Let us join in the joy of him who has been delivered from this life's storms. Let us rather give thanks 
because, wafted by kindly winds, he has cast anchor in the windless haven and has escaped the grievous 
shipwrecks whereof this life is full. But need I say all this to one who is a tried gladiator of goodness? Need I, 
as it were, anoint for endurance one who is a trainer of other athletes? Still I write. It is a comfort to myself to 
write as I do. I am really and truly grieved when I remember an intimacy that I esteemed so highly. Once 
more I praise the great Guide of all, Who both knows what would be good for us and guides our life 
accordingly. I have dictated this after writing my former communication, on one of my friends in Antioch 
telling me that the end had come. 

XIII. To Cyrus. 

I had heard of the island of Lesbos, and its cities Mitylene, Methymna, and the rest; but I was ignorant of the 
fruit of the vine cultivated in it.(1) Now, thanks to your diligence, I have become acquainted with it, and I 
admire both its whiteness and the delicacy of its flavour. Perhaps time may even improve it, unless it turns it 
sour; for wine, like the body, and plants, and buildings, and other things made by hand, is damaged by time. 
If, as you say, it makes the drinker longlived, I am afraid it will be of little use to me, for I have no desire to live 
a long life, when life's storms are so many and so hard. 

I was however much pleased to hear of the health of the monk. Really my anxiety about him was quite 
distressing, and I wrongly blamed the doctors, for his complaint required the treatment they gave. I have 
sent you a little pot of honey which the Cilician bees make from storax flowers. 

XIV. To Alexandra. 

Had I only considered the character of the loss which you have sustained, I should have wanted 
consolation myself, not only because I count that what concerns you concerns me, be it agreeable or 
otherwise, but because I did so dearly love that admirable and truly excellent man. But the divine decree 
has removed him from us and translated him to the better life. I therefore scatter the cloud of sorrow from my 
soul, and urge you, my worthy friend, to vanquish the pain of your sorrow by the power of reason, and to 
bring your soul in this hour of need trader the spell of God's word. Why from our very cradles do we suck the 
instruction of the divine Scriptures, like milk from the breast, but that, when trouble falls upon us, we may be 
able to apply the teaching of the Spirit as a salve for our pain? I know how sad. how very grievous it is, when 
one has experienced the worth of some loved object, suddenly to be deprived of it, and to fall in a moment 
from happiness to misery. But to them that are gifted with good sense, and use their powers of right reason, 
no human contingency comes quite unforeseen; nothing human is stable; nothing lasting; nor beauty, nor 
wealth, nor health, nor dignity; nor any of all those things that most men rank so high. Some men fall from a 
summit of opulence to lowest poverty; some lose their health and struggle with various forms of disease; 
some who are proud of the splendour of their lineage drag the crushing yoke of slavery. Beauty is spoilt by 
sickness and marred by old age, and very wisely has the supreme Ruler suffered none of these things to 
continue nor abide, with the intent that their possessors, in fear of change, may lower their proud looks, and, 
knowing how all such possessions ebb and flow, may cease to put their confidence in what is short lived 
and fleeting, and may fix their hopes upon the Giver of all good. I am aware, my excellent friend, that you 

know all this, and I beg you to reflect on human nature; you will find that it is mortal, and received the doom of 
death from the beginning. It was to Adam that God said "Dust thou art and to dust thou shalt return. "(1) The 
giver of the law is He that never lies, and experience witnesses to His truth. Divine Scripture tells us "all men 
have one entrance into life and the like going out, "(2) and every one that is born awaits the grave. And all do 
not live a like length of time; some men come to an end fill too soon; some in the vigour of manhood, and 
some after they have experienced the trials of old age. Thus, too, they who have taken on them the 
marriage yoke are loosed from it, and it must needs be that either husband first depart or wife reach this 
life's end before him. Some have but just entered the bridal chamber when their lot is weeping and 
lamentation; some live together a little while. Enough to remember that the grief is common to give reason 
ground for overcoming grief. Besides all this, even they who are mastered by bitterest sorrow may be 
comforted by the thought that the departed was the father of sons; that he left them grown up; that he had 
attained a very high position, and in it, so far from giving any cause for envy, made men love him the more, 
and left behind him a reputation for liberality, for hatred of all that is bad, for gentleness and indeed for every 
kind of moral virtue. (1) 

But what excuse for despondency will be left us if we take to heart God's own promises and the hopes of 
Christians; the resurrection, I mean, eternal life, continuance in the kingdom, and all that "eye hath not seen, 
nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that 
love Him"?(2) Does not the Apostle say emphatically, "I would not have you to be ignorant brethren 
concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not even as others which have no hope"?(3) I have known 
many men who even without hope have got the better of their grief by the force of reason alone, and it would 
indeed be extraordinary if they who are supported by such a hope should prove weaker than they who have 
no hope at all. Let us then, I implore you, look at the end as a long journey. When he went on a Journey we 
used indeed to be sorry, but we waited his return. Now let the separation sadden us indeed in some 
degree, for I am not exhorting what is contrary to human nature, but do not let us wail as over a corpse; let us 
rather congratulate him on his setting forth and his departure hence, because he is now free from a world of 
uncertainties, and fears no further change of soul or booty or of corporeal conditions. The strife now ended, 
he waits for his reward. Grieve not overmuch for orphanhood and widowhood. We have a greater Guardian 
whose law it is that all should take good care of orphans and widows and about whom the divine David 
says "The Lord relieveth the fatherless and widow, but the way of the wicked He turneth upside down.(1) 
Only let us put the rudders of our lives in His hands, and we shall meet with an unfailing Providence. His 
guardianship will be surer than can be that of any man, for His are the words "Can a woman forget her 
sucking child that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? Yet will I not forget thee. "(2) He 
is nearer to us than father and mother for He is our Maker and Creator. It is not marriage that makes fathers, 
but fathers are made fathers at His will. 

I am now compelled thus to write because my bonds(3) do not suffer me to hasten to you, but your most 
God-loving and most holy bishop is able unaided to give all consolation to your very faithful soul by word 
and by deed, by sight and by communication of thought and by that spiritual and God-given wisdom of his 
whereby I trust the tempest of your grief will be lulled to sleep. 

XV. To Silvanusthe Primate. (4) 

I know that in my words of consolation I am somewhat late, but it is not without reason that I have delayed to 
send them, for I have thought it worth while to let the violence of your grief take its course. The cleverest 
physicians will never apply their remedies when a fever is at its height, but wait for a favourable opportunity 
for using the appliances of their skill. So after reckoning how sharp your anguish must be, I have let these 
few days go by, for if I myself was so distressed and filled with such sorrow by the news, what must not have 
been the sufferings of a husband and yoke-fellow, made, as the Scripture says, one flesh, (5) at the violent 
sundering of the union cemented both by time and love? Such pangs are only natural; but let reason devise 
consolation by reminding you that humanity is frail and sorrow universal, and also of the hope of the 
resurrection and the will of Him who orders our lives wisely. We must needs accept the decrees of 
inestimable wisdom, and own them to be for our good; for they who reflect thus piously shall reap piety's 
rewards, and so delivered froth immoderate lamentations shall pass their lives in peace. On the other hand 
they whom sorrow makes its slaves will gain nothing by their wailing, but will at once live weary lives and 
grieve the Guardian of us all. Receive then, my most honoured friend, a fatherly exhortation "The Lord gave 
and the Lord hath taken away. He hath done whatsoever pleased Him. Blessed be the name of the 
Lord."(1) 

XVI. To Bishop lrenaeus.(2) 

There is nothing good, it seems, in prospect for us, so, far from calming down, the tempest troubling the 

Church seems to rise higher every day. The conveners of the Council have arrived and delivered the letters 
of summons to several of the Metropolitans including our own, and I have sent a copy of the letter to your 
Holiness to acquaint you how, as the poet has it, "Woe has been welded by woe. "(3) And we need only the 
Lord's goodness to stay the storm. Easy it is for Him to stay it, but we are unworthy of the calm, yet the grace 
of His patience is enough for us, so that haply by it we may get the better of our foes. So the divine apostle 
has taught us to pray "for He will with the temptation also make a way to escape that ye may be able to bear 
it."(4) But I beseech your godliness to stop the mouths of the objectors and make them understand that it is 
not for them who stand, as the phrase goes, out of range, to scoff at men fighting in the ranks anti giving and 
receiving blows; for what matters it what weapon the soldier uses to strike down his antagonists? Even the 
great David did not use a panoply when he slew the aliens' champion, (5) and Samson slew thousands on 
one day with the jawbone of an ass. (6) Nobody grumbles at the victory, nor accuses the conqueror of 
cowardice, because he wins it without brandishing a spear or covering himself with his shield or throwing 
darts or shooting arrows. The defenders of true religion must be criticized in the same way, nor must we try 
to find language which will stir strife, but rather arguments which plainly proclaim the truth and make those 
who venture to oppose it ashamed of themselves. 

What does it matter whether we style the holy Virgin at the same time mother of Man and mother of God, or 
call her mother and servant of her offspring, with the addition that she is mother of our Lord Jesus Christ as 
man, but His servant as God, anti so at once avoid the term which is the pretext of calumny, and express the 
same opinion by another phrase? And besides this it must also be borne in mind that the former of these 
titles is of general use, and the latter peculiar to the Virgin; and that it is about this that all the controversy has 
arisen, which would God had never been. The majority of the old Fathers have applied the more 
honourable title to the Virgin, as your Holiness yourself has done in two or three discourses; several of 
these, which your godliness sent to me, I have in my own possession, and in these you have not coupled 
the title mother of Man with mother of God but have explained its meaning by the use of other words. But 
since you find fault with me for having left out the holy and blessed Fathers Diodorus and Theodorus in my 
list of authorities, I have thought it necessary to add a few words on this point. 

In the first place, my dear friend, I have omitted many others both famous and illustrious. Secondly this fact 
must be borne in mind, that the accused party is bound to produce unimpeachable witnesses, whose 
testimony even his accusers cannot impugn. But if the defendant were to call into court authorities accused 
by the prosecutors, even the judge himself would not consent to receive them. If I had omitted these holy 
men in compiling an eulogy of the Fathers, I should, I own, have been wrong, and should have proved 
myself ungrateful to my teachers. But if when under accusation I have brought forward a defence, and have 
produced unimpeachable witnesses, why do men who are unwilling to see any of these testimonies lay me 
under unreasonable blame? How I reverence these writers is sufficiently shewn by my own book in their 
behalf, in which I have refuted the indictment laid against them, without fear of the influence of their accusers 
or even of the secret attack made upon myself. These people who are so fond of foolish talk bad better get 
some other excuse for their sleight of words. My object is not to make my words and deeds fit the pleasure 
of this man or that man, but to edify the church of God, and please her bridegroom and Lord. I call my 
conscience to witness that I am not acting as I do through care of material things, nor because I cling to the 
honour with all its cares, which I shrink from calling an unhappy one. I would long ago have withdrawn of my 
own accord, did I not fear the judgment of God. And now know well that I await my fate. And I think that it is 
drawing near, for so the plots against me indicate. (1) 

XVII. To the Deaconess Casiana. 

Had I only considered the greatness of your sorrow, I should have put off writing a little while, that I might 
make time my ally in my attempt to cure it, but I know the good sense of your piety, and so I make bold to 
offer you some words of consolation suggested partly by human nature, and partly by divine Scripture. For 
our nature is frail, and all life is full of such calamities, and the universal Governor and Ruler of the 
World, -the Lord who wisely orders our concerns, -gives us by means of His divine oracles consolation of 
various kinds, of which the writings of the holy Evangelists and the divine utterances of the blessed prophets 
are full. But I am sure it is needless to cull these passages, and suggest them to your piety, nurtured as you 
have been from the beginning in the inspired word, ruling your life in accordance with them, and needing no 
other teaching. But I do implore you to remember those words that charge us to master our feelings, and 
promise us eternal life, proclaim the destruction of death, and announce the common resurrection of its all. 
Besides all this, nay, before all this, I ask you to reflect that He who has bidden these things so be is the 
Lord, that He, is a Lord all wise and all good, Who knows exactly what is best for us, and to this end guides 
all our life. Sometimes death is better than life, and what seems distressing is really pleasanterthan fancied 
joys. I beg your piety to accept the consolation offered by my humility, that you may serve the Lord of all by 
nobly bearing your pain, and affording to men as well as women an example of trite wisdom. For all will 

admire the strength of mind which has bravely borne the attack of grief and broken the force of its violent 

assault by the magnanimity of its resolution. And we are not without great comfort in the living likenesses of 

your departed son; for he has left behind him offspring worthy of deep affection, who may be able to stay the 

excess of our sorrow. 

Lastly I implore you to remember in your grief what your bodily infirmity can endure, and to avoid increasing 

your sufferings by mourning overmuch; and I implore our Lord of His infinite resources to give you ground of 

consolation. 

XVIII. To Neoptolemus. 

Whenever I cast my eyes on the divine law which calls those who are joined together in marriage "one 
flesh, "(1) I am at a loss how to comfort the limb that has been sundered, because I take account of the 
greatness of the pang. But when I consider the course of nature, and the law which the Creator has laid down 
in the words "Dust thou art and to dust thou shalt return, "(1) and all that goes on daily in all the world on land 
and sea-for either husbands first approach the end of life or this lot first befalls the wives-l find from these 
reflections many, grounds of consolation; and above all the hopes that have been given us by our Lord and 
Saviour. For the reason of the accomplishment of the mystery of the incarnation was that we, being taught 
the defeat of death, should no more grieve beyond measure at the loss by death of those we love, but await 
the longed-for fulfilment of the hope of the resurrection. I entreat your Excellency to reflect on these things, 
and to overcome the pain of your grief; and all the more because the children of your common love are with 
you, and give you every ground of comfort. Let us then praise Him who governs our lives wisely, nor rouse 
His anger by immoderate lamentation, for in His wisdom He knows what is good for us, and in His mercy He 
gives it. 

XIX. To the Presbyter Basilius. 

I have found the right eloquent orator Athanasius to be just what your letter described him. His tongue is 
adorned by his speech, and his speech by his character, and all about him is brightened by his abundant 
faith. Ever, most God-beloved friend, send us such gifts. You have given me, be assured, very great 
pleasure through my intercourse with him. 

XX. To the Presbyter Martyrius. 

Natural disposition appears in us before resolution of character, and, in this sense, takes the lead; but 
disposition is overcome by resolution, as is plainly proved by the right eloquent orator Athanasius. Though 
an Egyptian by birth, he has none of the Egyptian want of selfcontrol, but shews a character tempered by 
gentleness. (2) He is moreover a warm lover of divine things. On this account he has spent many days with 
me, expecting to reap some benefit from his stay. But I, as you know, most God-beloved friend, shrink from 
trying so to derive good from others, and am far from being able to impart it to those who seek it, and this not 
because I grudge, but because I have not the wherewithal, to give. Wherefore let your holiness pray that 
what is said of me may be confirmed by fact, and that not only may good things be reported of me by word, 
but proved in deed. 

XXI. To the learned Eusebius. 

The disseminators of this great news, with the idea that it would be very distasteful to me, fancied that they 

might in this way annoy me. But I by God's grace welcomed the news, and await the event with pleasure. 

Indeed very grateful to me is any kind of trouble which is brought on me for the sake of the divine doctrines. 

For, if we really trust in the Lord's promises, "The sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be 

compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us."(1) 

And why do I speak of the enjoyment of the good things which are hoped for? For even if no prize had been 

offered to them that struggle for the sake of true religion, Truth alone by her own unaided force would herself 

have been sufficient to persuade them that love her to welcome gladly all perils in her cause. And the divine 

Apostle is witness of what I say, exclaiming as he does, "Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? 

Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril or sword? As it is written, 'For 

thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter.'"(2) 

And then to teach us that he looks for no reward, but only loves his Saviour, he adds straightway "Nay in all 

these things we are more than conquerors through him that loved US. "(3) 

And he goes on further to exhibit his own love more clearly. "For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, 

nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor 

any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. "(4) 
Behold, my friend, the flame of apostolic affection; see the torch of love. (5) 

I covet not, he says, what is His. I only long for Him; and this love of mine is an unquenchable love and I 
would gladly forego all present and future felicity, aye, suffer and endure again all kinds of pain so as to 
keep with me this flame in all its force. This was exemplified by the divine writer in deed as well as in word 
and everywhere by land and sea he has left behind him memorials of his sufferings. So when I turn my eyes 
on him and on the rest of the patriarchs, prophets, apostles, martyrs, priests, what is commonly reckoned 
miserable I cannot but hold to be delightful. I confess to a feeling of shame when I remember how even they 
who never learnt the lessons we have learnt, but followed no other guide but human nature alone, have won 
conspicuous places in the race of virtue. The famous Socrates, son of Sophroniscus, when under the 
calumnious indictment, not only treated the lies of his accusers with contempt, but expressed his 
cheerfulness in the midst of his troubles in the words. "Anytus and Meletus(1) can kill me, but they cannot 
harm me." And the orator of Paeania,(2) who was as wise as he was eloquent, enriched both the men of his 
own day and them that should come after him with the saying: "to all the race of men the end of life is death, 
even though one shut himself up for safety in a cell; so good men are bound ever to put their hand to every 
honourable work, ever defending themselves with good hope as with a shield, and bravely to bear 
whatever lot may be given them by God. "(3) 

Moreover a writer of earlier date than Demosthenes, I mean the son of Olorus, wrote many noble 
sentiments, and among them this "We must bear what the gods send us of necessity and the fortune of war 
with courage. "(4) Why need I quote philosophers, historians, and orators? For even the men who gave 
higher honour to their mythology than to the truth have inserted many useful exhortations in their stories; as 
Homer in his poems introduces the wisest of the Hellenes preparing himself for deeds of valour, where he 
says 

"He chid his angry spirit and beat his breast, 
And said 'Forbear my mind, and think on this: 
There hath been time when bitterer agonies 
Have tried thy patience. '"(5) 

Similar passages might easily be collected from poets, orators, and philosophers, but for us the divine 
writings are sufficient. 

I have quoted what I have to prove how disgraceful it were for the mere disciples of nature to get the better of 
us who have had the teaching of the prophets and the apostles, trusting in the Saviour's sufferings and 
looking for the resurrection of the body, freedom from corruption, the gift of immortality and the kingdom of 
heaven. 

So, my dear friend, comfort those who are discouraged at the stories bruited abroad, and if anybody is 
pleased at them, tell them that we are happy too, that we are exulting and dancing with joy, and that what 
they call punishment we are looking for as the kingdom of heaven itself. 

To inform those who do not know in what mind we are, be assured, most excellent friend, that we believe, as 
we have been taught, in the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. There is no truth in the slander of some that 
we have been taught to believe, or have been baptized, or do believe, or teach others to believe, in two 
Sons. As we know one Father and one Holy Ghost so we know one Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, the only 
begotten Son of God, God the Word who was made man. We do not however deny the properties of the 
natures. We hold them to be in error who divide the one Lord Jesus Christ into two Sons, and we also call 
them enemies of the truth who endeavour to confound the natures. We believe an union to have been made 
without confusion, and we reckon some qualities to be proper to the manhood and others to the Godhead; 
for just as the man-l mean man in general-reasonable and mortal being, has a soul and has a body, and is 
reckoned to be one being, just so the distinction between the two natures does not divide the one man into 
two persons, but we recognise in the one man both the immortality of the soul and the mortality of the body, 
and acknowledge the invisible soul and the visible body, but, as I said, one being at once reasonable and 
mortal; so do we recognise our Lord and God, I mean the Son of God our Lord Christ, even after His 
incarnation, to be one Son; for the union is indivisible, as we know it is without confusion. We acknowledge 
too that the Godhead is without beginning, and that the manhood is of recent origin; for the one nature is of 
the seed of Abraham and David, from whom descended the holy Virgin, but the divine nature was begotten 
of the God and Father before the ages without time, without passions, without severance. But suppose the 
distinction between flesh and Godhead to be destroyed, what weapons shall we use in our war with Arius 
and Eunomius? How shall we undo their blasphemy against the only begotten? As it is, we apply the words 
of humiliation as to man, the words of exaltation and divinity as to God, and the setting forth of the truth is very 
easy to us. 

But this disquisition on the faith is exceeding the limits of a letter. Still even these few words are enough to 
show the character of the apostolic faith. (1) 

XXII. To Count Ulpianus. 

It is said that what is faulty in men's ways may be brought to order and improved by words. But I think that 
characters made beautiful by nature, themselves make words fair, though they stand in need of none, just 
as bodies naturally beautiful need no artificial colouring. These qualities are conspicuous in the right 
eloquent orator Athanasius, and I have been the more pleased with him because he is an ardent lover of 
your Excellency, and is constantly sounding your praises. Here, however, I have striven with him, and in 
enumerating your high qualities, have outdone him, for I know more about good deeds of yours than he. I 
am however vexed at not being able to praise them all, and to see that my summary of your virtues falls 
short of what might be said in your praise, but if God grant it even to approach the truth you will hold the 
pre-eminence in every kind of virtue among all your contemporaries. (2) 

XXIII. To the Patrician Areobindas.(3) 

In distributing wealth and poverty among men the Creator and Governor of all gives no unjust judgment, but 
gives the poverty of the poor to the rich as a means of usefulness. So He brings chastisement upon men not 
merely in the infliction of punishment for their faults, but to provide the wealthy with opportunities for shewing 
kindness to mankind. This year the Lord has sent us scourges, far less than our sins, but enough to distress 
the husbandmen, of whose sufferings I lately made your magnificence acquainted through your own hinds. 
Pity, I beseech you, the tillers of the ground, who have spent their toil with but very little result. Be this bad 
year a suggestion of spiritual abundance, and do ye through the exercise of compassion gather in the 
harvest of the compassion of God. On this account the excellent Dionysius has hurried to your greatness to 
tell you of the trouble, that he may receive the remedy. He carries this letter, like a suppliant's branch of 
olive, in the hope that by its means he may receive greater kindness. 

XXIV. To Andreas Bishop of Samosata. 

Your piety, nursling of God's love, longs, I am sure, for my society. But I am all the more eager for yours in 
proportion as I know that from it more advantage will accrue to me. Want somehow naturally makes our 
wishes the stronger, but the Lord of all is able to give us what we long for. He rules all things Himself; knows 
what is sure to do us good, and never ceases to give every man this boon. I really cannot tell you how much 
delighted I was with your letter, and the very honourable and devout deacon Thalassius increased my 
pleasure by telling me what I was very anxious to know, for what call be more welcome to me than news that 
all goes well with you ? And what is it that so increases your welfare as the moderation of the great men 
among us ? You have acted like a wise and active physician who does not wait to be sent for, but comes of 
his own accord to them that need his care. This has given me great pleasure, and I have learnt by my own 
experience what the poet means when he says "laughing through her tears. "(1) May the bountiful Giver of all 
good things grant your holiness to excel in them, and to make us emulous of what is praiseworthy in all good 
men. Help us then my dear friend, and persuade him who can to grant our petition." 

XXV. Festal. 

When the only begotten God had been made Man, and had wrought out our salvation, they who in those 
days saw Him from whom these bounties flowed kept no feast. But in our time, land and sea, town and 
hamlet, though they cannot see their benefactor with eyes of sense, keep a feast in memory of all He has 
done for them; and so great is the joy flowing from these celebrations that the streams of spiritual gladness 
run in all directions. Wherefore we now salute your piety, at once to signify the cheerfulness which the feast 
has caused in us, and to ask your prayers that we may keep it to the end. 

XXVI. Festal. 

The fountains of the Lord's kindness are ever gushing forth with good things for them that believe; but some 
further good is conveyed by the celebrations which preserve the memory of the greatest of benefits to them 
that keep the feasts with more good will. We have just now celebrated the rites and enjoyed their blessing, 
and thus salute your piety, for so the custom of the feast and law of love enjoins. 

XXVII. To Aquilinus, deacon and Archimandrite. 

No one who has won the divine adoption weeps for orphanhood, for what guardian care can be more 
powerful than that of our Father which is on high, because of Him fathers of earth are fathers. By His will 

some are made fathers by nature, some by grace. To Him then let us hold fast and keep alive the memory 
of them that are dead. For we shall be the better for the recollection of them that have lived well, rousing us 
to imitation of them. 

XXVIII. To Jacobus, presbyterand monk. 

They who have made the vigour of their manhood bright by virtuous industry hasten happily towards old 
age, gladdened by the recollection of their former victories, and for old age's sake rid of further struggle. 
This joy I think your own piety possesses, and that you bear your old age the more easily for the 
recollection of the labours of your youth. 

XXIX. To Apellion. 

The sufferings of the Carthaginians would demand, and, in their greatness, perhaps out-task, the power of 
the tragic language of an AEschylus or a Sophocles. Carthage of old was with difficulty taken by the 
Romans. Again and again she contended with Rome for the mastery of the world, and brought Rome within 
danger of destruction. Now the ruin has been the mere byplay of barbarians. Now dignified members of her 
far-famed senate wander all over the world, getting means of existence from the bounty of kindly strangers, 
moving the tears of beholders, and teaching the uncertainty and instability of the lot of man. 
I have seen many who have come thence and I have felt afraid, for I know not, as the Scripture says, "what 
the morrow will bring forth. "[1] Not least do I admire the admirable and most honourable Celestinianus, so 
bravely does he bear his misfortune, and makes the loss of his happiness an occasion for philosophy, 
praising the governor of all, and holding that to be good which God either ordains or suffers to be. For the 
wisdom of divine Providence is unspeakable. He is travelling with his wife and children, and I beg your 
excellency to treat him with an hospitality like that of Abraham. With perfect confidence in your benevolence 
I have undertaken to introduce him to you, anti I am telling him how generous is your right hand.[1] 

XXX. To Aerius the Sophist.[2] 

Now is the time for your Academy to prove the use of your discussions. I am told that a brilliant assemblage 
collects at your house, of which the members are both illustrious by birth and polished of speech, and that 
you debate about virtue and the immortality of the soul, anti other kindred subjects. Show now opportunely 
your nobility of soul and wealth of virtue, and receive the most admirable and honourable Celestinianus in 
the spirit of men who have learnt the rapid changes of human prosperity. He was formerly an ornament of 
the city of Carthage, where he flung open the doors of his house to many priests, and never thought to need 
a stranger's kindness. Be his spokesman, my friend, and aid him in his need of your voice, for he cannot 
suffer the advice of the poet which bids him that needeth speak though he be ashamed. [3] 
Persuade I beg you any of your society who are capable of so doing to emulate the hospitality of 
Alcinous,[4] to remove the poverty which has unexpectedly befallen him, and to change his evil fortune into 
good. Let them praise our kindly Lord for making us wise by other men's calamities, not having sent us to 
strangers' houses and having brought stranger's to our doors. To men that shew kindness He promises to 
give what words cannot express and no intelligence can understand. 

XXXI. To Domnus bishop of Antioch.[5] 

The most admirable and honourable Celestinianus is a native of the famous Carthage, and of an illustrious 
family in that city. Now he has been exiled from it. He is wandering in foreign parts, and has to look to the 
benevolence of them that love God. He carries with him a burden from which he cannot escape and which 
increases his care-l mean his wife, his children and his servants, for whom he is at great expense. I wonder 
at his spirit. For he praises the great Pilot as though he were being borne by favourable breezes, and cares 
nothing for the terrible storm. From his calamity he has reaped the fruit of piety, and this thrice blessed gain 
has been brought him by his misfortune; for while he was in prosperity he never accepted this teaching, but 
when the evil day left him bare, among the rest of his losses he lost his impiety too, and now possesses the 
wealth of the faith, and for its sake thinks little of his ruin. 

I therefore beseech your holiness to let him find a fatherland in these foreign parts, and to charge them that 
abound in riches to comfort one who once was endowed like themselves, and to scatter the dark cloud of 
his calamity. It is only right and proper that among men of like nature, where all have erred, they that have 
escaped chastisement should bring comfort to them that have fallen on evil days, and by their sympathy for 
these latter propitiate the mercy of God. 

XXXII. To the Bishop Theoctistus.[1] 

If the God of all hall forthwith inflicted punishment on all that err he would utterly have destroyed all men. But 
He spares; He is a merciful Judge; and therefore some He chastises, and to others He gives the lesson of 
the punishment of the chastised. An instance of this merciful dealing has been shewn in our times. Exiles 
from what was once known as Libya, but is now called Africa, have been brought by Him to our doors, and 
by shewing us their sufferings He moves us to fear, and by fear rouses us to sympathy; thus He 
accomplishes two ends at once, for He both benefits us by their chastisement, and to them by our means 
brings comfort. This comfort I now beg you to give to the very admirable and honourable Celestinianus, a 
man who once was an ornament of the Africans' chief city, but now has neither city nor home, nor any of the 
necessaries of life. Now it is proper that those who in the jurisdiction of your holiness have been entrusted 
with the pastoral care of souls should bring before their fellow citizens what is for their good, for indeed they 
need such teaching. For this reason, as we know, the divine Apostle in his Epistle to Titus writes "Let ours 
also learn to maintain good works for necessary uses,"[1] for if our city, solitary as it is, and with only a small 
population, and that a poor one, succours the strangers, much rather may Beroea,[2] which has been 
nurtured in true religion, be expected to do so, especially under the leadership of your holiness. 

XXXIII. To Stasimus, Count and Primate. [3] 

To narrate the sufferings of the most honourable and dignified Celestinianus would require tragic 
eloquence. Tragic writers set forth fully the ills of humanity, but I can only in a word inform your excellency 
that his country is Libya, so long on all men's tongues, his city the far famed Carthage, his hereditary rank a 
seat in her famous council, his circumstances affluent. But all this is now a tale, mere words stripped bare of 
realities. The barbarian war has deprived him of all this. But such is fortune; she refuses to remain always 
with the same men and hastens to change her abode to dwell with others. [4] I beg to introduce this guest to 
your excellency, and beseech you that be may enjoy your far famed beneficence. I beg also that through 
your excellency he may become known to all those who are in office and opulence, in order that you may 
both become a means of advantage to them and win the higher reward from our merciful God. 

XXXIV. To the Count Patricius. 

All kinds of goodness are praiseworthy, but all are made more beautiful by loving kindness. For it we 
earnestly pray the God of all; through it alone we obtain forgiveness when we err; it makes wealth stoop to 
the poor, and because I know that your Excellency is richly endowed with it I confidently commend to you the 
admirable and excellent Celestinianus, once lord of vast wealth and possessions and suddenly stripped of 
all, but bearing his poverty as easily as few men bear their riches. The subject of the tragedy involving the 
fall of his fortunes is the barbarian invasion of Libya and Carthage. I have introduced him to your greatness; 
pray suggest his case to others, and move them to pity. You will win greater gain by giving many a lesson in 
loving kindness: 

XXXV. To the Bishop lrenoeus.[1] 

You are conspicuous, my Lord, for many forms of goodness, and your holiness is beautified in an especial 
degree by loving-kindness, by contempt of riches, and by a generosity that gushes forth for the help of them 
that need. I know too that you deem worthy of more than ordinary attention those who have been brought up 
in prosperity and have fallen from it into trouble. Knowing this as well as I do I venture to make known to you 
the very admirable and excellent Celestinianus. He was once well known in Carthage for wealth and 
position, now stripped of these he is favourably known by his piety and philosophy, for he bears what men 
call misfortune with resignation because it has brought him to the salvation of his soul. He came to me with a 
letter which described his former prosperity, and after he had passed several days with me I proved the 
truth of what was said of him by experience. I have therefore no hesitation in commending him to your 
Holiness, and begging you to make him known to the well-to-do men of the city. It is probable that when they 
have learnt what has befallen him, in fear of a like fate befalling themselves, they will endeavour to escape 
judgment by shewing mercy. He has no resource but to go about begging, as he is put to the greater 
expense because he has with him his wife and children, and the domestics who with him escaped the 
violence of the barbarians. 

XXXVI. To Pompianus, Bishop of Emesa. 

I know very well that your means are small and your heart is great, and that in your case generosity is not 

prevented by limited resources. I therefore introduce to your holiness the admirable and excellent 
Celestinianus, once enjoying much wealth and prosperity, but now escaped from the hands of the 
barbarians with nothing but freedom, and having no means of livelihood except the mercy of men like your 
piety. And cares crowd round him, for travelling with him are his wife, children and servants, whom he has 
brought with him from no motives but those of humanity, for he cannot think it right to dismiss them when they 
refuse to abandon him. I beg you of your goodness to make him known to our wealthy citizens, for I think that, 
after being informed by your holiness and seeing how soon prosperity may fall away, they will bethink them 
of our common humanity, and, in imitation of your magnanimity, will give him such help as they can. 

XXXVII. To Salustiusthe Governor.[1] 

When rulers keep the scales of justice true, and let them hang in even balance, they confer all kinds of 
benefits upon their subjects; if they are also gifted with prudence and further show loving-kindness to him 
that needs it, manifold advantages accrue from their rule to them that live under it. Having enjoyed these 
good things through your excellency, and having experienced them in your refiner administration, they have 
now been moved with joy at the information that to your munificence the helm of government has been 
entrusted. I pray that they may gain yet greater good, that your excellency may win still higher praise, and 
that the encomiums of your eulogists may be vindicated by the addition to all your other honourable titles to 
fame of that colophon[2] of good things-true religion. As I was compelled to pass several days in 
Hierapolis I hoped to have the pleasure of meeting your excellency, and persistently enquired of new 
comers if the insignia of office had been conveyed to you. But I was compelled by the divine feast of 
salvation to return in haste to the city entrusted to me. Now however that I have received your excellency's 
letter, with very great pleasure I return your salutation, and without delay have sent, as you requested, the 
honourable and pious deacon who is by God's grace a water-finder. May the Lord in His loving kindness 
grant him both to do good service to the city and increase your excellency's glory. 

XXXVIII. Festal. 

The divine feast of salvation has brought us the founts of God's good gifts, the blessing of the Cross, and the 
immortality which sprang from our Lord's death, the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ which gives 
promise of the resurrection of us all. These being the gifts of the feast, such its exhibition of the bounty of 
divine grace, it has filled us with spiritual gladness. But encompassed as we are on every side by many 
and great calamities, the brightness of the feast is dimmed, and lamentation and wailing are mingled with 
our psalmody. Such sorrows does sin bring forth. It is sin which has filled our life with pangs; it is on account 
of sin that death is lovelier to us than life; it is on account of sin that when we think in imagination of that 
incorruptible tribunal we shudder even at the life to come. So may your piety pray that God's 
loving-kindness may light on us, and that this gloomy and terrible cloud may be dispersed and sunshine 
again quickly give us joy. 

XXXIX. Festal. 

My wish was to write in cheerful terms and sound the note of the spiritual joy of the feast, but I am prevented 
by the multitude of our sins, which are bringing on us the judgment of God. For who indeed can be so 
insensible as not to perceive the divine wrath? May your piety then pray that affairs may undergo a change 
for the better; that so we too may change the style of our letter, and write words of cheerfulness instead of 
those of wailing. 

XL. To Theodorus the Vicar.[1] 

The custom of the feast bids me write a festal letter, but the cloud of our calamities suffers me not to gather 
the usual happy fruit from it. Who is so stony-hearted as not to be shocked and affrighted at the anger and 
grief of the Lord? Who is not stirred to the memory of faults? Who does not look for the righteous sentence? 
All this dims the brightness of the feast, but the Lord is frill of loving-kindness, and we trust He will not actually 
fulfil His threats, but will look mercifully on us, scatter our sadness, open the springs of mercy, and shew His 
wonted long suffering. I salute your greatness, and beseech you to send me news of the health I sincerely 
trust you are enjoying. 

XLI. To Claudia nus.[2] 

The divine Celebration has as usual conferred on us its spiritual boons; but the sour fruits of sin have not 

suffered us to enjoy them with gladness. They have had their usual results; in the beginning they caused 
thorns, caltrops, sweats, toil and pain to sprout; at the present moment sin sets the earth quaking against us, 
and makes nations rise against us on every side. And we lament because we force the good Lord, who is 
wishful to do us good, to do us ill, and compel Him to inflict punishment. 

Yet when we be think us of the unfathomable depths of His pity we are comforted, and trust that the Lord will 
not cast off His people, neither will He forsake His inheritance. [1] While saluting your magnificence I 
beseech you to give me news of your much-wished for health. 

XLII. To Constantius the perfect. [2] 

Did no necessity compel me to address a letter to your greatness, I might haply be found guilty of 
presumption, for neither taking due measure of myself nor recognising the greatness of your power. But now 
that all that is left of the city and district which God has committed to my charge is in peril of utterly perishing, 
and certain men have dared to bring calumnious charges against the recent visitation, I am sure your 
magnificence will pardon the boldness of my letter when you enquire into the necessity of the case, my own 
object in writing. I groan and lament at being compelled to write against a man over whose errors one ought 
to throw a veil, because he is of the clerical order. Nevertheless I write to defend the cause of the poor 
whom he is wronging. After being charged with many crimes and excluded from the Communion, pending 
the assembly of the sacred Synod, in alarm at the decision of the episcopal council he has made his 
escape from this place, thereby trampling, as he supposed, on the laws of the Church, and, by his contempt 
of the sentence of excommunication has laid bare his motive. He has undertaken an accusation not even fit 
for men of mean crafts, and in consequence of his ill-feeling towards the illustrious Philip has proceeded 
against the wretched tax-payers. I feel that it is quite needless for me to mention his character, his course of 
life from the beginning and the greatness of his wrong-doings, but this one thing I do beseech your 
Excellency, not to believe his lies, but to ratify the visitation, and spare the wretched tax-payers. Aye, spare 
the thrice wretched decurions who cannot exact the moneys demanded of them. Who indeed is ignorant of 
the severity of the taxation of the acres among us? On this account most of our landowners have fled, our 
hinds have run away, and the greater part of our lands are deserted. In discussing the land there will be no 
impropriety in our using geometrical terms. Of our country the length is forty milestones, and the breadth the 
same. It includes many high mountains, some wholly bare, and some covered with unproductive vegetation. 
Within this district there are fifty thousand free jugers,[1] and besides that ten thousand which belong to the 
imperial treasury. Now only let your wisdom consider how great is the wrong. For if none of the country had 
been uncultivated, and it had all furnished easy husbandry for the hinds, they would nevertheless have sunk 
under the tribute unable to endure the severity of the taxation. And here is a proof of what I say. In the time of 
lsidorus[2] of glorious memory, fifteen thousand acres were taxed in gold, but the exactors of the Comitian 
assessment unable to bear the loss, frequently complained, and by offerings besought your high dignity to 
let them off two thousand five hundred for the unproductive acres, and your excellency's predecessors in 
this office ordered the unproductive acreage to be taken off the unfortunate decurions, and an equivalent 
number to be substituted for the Comitian; and not even thus are they able to complete the tale. 
So with many words I ask your favour, and beseech your magnificence to put aside the false accusations 
that are made against the wretched tax-payers, to stem the tide of distress in this unhappy district, and let it 
once more lift its head. Thus you will leave an imperishable memory of honour to future generations. I am 
joined in my supplication to you by all the saints of our district, and especially by that right holy and pious 
man of God, the Lord Jacobus. [3] who holds silence in such great esteem that he cannot be induced to 
write, but he prays that our city, which is made illustrious by having him as neighbour and is protected by his 
prayers, may receive the boon which I ask. 

XLIII. To the Augusta Pulcheria[4] 

Since you adorn the empire by your piety and render the purple brighter by your faith, we make bold to write 
to you, no longer conscious of our insignificance in that you always pay all due honour to the clergy. With 
these sentiments I beseech your majesty to deign to show clemency to our unhappy country, to order the 
ratification of the visitation which has been several times made, and not to accept the false accusations 
which some men have brought against it. I beseech you to give no credit to him who bears indeed the name 
of bishop, but whose mode of action is unworthy even of respectable slaves. [1] He has been himself under 
serious charges and subject to the bann of excommunication under the most holy and God-beloved 
archbishop of Antioch, the Lord Domnus, pending the summoning of the episcopal council for the 
investigation of the charges against him. He has now made his escape, and betaken himself to the imperial 
city, where he plies the trade of an informer, attacking the country which is his mother country with its 
thousands of poor, and, for the sake of his hatred to one, wags his tongue against all. Out of regard to what 

is becoming to me I will say nothing as to his character and education, and indeed he shows only too plainly 
what he has at present in hand. But of the district I will say this, that when the whole province had its burdens 
lightened, this portion, although it bore a very heavy share of the burden, never enjoyed the benefit of 
relaxation. The result is that many estates are deprived of husbandmen; nay, many are altogether 
abandoned by their owners, while the wretched decurions have demands made on them for these very 
properties, and, being quite unable to bear the exaction, betake themselves some to begging, and some to 
flight. The city seems to be reduced to one man, and he will not be able to hold out unless your piety 
supplies a remedy. But I am in hopes that your serenity will heal the wounds in the city and add yet this one 
more to your many good deeds. 

XLIV. To the patrician[2] Senator. 

Thanks be to the Saviour of the world because to your greatness He is ever adding dignity and honour. The 
reason of my not writing up to this time to exhibit the delight which I have felt at the colophon[2] of your 
honour, has been my wish not to trouble your magnificence. At the moment of my now thus writing, the district 
which Providence has committed to my care stands as the proverb has it on a razor's edge. [4] You will 
remember the visitation which was made at the time when we first were benefited by your presence among 
us; how it was with difficulty established in the time of the most excellent prefect the Lord Florentius;(1) and 
how it was confirmed by the present holder of the office. An individual who bears the name of bishop, but of 
ways unworthy even of stage players, has fled from the episcopal synod at a time when he was lying under 
sentence of excommunication and is endeavouring to calumniate and discredit the visitation, while through 
his hatred to the illustrious Philip be assails the truth. I therefore beseech your excellency to make his lies of 
none effect, and that the visitation lawfully confirmed may remain undisturbed. It is indeed becoming to your 
greatness to reap the fruit of this good deed among the rest, to receive the acclamations of those whom yon 
are benefiting, and so to do honour at once to the God of all and to his true servant the very man of God the 
Lord Jacob, (2) who joins with me in sending you this supplication. Had it been his wont to write he would 
have written himself. 

XLV. To the Patrician Anatolius. (3) 

Your greatness knows full well how all the inhabitants of the East feel towards your magnificence, as sons 
feel towards an affectionate father. Why then have you shewn hate to them that love you, deprived them of 
your kindly care, and driven them all to weeping and lamentation by putting your own advantage before the 
service of others? In truth I think there is not one of them that fear the Lord who is not much grieved at losing 
your official sway, and I think that even all the rest, although they have not right knowledge about divine 
things, when they reflect on the kindnesses you have conferred share in these sentiments of distress. I for 
my part am specially sorry when I bethink the of your dignity and your unaffected character, and I pray the 
God of all ever to bestow on you the bulwark of His invincible right hands and supply you with abundance of 
all kinds of blessings. We beseech your excellency no less when absent than when present to extend to us 
your accustomed protection, and to undo the rage of that unworthy bishop of ours whose purposes are 
perfectly well known to your greatness. He is endeavouring, as I am informed, to work the entire ruin of our 
district, and has accepted the part of an informer to culumniate the recent visitation, and this when all in a 
word know that the taxation of our district is very heavy, and that in consequence many estates have been 
abandoned by the husbandmen. But this man, in contempt of his excommunication, and in flight from the 
holy synod, has thrust out his tongue against the unhappy poor. May your magnificence then consent to look 
to it that the truth be not vanquished by a lie. And I bring the same supplication about the Cilicians. For we 
cease not to wail till the iniquity be undone. The Lord, who promises to reward even a drop of water, will 
requite you for this trouble. 

XLVI. To the learned Petrus. 

Nothing is able to stay the praiseworthy purpose of them that highly esteem what is right. That this is the 
case is confirmed by the grief shown by your magnificence at the news you have lately received, and your 
re-refusal to overlook the attack that right has suffered. You have opportunely put away your distress, and 
righteously stopped the mouth of the enemy of the truth. No sooner did we hear of this, and found true 
philosophy so coupled with rhetorical skill, than we felt the more warmly disposed towards your' excellence. 
Now we beseech you the more earnestly to counteract this fine fellow's lies and confirm the comfort given to 
the unhappy poor. 

XLVII. To Proclus,(1) Bishop of Constantinople. 

A year ago, thanks to your holiness, the illustrious Philip governor of our city was delivered from serious 
danger. After entering into the enjoyment of the security which he owed to your kindness, he filled our ears 
with your praises. But all your labour a certain most pious personage was endeavouring to make null and 
void. The visitation made several times twelve years ago he calumniates, and has adopted a style of 
slander which would be unbecoming even in a respectable slave. Now I beseech your sanctity to put a stop 
to his lies, and to induce the illustrious praefects to ratify the decision which they duly and mercifully gave. 
As a matter of fact our city was taxed more severely than all the cities of the provinces, and after every city 
had been relieved ours continued to this day assessed at over sixty-two thousand acres. At last the 
occupants of that seat of honour were with difficulty induced to send inspectors of the district; their report was 
first received by Isidorus of famous memory and confirmed by the glorious and Christ-loving lord Florentius, 
and tile whole matter was very carefully enquired into by our present ruler, whose equity adorns the throne, 
and he confirmed the assessment by an imperial decree. But this truth-loving person, all for his hatred of 
one single individual, the excellent Philip, has declared war against the poor. Under these circumstances I 
implore your holiness to array the forces of your righteous eloquence against his eloquence of wrong, to 
throw your shield over the truth which is attacked and at once prove her strength and the futility of lies. 

XLVIII. To Eustathius, bishop of Berytus.(1) 

I have gladly received the accusation, although I have no difficulty in disproving the indictment. I have written 
not three letters only but four; and I suspect one of two things; either those who promised to convey the 
letters did me wrong in the matter of their delivery, or else your piety, though in receipt of them, is yet anxious 
for more, and so gets up a charge of idleness against me. I, as I said before, am not distressed at the 
accusation, for it is plain proof to me of the warmth of your affection. Continue then to ply your craft, cease not 
to prefer your complaint and so to cause pleasure to myself. 

XLIX. To Damianus,(2) bishop of Sidon. 

It is the nature of mirrors to reflect the faces of them that gaze into them, and so whoever looks at them sees 
his own form. This is the same too with the pupils of the eyes, for they shew in them the likeness of other 
people's features. Of this your holiness furnishes an instance, for you have not seen my ugliness, but have 
beheld with admiration your own beauty. I really have none of the qualities which you have mentioned. It is 
nevertheless my prayer that your words may be vindicated by actual fact, and I beseech your piety by your 
prayers to cause it to come to pass that your praises may not fall to the ground through having no reality to 
correspond with them. 

L. To the Archimandrite Gerontius.(l) 

The characters of souls are often depicted in words and their unseen forms revealed; so now your 
reverence's letter exhibits the piety of your holy soul. Your waiting for that sentence, your anxiety, your 
search for advocates and preparation for a defence, clearly indicate your soul's zeal about divine things. 
We on the contrary are in a manner inactive and sleepy; we are nurtured in idleness, and stand in need of 
much assistance from prayers. Give them to us, O man beloved of God, that now at all events we may wake 
up and give some care to the soul. 

LI. To the presbyter Agapius. (2) 

The works of virtue are admirable in themselves, but yet more admirable do they appear if they find an 
eloquence able to report them well. Neither of these advantages has been lacking in the case of the bishop 
beloved of God, the lord Thomas, for he himself has contributed his own labours on behalf of piety, and has 
found in your holiness a tongue to bestow meet praise on those labours. Coming as he did with such 
testimony in his favour we have been all the more delighted to see him, and, after enjoying his society for a 
short space, have dismissed him to his charge. 

LI I. To Ibas, bishop of Edessa. (3) 

It is, I think, of His providential care for our common salvation that the God of all brings on some men certain 
calamities, that chastisement may prove to be to them that have erred a healing remedy; to virtue's athletes 
an encouragement to constancy; and to all who look on a beneficial exemplar. For it is natural that when we 
see others punished we should be filled with fear ourselves. In view of these considerations I look on the 

trouble of Africa as a general advantage. In the first place when I bear in mind their former prosperity and 
now took on their sudden overthrow, I see how variable are all human affairs, and learn a twofold 
lesson;-not to rejoice in felicity as though it would never come to an end, nor be distressed at calamities as 
hard to bear. Then I recall the memory of past errors, and tremble lest I fall into like sufferings. My main 
motive in now writing to you is to introduce to your holiness the very God-beloved bishop Cyprianus,(1) who 
starting from the famous Africa is now compelled, by the savagery of the barbarians, to travel in Foreign 
lands. 

He has brought a letter to us from the very holy bishop the lord Eusebius,(2) who wisely rules the Galatians. 
When your piety has received him with your wonted kindness I beg you to send him with a letter to whatever 
pious bishops you may think fit so that while he enjoys their kindly consolation he may be the means of their 
receiving heavenly and lasting benefits. 

LIN. To Sophronius, bishop of Constantina.(3) 

Since I know, O God-beloved, how generous and bountiful is your right hand, I put a coveted boon within 
your reach; for just as men hungry for this world's gain are annoyed at the sight of them that stand in need of 
pecuniary aid, so the liberal are delighted, because the riches they reach after are heavenly. A man who 
furnishes this excellent opportunity is the God-beloved bishop Cyprianus, formerly known among them that 
minister to others, but now, while he gives a deplorable account of the African calamities, he has to look to 
the benevolence of others, and depends on the bounty of pious souls. I hope that he too will enjoy your 
brotherly kindness, and will be forwarded with letters to other havens of refuge. 

LIV. Festal. 

By our divine and saving celebrations both the down-hearted are cheered, and the joyous made yet more 
joyful. This I have learnt by experience, for, when whelmed in the waves of despair, I have risen superior to 
the surge at sight of the haven of the feast. May your piety pray that I may be wholly rescued from this storm, 
and that our loving Lord may grant me forgetfulness of my sorrow. 

LV. Festal. 

We are much distressed, for we are gifted with the nature not of rocks but of men, but the recollection of the 
Lord's Epiphany has been to me a very potent medicine; so at once I write, according to the custom of the 
feast, and salute your magnificence with a prayer that you may live in prosperity and repute. 

LVI. Festal. 

My grief is now at its height and my mind is seriously affected by it, but I have thought it right to fulfil the 
custom of the feast, so now I take my pen to salute your reverence and pay the debt of affection. 

LVII. To the praefect Eutrechius.(l) 

Besides other boons the Ruler of the universe has granted to us that of hearing of your excellency's honour, 
and of congratulating at once yourself on your elevation and your subjects on so gentle a rule. I have 
thought it wrong to give no expression to my satisfaction and to refrain from manifesting it by letter. Your 
magnificence knows quite well how warm is our affection towards you-an affection most warmly 
reciprocated. And being so filled with love we beseech the Giver of all good things ever to pour on you His 
manifold gifts. 

LVIII. To the consul Nomus.(2) 

I am divided in mind at the idea of sending a letter to your greatness. On the one hand I know how 
everything depends on your judgment; I see you under the weight of public anxieties, and so think it better to 
be silent. On the other hand, being well aware of the breadth and capacity of your intelligence, I cannot bear 
to say nothing, and am afraid of being charged with negligence. I am moreover stimulated by the longing 
regret left with me by the short taste I had of your society. My full enjoyment of it was prevented by the 
disease and death of that most blessed man, so now I think writing will be a comfort. I pray the Master of all 
to guide your life that it be ever borne on favourable breezes and so we may reap the benefit of your kindly 
care. 

LIX. To Claudianus.(3) 

Sincere friendships are neither dissolved by distance of place nor weakened by time. Time indeed inflicts 
indignities on our bodies, spoils them of the bloom of their beauty, and brings on old age; but of friendship 
he makes the beauty yet more blooming, ever kindling its fire to greater warmth and brightness. So 
separated as I am from your magnificence by many a day's march, pricked by the goad of friendship I indite 
you this letter of salutation. It is conveyed by the standard-bearer Patroinus, a man who on account of his 
high character is worthy of all respects for he endeavours with much zeal to observe the laws of God. Deign, 
most excellent sir, to give us by him information of your excellency's precious health, and of the desired 
fulfilment of your promise. 

LX. To Dioscorus, bishop of Alexandria. (1) 

Among many forms of virtue by which, we hear that your holiness is adorned (for all men's ears are filled by 
the flying fame of your glory, which speeds in all directions) special praise is unanimously given to your 
modesty, a characteristic of which our Lord in His law has given Himself as an ensample, saying, "Learn of 
me; for I am meek and lowly in heart;"(2) for though God is high, or rather most high He honoured at His 
incarnation the meek and lowly spirit. Looking then to Him, sir, you do not behold the multitude of your 
subjects nor the exaltation of your throne, but you see rather human nature, and life's rapid changes, and 
follow the divine laws whose observance gives us the kingdom of heaven. Hearing of this modesty on the 
part of your holiness, I take courage in a letter to salute a person sacred anti dear to God, and I offer prayers 
whereof the fruit is salvation. Occasion is given me to write by the very pious presbyter Eusebius, for when I 
heard of his journey thither I immediately indited this letter to call upon your holiness to support us by your 
prayers, and by your reply to give us a spiritual feast, sending to us who are hungry the blessed banquet of 
your words. 

LXl.Tothe presbyter Archibius. 

I did not let the two letters which I had just received from you go unheeded, but wrote without delay, and 
gave my letter to the very devout presbyter Eusebius. (3) In consequence of some delay, it was for the time 
postponed, for the weather kept the vessels within the harbour, inasmuch as it indicated a coming storm at 
sea and bade sailors and pilots wait awhile. So I discharged this debt for the time, not that I may cease to 
be a debtor but that I may increase the debt. For this obligation becomes many times greater by being 
discharged, inasmuch as they who try to observe the laws of friendship increase the potency of its love, 
and, blowing sparks into a flame, kindle a greater warmth of affection, while all who are fired thereby strive to 
surpass one another in love. Receive then my defence, my venerable friend; forgive me; and send me a 
letter to tell me how you are. 

LXII. To the presbyter John. 

A saying of one of the men who used to be called wise was, "Live unseen." I applaud the sentiment, and 
have determined to confirm the word by deed, for I see no impropriety in gathering what is good from others, 
just as bees, it is said, gather their honey and draw forth the sweet dew from bitter herbs as well as from 
them that are good to eat, and I myself have seen them settling on a barren rock and sucking up its scanty 
moisture. Far more reasonable is it for them that are credited with reason to harvest what is good from every 
source; so, as I said, I try to live unseen, and above all men am I a lover of peace and quiet. On his recent 
return from your part of the world the very pious presbyter Eusebius announced that you had held a certain 
meeting, and that in the course of conversation mention had been made of me, and that your piety spoke 
with praise of my insignificant self. I have therefore deemed it ungrateful, and indeed unfair, that he who 
spoke thus well and kindly of me should fail to be paid in like coin; for although we bare done nothing worthy 
of praise still we admire the intention of them that thus praise us, for such praise is the off-spring of affection. 
Wherefore I salute your reverence, using as a means of conveyance of my letter him who has brought to me 
the unwritten words which you have spoken about me. When, most pious sir, you have received my letter, 
write in reply. You were first in speech; I in writing; and I answer speech by letter. It remains now to you to 
answer letter for letter. 

LXIII. Festal. (1) 

We have enjoyed the wonted blessings of the Feast. We have kept the memorial Feast of the Passion of 
Salvation; by means of the resurrection of the Lord we have received the glad tidings of the resurrection of 

all, and have hymned the ineffable loving kindness of our God and Savior. But the storm tossing the 
churches has not suffered us to take our share of unalloyed gladness. If, when one member is in pain the 
whole body is partaker of the pang, (2) how can we forbear from lamentation when all the body is 
distressed? And it intensifies our discouragement to think that these things are the prelude of the general 
apostasy. May your piety pray that since we are in this plight we may get the divine succour, that, as the 
divine Apostle phrases it, we may "be able to withstand the evil day."(1) But if any time remain for this life's 
business, pray that the tempest may pass away, and the churches recover their former calm, that the 
enemies of the truth may no more exult at our misfortunes. 

LXIV. Festal. 

When the Master underwent the Passion of salvation for the sake of mankind, the company of the sacred 
Apostles was much disheartened, for they know not clearly what was to be the Passion's fruit. But when they 
knew the salvation that grew therefrom, they called the proclamation of the Passion glad tidings, and 
eagerly offered it to all mankind. And they that believed, as being enlightened in mind, cheerfully received it, 
and keep the Feast in memory of the Passion, and make the moment of death an opportunity for 
entertainment and festivity. For the close connexion with it of the resurrection does away with the sadness of 
death, and becomes a pledge for the resurrection of all. After just now taking part in this celebration, we 
send you these tidings of the feast as though they were some fragrant perfume, and salute your piety. 

LXV. To the general Zeno.(2) 

To be smitten by human ills is the common lot of all men; to endure them bravely and rise superior to their 
attack is no longer common. The former is of human nature; the latter depends upon resolution. It is on this 
account that we wonder how the philosophers resolved on the noblest course of life and conquered their 
calamities by wisdom. And philosophy is produced by our reason's power, which rules our passions and is 
not led to and fro by them. Now one of human ills is grief, and it is this which we exhort your excellency to 
overcome, and it will not be difficult for you to rise victorious over this feeling, if you consider human nature, 
and take to heart the uselessness of sorrow. For what gain will it be to the departed that we should wail and 
lament? When, however, we reflect upon the common birth, the long years of intercourse, the splendid 
service in the field, and the far-famed achievements, let us reflect that he who was adorned by them was a 
man subject to the law of death; that moreover all things are ordained by God, who guides the affairs of men 
in accordance with His sacred knowledge of what will be for their good. Thus have I written so far as the 
limits of a letter would allow me, beseeching your eminence for all our sakes to preserve your health, which 
is wont to be maintained by cheerfulness and ruined by despondency. Wherefore in my care for the 
advantage of us all I have penned this letter. 

LXVI. To Aeriusthe Sophist.(1) 

She that gave you birth and nurtured you invites you to the longed-for feast. The holy shrine is crowned by a 
roof; it is fitly adorned; it is eager for the inhabitants for whom it was erected. These are Apostles and 
Prophets, loud-voiced heralds of the old and new covenant. Adorn, therefore, the feast with your presence; 
receive the blessing which swells forth from it, and make the feast more joyous to us. 

LXVM.To Maranas. 

It was thy work, my good Sir, to call the rest also to the feast of the dedication. Through thy zeal and energy 
the holy temple has been built, and the loud-voiced heralds of the truth have come to dwell therein, and 
guard them that approach thither in faith. Nevertheless I write and signify the season of the feast. 

LXVIII. To Epiphanius. 

It was my wish to summon you to the feast of holy Apostles and Prophets, not only as a citizen, but as one 
who shares both my faith and my home. But I am prevented by the state of your opinions. Therefore I put 
forward no other claims than those of our country, and I invite you to participate in the precious blessing of 
the holy Apostles and Prophets. This participation no difference of sentiment hinders. 

LXIX. To Eugraphia.(2) 

Had I not been unavoidably prevented, I should no sooner have heard that your great and glorious 

husband had fallen asleep than I should straightway have hurried to your side. I have enjoyed at your hands 
many and various kinds of honour, and I owe you full many thanks. When hindered, much against my will, 
from paying my debt, I deemed it ill-advised to send you a letter at the very moment, when your grief was at 
its height; when it was impossible for my messenger to approach your excellency, and when grief prevented 
you from reading what I wrote. But now that your reason has had time to wake from the intoxication of grief, to 
repress your emotion, and to discipline the license of sorrow, I have made bold to write and to beseech 
your excellency to bethink you of human nature, to reflect how common is the loss you deplore, and, above 
all, to accept the divine teaching, and not let your distress go beyond the bounds of your faith. For your most 
excellent husband, as the Lord Himself said, "is not dead but sleepeth"(1)-a sleep a little longer than he 
was wont. This hope has been given us by the Lord; this promise we have received from the divine oracles. 
I know indeed how distressing is the separation, how most distressing; and especially so when affection is 
made stronger by sympathy of character and length of time. But let your grief be for a journey into a far 
country, not for a life ended. This kind of philosophy is particularly becoming to them that be brought up in 
piety, and it is of this philosophy that I beseech you, my respected friend, to seek the adornment. And I do 
not offer you this advice as a man labouring himself under insensibility; in truth my heart was grieved when I 
learnt of the departure of one I loved so well. But I call to mind the Ruler of the world and His unspeakable 
wisdom, which ordains everything for our good. I implore your holiness to take these reflections to heart, to 
rise superior to your sorrow, and praise God who is the Master of us all. It is with ineffable providence that 
He guides the lives of men. 

LXX. To Eustathius, bishop of AEgoe.(2) 

The story of the noble Mary is one fit for a tragic play. As she says herself, and as is attested by several 
others, she is a daughter of the right honourable Eudaemon. In the catastrophe which has overtaken Libya 
she has fallen from her father's free estate, and has become a slave. Some merchants bought her from the 
barbarians, and have sold her to some of our countrymen. With her was sold a maiden who was once one 
of her own domestic servants; so at one and the same time the galling yoke of slavery fell on the servant 
and the mistress. But the servant refused to ignore the difference between them, nor could she forget the old 
superiority: in their calamity she preserved her kindly feeling, and, after waiting upon their common masters, 
waited upon her who was reckoned her fellow slave, washed her feet, made her bed, and was mindful of 
other like offices. This became known to the purchasers. Then through all the town was noised abroad the 
free estate of the mistress and the servant's goodness. On these circumstances becoming known to the 
faithful soldiers who are quartered in our city (I was absent at the time) they paid the purchasers their price, 
and rescued the woman from slavery. After my return, on being informed of the deplorable circumstances, 
and the admirable intention of the soldiers, I invoked blessings on their heads, committed the noble damsel 
to the care of one of the respectable deacons, and ordered a sufficient provision to be made for her. Ten 
months had gone by when she heard that her father was still alive, and holding high office in the West, and 
she very naturally expressed a desire to return to him. It was reported that many messengers from the West 
are on the way to the fair which is now being held in your parts. She requested to be allowed to set out with a 
letter from me. Under these circumstances I have written this letter, begging your piety to take care of a 
noble girl, and charge some respectable person to communicate with mariners, pilots, and merchants, and 
commit her to the care of trusty men who may be able to restore her to her father. There is no doubt that 
those who, when all hope of recovery has been lost, bring the daughter to the father, will be abundantly 
rewarded. 

LXXI. To Zeno,(1) General and Consul. 

Your fortitude rouses universal admiration, tempered as it is by gentleness and meekness, and exhibited to 
your household in kindliness, to your foes in boldness. These qualities indicate an admirable general. In a 
soldier's character the main ornament is bravery, but in a commander prudence takes precedence of 
bravery; after these come self-control and fairness, whereby a wealth of virtue is gathered. Such wealth is 
the reward of the soul which reaches after good, and with its eyes fixed on the sweetness of the fruit, deems 
the toil right pleasant. For to virtue's athletes the God of all, like some great giver of games, has offered 
prizes, some in this life, and some in that life beyond which has no end. Those in this present life your 
excellency has already enjoyed, and you have achieved the highest honour. Be it also the lot of your 
greatness to obtain too those abiding and perpetual blessings, and to receive not only the consul's robe, 
but also the garment that is indescribable and divine. Of all them that understand the greatness of that gift 
this is the common petition. 

LXXII. To Hermesigenes the Assessor. (1) 

At the time when men were whelmed in the darkness of ignorance, all did not keep the same feasts, but 
celebrated distinct ceremonies in different cities. In AElis were the Olympian games, at Delphi the Pythian, 
at Sparta the Hyacinthian, at Athens the Panathenaic, the Thesmophoria, and the Dionysian. These were 
the most remarkable, and further some men celebrated the revel feast of some daemons and some of 
others. But now that those mists have been scattered by intellectual light, in every land and sea mainlanders 
and islanders together keep the feast of our God and Saviour, and whithersoever any one may wish to 
travel abroad, journey he either towards rising or towards setting sun, everywhere he will find the same 
celebration observed at the same time. There is no longer necessity, in obedience to the law of Moses 
which was adapted to the infirmity of the Jews, to come together into one city and keep the feast in memory 
of our blessings, but every town, every village, the country and the farthest frontiers, are filled with the grace 
of God, and in every spot divine shrines and precincts are consecrated to the God of all. So through every 
town we observe our several festivals and communicate with one another in the feast. It is the same God 
and Lord who is honoured in our hymns and to whom our mystic sacrifices are offered. On this account, as is 
well known, we neighbours address one another by letter and signify the joy that comes to us in the feast. So 
now do I to you and offer the festal salutation to your excellency. You will without doubt reply and honour the 
custom of the feast. 

LXXIM.To Apollonius.(2) 

Themistocles the son of Neocles, the far-famed and admirable general, is described by the admiring 
historian as endowed with natural virtue alone. Of Pericles, however, the son of Xanthippus, it is said that he 
also derived ability from his education to charm his hearers by his persuasive eloquence, and was gifted 
with the power alike of knowing what measures should be taken and of enforcing them by word of mouth. In 
writing about him there is no impropriety in my using his own words. These things illustrate your 
magnificence, for God, our Creator, hath given you natural capacity, and your education makes its brilliance 
the more conspicuous. Nothing then is wanting to the full complement of your high qualities save only 
knowledge of their Author; be but this added, and the tale of virtues which we shall have will be complete. 
Thus I write to you on receiving news of your arrival, beseeching the Giver of all good to grant a beam of 
light to your soul's eye, to show you the greatness of His boon, to kindle your love of that possession, and to 
grant the longed for favour to him that longs for it.(1) 

LXXIV. To Urbanus. 

It has been granted to us by our generous Lord once again to enjoy the feast and to send to your excellency 
the festal salutation. We pray that you may be well and prosperous, and share the ineffable and divine boon 
which to them that approach supplies the seeds of the blessings hoped for, and gives the symbols of the life 
and kingdom that have no end. These things we beseech the loving Lord to impart to you, for it is natural for 
friends to ask that their friends may be blessed. 

LXXV. To the Clergy of Beraea. 

I perceive that it is with reason that I am well disposed to your reverences, for I have been assured by your 
kindly letter that my affection was returned. For this affection of mine towards you I have many reasons. First 
of all there is the fact that your father, that great and apostolic man, was my father too. Secondly I look upon 
that truly religious bishop,(2) who now rules your church, as I might on a brother both in blood and in 
sympathy. Thirdly there is the near neighbourhood of our cities, and fourthly our frequent intercourse with 
one another, which naturally begets friendship and increases it when it is begotten. If you like, I will name yet 
a fifth, and that is that we have the same close connexion with you as the tongue has with the ears, the former 
uttering speech, and the latter receiving it; for you most gladly listen to my words, and I am delighted to let 
fall my little drop upon you. But the colophon(1) of our union is our harmony in faith; our refusal to accept any 
spurious doctrines; our preservation of the ancient and apostolic teaching, which has been brought to you 
by hoary wisdom and nurtured by virtue's hardy toil. I beseech yon therefore to take greater care of the 
flock, to preserve it unharmed for the Shepherd, and boldly to utter the famous words of the patriarch "that 
which was born of beasts I offered not unto Thee. "(2) 

LETTERS OF THE BLESSED THEODORET, BISHOP OF 
CYRUS, LETTERS LXXVI TO CXX 

LXXVI. To Uranius, Governor of Cyprus. 

True friendship is strengthened by intercourse, but separation cannot sunder it, for its bonds are strong. This 
truth might easily be shewn by many other examples, but it is enough for us to verify what I say by our own 
case. Between me and you are indeed many things, mountains, cities, and the sea yet nothing has 
destroyed my recollection of your excellency. No sooner do we behold any one arriving from those towns 
which lie on the coast, than the conversation is turned on Cyprus and on its right worthy governor, and we are 
delighted to have tidings of your high repute. And lately we have been gratified to an unusual degree at 
learning the most delightful news of all: for what, most excellent sir, can be more pleasing to us than to see 
your noble soul illuminated by the light of knowledge? For we think it right that he who is adorned with many 
kinds of virtue should add to them also its colophon, and we believe that we shall behold what we desire. 
For your nobility will doubtless eagerly seize the God-given boon, moved thereto by true friends who clearly 
understand its value, and guided to the bountiful God "Who wills all men to be saved and to come to the 
knowledge of the truths"(3) netting men by men's means to salvation, and bringing them that He captures to 
the ageless life. The fisherman indeed deprives his prey of life, but oar Fisher frees all that He takes alive 
from death's painful bonds, and therefore "did he shew himself upon earth, and conversed with men, "(4) 
bringing men His life, conveying teaching by means of the visible manhood, and giving to reasonable 
beings the law of a suitable life and conversation. This law He has confirmed by miracles, and by the death 
of the flesh has destroyed death. By raising the flesh He has given the promise of resurrection to us all, after 
giving the resurrection of His own precious body as a worthy pledge of ours. So loved He men even when 
they hated Him that the mystery of the oeconomy fails to obtain credence with some on account of the very 
bitterness of His sufferings, and it is enough to show the depths of His loving kindness that He is even yet 
day by day calling to men who do not believe. And He does so not as though He were in need of the 
service of men,-for of what is the Creator of the universe in want?-but because He thirsts for the salvation of 
every man. Grasp then, my excellent friend, His gift; sing praises to the Giver, and procure for us a very 
great and right goodly feast. 

LXXVII. To Eulalius, bishop of Persian Armenia. (1) 

I know that Satan has sought to sift you as wheat,(2) and that the Lord has allowed him so to do that He may 
shew the wheat, and prove the gold, crown the athletes, and proclaim the victors' names. Nevertheless I 
fear and tremble, not indeed distressed for the sake of you who are noble champions of the truth, but 
because I know that it comes to pass that some men are of feebler heart. If among twelve apostles one was 
found a traitor, there is no doubt that among a number many times as great any one might easily discover 
many falling short of perfection. Thus reflecting I have been confounded and filled with much 
discouragement, for, as says the divine Apostle, "whether one member suffer all the members suffer with 
it."(3) "We are members one of another,"(4) and form one body, having the Lord Christ for head. (5) Yet one 
consolation I have in my anxiety, when I bethink me of your holiness. For brought up as you have been in the 
divine oracles, and taught by the arch-shepherd what are the good shepherd's marks, there is no doubt that 
you will lay down your life for the sheep. For, as the Lord says, "he that is an hireling" when he sees "the wolf 
coming," "fleeth because he is an hireling, and careth not for the sheep," but "the good shepherd giveth his 
life for the sheep. "(6) Just so it is not in peace that the best general shews his inborn valour, but in time of 
war, by at once stimulating others and himself exposing himself to peril for his men. For it would be 
preposterous that he should enjoy the dignity of his command, and, in the hour of need, run out of danger's 
way. Thus the thrice blessed prophets ever acted, making light of the safety of their bodies, and, for the 
sake of the Jews who hated and rejected them, underwent all kinds of peril and toil. Of them the divine 
apostle says "they were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain by the sword; they 
wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, of whom the world was 
not worthy; they wandered in deserts and mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth. "(1) Thus the divine 
apostles travelled preaching over all the world, without home, bed, bedding, board, or any of the 
necessaries of life, but scourged, racked, imprisoned, and undergoing countless kinds of death. And all this 
they underwent, not for the sake of their friends, but voluntarily facing these perils for the sake of the men who 

were persecuting them. A far stronger claim is made on you now to accept the peril at present assailing you, 
for the sake of fellow-believers and brothers and children. This affection is shown even by unreasoning 
animals, for sparrows may be seen fighting with all their force in behalf of their brood, and putting out in their 
defence all the strength they have; other kinds of birds moreover undergo danger for their young. But why 
do I speak of birds? Bears too, and leopards, wolves, and lions, voluntarily suffer any pain for the safety of 
their offspring, for instead of fleeing from the hunter they will await his attack and do battle for their young. 
I have adduced these instances not as though anointing your piety for endurance and courage by the 
example of brute beasts, but to console myself in my despondency, and to be assured that you will not 
leave Christ's flock without a shepherd when wolves make their attack, but will invoke the Lord of the flock to 
help you and will heartily do battle in its behalf. A crisis like this proves who is a shepherd and who a 
hire-ling; who diligently feeds the flock and who on the other hand feeds on the milk and thinks little of the 
safety of the sheep. "But God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will 
with the temptation also make a way to escape that ye may be able to bear it."(2) But one thing I do 
beseech your reverence, and that is to have greater heed of the unsound; and not only to strengthen the 
unstable but also to raise the fallen, for shepherds by no means neglect those of their flock who have fallen 
sick, but keep them apart from the rest, and try in every possible way to restore them, and so must we do. 
We must make them that are slipping stand up, and give them a helping hand and a word of 
encouragement. When they are bitten we must heal them; we must not give up the attempt to save them nor 
leave them in the devil's maw. Thus ever acted the divine Apostle Paul; and when the Galatians, after 
receiving the baptism of salvation, and the gift of the divine Spirit, fell away into the sickness of Judaism, and 
received circumcision, he wailed and lamented more exceedingly than the most affectionate mother, and 
tended them and freed them from that infirmity. We can hear him exclaiming, "My little children, of whom I 
travail in birth again until Christ be formed in you."(1) So too the teacher of the Corinthians, who had 
committed that abominable fornication, he both chastised as might a father, and very skilfully treated, and 
after cutting him off in the first Epistle, readmitted him in the second and says, "So that contrariwise ye ought 
rather to forgive him and comfort him lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with overmuch 
sorrow. "(2) And again, "Lest Satan should get an advantage of us for we are not ignorant of his devices. "(3) 
In the same manner too those who partook of things offered to idols he properly rebuked, suitably exhorted, 
and freed from their grievous error. 

Wherefore our Lord Jesus Christ permitted the first of the apostles, whose confession tie had fixed as a kind 
of groundwork and foundation of the Church, to waver to and fro, and to deny Him, and then raised Him up 
again. And thus He gave us two lessons: not to be confident in our own strength, and to strengthen the 
unstable. Reach out, therefore, I beseech you, a hand to them that are fallen, "draw them out of the horrible 
pit, out of the miry clay, and set their feet upon a rock," and "put a new song into their mouth, even praise 
unto our God, "(4) that their example of life may become an example of salvation, that "many shall see it and 
fear and shall trust in the Lord. "(5) Let them be prevented from participating in the holy mysteries, but let them 
not be kept from the prayer of the catechumens, nor from hearing the divine Scriptures and the exhortation of 
teachers, (6) and let them be prohibited from partaking of the sacred mysteries, not till death, but during a 
given time, till they recognise their ailment, covet health, and are properly contrite for having abandoned 
their true Prince and deserted to a tyrant, and for having left their benefactor and gone over to their foe. 
The same lessons are given us by the precepts of the holy and blessed Fathers. I write as I do, not to teach 
you piety, but to remind you as a brother might, knowing well that even the best of pilots in the moment of the 
storm needs monition even from his men. So the great and famous Moses, renowned throughout the world, 
who did those mighty works of wonder, did not refuse the counsel of Jethro, a man still sunk in idolatrous 
error; for he did not regard his impiety, but acknowledged the soundness of his advice. Moreover I implore 
your piety to offer earnest prayer to God in my behalf that for the remaining days of my life I may live in 
accordance with His laws. 

Thus have I written by the most honourable and religious presbyter Stephanus, whom on account of the 
goodness of his character I have seen with great pleasure. 

LXXVIII. To Eusebius, bishop of Persian Armenia. 

Whenever anything happens to the helmsman, either the officer in command at the bows, or the seaman of 
highest rank, takes his place, not because he becomes a self-appointed helmsman, but because he looks 
out for the safety of the ship. So again in war, when the commander falls, the chief tribune assumes the 
command, not in the attempt to lay violent hands on the place of power, but because he cares for his men. 
So too the thrice blessed Timothy when sent by the divine Paul took his place. (1) It is therefore becoming to 
your piety to accept the responsibilities of helmsman, of captain, of shepherd, gladly to run all risk for the 
sake of the sheep of Christ, and not to leave His creatures abandoned and alone. It is rather yours to bind 
up the broken, to raise up the fallen, to turn the wanderer from his error, and keep the whole in health, and to 

follow the good shepherds who stand before the folds and wage war against the wolves. Let us remember 
too the words of the patriarch Jacob; "In the day the drought consumed me and the frost by night and my 
sleep departed from my eyes. The rams of thy flock I have not eaten. That which was born of beasts I 
brought not unto thee. I bare the loss of it. Of my hand didst thou require it, whether stolen by day or stolen by 
night."(1) These are the marks of the shepherd; these are the laws of the tending of the sheep. And if of brute 
cattle the illustrious patriarch had such care, and offered this defence to him who trusted them to his charge, 
what ought not we to do who are entrusted with the charge of reasonable sheep, and who have received this 
trust from the God of all, when we remember that the Lord for them gave up His life? Who does not fear and 
tremble when he hears the word of God spoken through Ezekiel? "I judge between shepherd and sheep 
because ye eat the fat and clothe yourselves with the wool and ye feed not the flocks. "(2) And again, "I have 
made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel; when thou speakest not to warn the wicked from his wicked 
way, the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity but his blood shall I require at thine hand. "(3) With this 
agree the words spoken in parables by the Lord. "Thou wicked and slothful servant ... Thou oughtest to 
have put my money to the exchangers, and then at my coming I should have received the same with 
usury. "(4) Up then, I beseech you, let us fight for the Lord's sheep. Their Lord is near. He will certainly 
appear and scatter the wolves and glorify the shepherds. "The Lord is good unto them that wait for Him, to 
the soul that seeketh Him. "(5) Let us not murmur at the storm that has arisen for the Lord of all knoweth what 
is good for us. Wherefore also when the Apostle asked for release from his trials He would not grant his 
supplication but said, "My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in weakness. "(6) Let us 
then bravely bear the evils that befall us; it is in war that heroes are discerned; in conflicts that athletes are 
crowned; in the surge of the sea that the art of the helmsman is shewn; in the fire that the gold is tried. And let 
us not, I beseech you, heed only ourselves, let us rather have forethought for the rest, and that much more 
for the sick than for the whole, for it is an apostolic precept which exclaims "Comfort the feeble minded, 
support the weak."(7) Let us then stretch out our hands to them that lie low, let us tend their wounds and set 
them at their post to fight the devil. Nothing will so vex him as to see them fighting and smiting again. Our 
Lord is full of loving-kindness. He receives the repentance of sinners. Let us hear His own words: "As I live 
saith the Lord I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live."(1) 
So He prefaced His words with an oath, and He who forbids oaths to others swore Himself to convince us 
how He desires our repentance and salvation. Of this teaching the divine books, both the old and the new, 
are full, and the precepts of the holy Fathers teach the same. 

But not as though you were ignorant have I written to you; rather have I reminded you of what you know, like 
those who standing safe upon the shore succour them that are tossed by the storm, and shew them a rock, 
or give warning of a hidden shallow, or catch and haul in a rope that has been thrown. "And the God of 
peace shall bring Satan under your feet shortly"(2) and shall gladden our ears with news that you have 
passed from storm to calm, at His word to the waves "Peace be still. "(3) 

And do you too offer prayers for us, for you who have undergone peril for His sake can speak with greater 
boldness. (4) 

LXXIX. To Anatolius the Patrician. (5) 

The Lord God has given your excellency to us to be at the present time a source of very great comfort, and 
has afforded us a meet haven for the storm. We have therefore confidence in informing your lordship of our 
distress. Not long ago we acquainted your excellency that the right honourable Count Rufus had shewn us 
an order written in the imperial handwriting commanding the gallant general to provide with prudence and 
diligence for our residence at Cyrus, and not to suffer us to depart to another city, on the ground that we are 
endeavouring to summon synods to Antioch, and are disturbing the orthodox. (6) Now I make known to you 
that in obedience to the imperial letter I have come to Cyrus. After an interval of six or seven days they sent 
the devoted Euphronius, the commander, with a letter begging me to acknowledge in writing that the 
imperial order had been shown me. I therefore promised to remain in Cyrus and its adjacent district, and to 
tend the sheep entrusted to my care. I therefore beseech your excellency to make exact enquiry, both 
whether these orders had really been issued, and for what reason. I am indeed conscious of many other 
sins, but I do not know that I have erred either against the Church of God, or against public order. And I write 
as I do, not because I take it ill to have to live at Cyrus, for in truth she is dearer to me than any of the most 
famous cities, because my office in her has been given me by God. But the fact of my being bound to her 
not by preference but by compulsion does seem somewhat grievous, and besides it does give a handle to 
the wicked to grow bold and to refuse to obey our exhortations. 

Under these circumstances I beseech your lordship, if no order of the kind has really been issued, to let me 
know; but if the letter really comes from the victorious emperor, tell his pious majesty not readily to believe 
calumnies, nor give ear to accusers alone, but to demand an account from the accused. Though really the 
evidence of the facts alone was quite enough to persuade his piety that the charges against me were false. 

For when did I ever make myself offensive about anything to his serene majesty or his chief officers? Or 
when was I ever obnoxious to the many and illustrious owners here? It is on the contrary well known to your 
excellency that I have spent a considerable portion of my ecclesiastical revenues in erecting porticoes and 
baths, building bridges, and making further provision for public objects. But if any persons take it ill that I 
mourn over the ruin of the churches of Phoenicia, be it known to your lordship that it is impossible forme not 
to grieve when I see the horn of the Jews exalted on high and the Christians in tears and sorrow, though they 
send them to the very ends of the earth. (1) We cannot fight against the apostolic decrees, for we remember 
the word of the Apostle which says, "We ought to obey God rather than men, "(2) and more terrible to us than 
any of the pains of this life is the "judgment seat of Christ"(3) the Lord, before whom we shall all stand to 
render an account of our words and of our deeds. On account of that judgment seat the hardships of this 
present life must be endured. For them that suffer wrong the hope of what is to come is consolation enough, 
but to us the loving Lord has given further comfort in you, most excellent sir, whose life is bright with piety and 
faith. 

LXXX. To the prefect Eutrechius.(l) 

I have been much astonished that no information has been sent me by your lordship of the plots against me. 
To counteract them would very likely have been a difficult matter to any one not having the means of 
convicting their promoters of lies; but to give information of what was going on needed not so much power 
as friendliness, and we had hoped that when your excellency had been summoned to the imperial city, and 
had been chosen to adorn the prefect's exalted seat, every tempest of the Church would be calmed down. 
But we suffer from such disturbances as we did not see even in the beginning of the dispute. The churches 
of Phoenicia are in trouble; in trouble are those of Palestine, as all unanimously report; and the distress is 
proved by the letters of the most pious bishops. All the saints among us groan and every pious 
congregation is lamenting. While looking for a cessation of our former troubles we have been afflicted with 
new ones. I myself have been forbidden to quit the coasts of Cyrus, if the dispatch is true which has been 
shewn me, and which is said to be an autograph of our victorious emperor. It runs as follows "Since so and 
so the bishop of this city is continually assembling synods and this is a cause of trouble to the orthodox, 
take heed with proper diligence and wisdom that he resides at Cyrus, and does not depart from it to another 
city." I have accepted the sentence, and remain still. Your lordship can bear witness to my sentiments, for 
you know how on my arrival at Antioch I departed in a hurry, on account of those who wished to detain me 
there. And those were unquestionably wrong who gave both their ears to my calumniators and would not 
keep one for me. Even to murderers, and to them that despoil other men's beds, an opportunity is given of 
defending themselves, and they do not receive sentence till they have been convicted in their own 
presence, or have made confession of the truth of the charges on which they are indicted. But a high priest 
who has held the office of bishop for five and twenty years(2) after passing his previous life in a monastery, 
who has never troubled a tribunal, nor yet on any single occasion been prosecuted by any man, is treated 
as a mere plaything of calumny, without being allowed even the common privilege of grave-robbers of 
being questioned as to the truth of the accusations brought against them. Yet they have done wrong; I have 
done no wrong. But I am ready for even more serious troubles. Though they be ever so much annoyed at 
my bewailing the calamities of Phoenicia I shall not cease so to do so long as I behold them. The only 
judgment that is awful to me is the judgment of God. For them, nevertheless, I pray that from the God of all 
they may obtain forgiveness; for your excellency, that you may ever live in honour, excel in all good things, 
speak boldly against lies, and fight on the side of the truth. And let the contrivers of this plot know that, though 
I depart to the uttermost ends of the earth, God will not suffer the confirmation of impious doctrines, but will 
nod His head and destroy them that bow down to doctrines of abomination. 

LXXXI. To the Consul Nomus.(1) 

For but a brief portion of a day I enjoyed the society of your lordship, for I was deprived by unavoidable 
circumstances of what I so earnestly desired. I had hoped that our short interview would have kindled good 
will and friendly intercourse, but I was disappointed. I have now written you two letters, without receiving any 
reply; and by the imperial decree I am forbidden to travel beyond the boundaries of Cyrus. For this apparent 
punishment cause there is none, except the fact of my convening an episcopal synod. No indictment was 
published; no prosecutor appeared; the defendant was not convicted; but the sentence was given. We 
submit, for we know the reward of the wronged. I am aware however that Festusthe Procurator who was 
entrusted with the government of the Jews when they demanded the death of the divine Paul, publicly 
replied, "It is not lawful to us Romans to deliver any man before that he which is accused have the accusers 
face to face, and have license to answer for himself concerning the crime laid against him. "(2) Now these 
words were spoken by one who was no believer in our Master, Christ, but was a slave to the errors of 

polytheism. I was never asked whether I was assembling synods or not, or for what reason I was 
assembling them, or what umbrage this could give, either to the Church or to the government; yet just as 
though I had been a very guilty criminal I am prohibited from visiting other cities; while to every one else 
every city lies open, and that not only to Arians and Eunomians, but to Manichees and Marcionists, to them 
that are sick with the unsoundness of Valentinus and Montanus, aye to pagans and Jews, while I, a foremost 
champion of the teaching of the Gospels, am from every city excluded. Some however maintain that I do not 
adhere to it. Then let there be a council: let there be assembled there the godly bishops who are capable of 
judging: then let there be assembled those in office and in rank who have been instructed in divine lore. Let 
me state what I hold, and let the judges declare what opinion is agreeable to the teaching of the Apostles. I 
have not thus written from any desire to see the great city, nor from trying to travel to any other. In fact I rather 
love the quiet of them whose wish is to administer the churches in a monastic state. I should like your 
excellency to know that neither in the time of the blessed and sainted Theodotus, nor in that of John of 
blessed memory, nor in that of the very holy lord bishop Domnus, did I of my own accord enter Antioch; five 
or six times I was invited but I with difficulty assented, and when I did assent it was in obedience to the canon 
of the Church which orders him who is summoned to a synod and refuses to be present to be held guilty. 
And when I appeared, what thing unpleasing to God did I do? Was it that I removed from the sacred lists the 
names of such and such a man guilty of unspeakable wickedness? Was it that I ordained to the priesthood 
men of character and of honourable life? Was it that I preached the gospel to the people? If these things are 
worthy of indictment and punishment, I gladly welcome yet severer punishments for their sake. My accusers 
compel me to speak. Even before my conception my parents promised to devote me to God; from my 
swaddling-band, they devoted the according to their promise and educated me accordingly; the time 
before my episcopate I spent in a monastery and then was unwillingly consecrated(l) bishop. Five and 
twenty years I so lived that I was never summoned to trial by any one nor ever brought accusation against 
any. Not one of the pious clergy who were under me ever frequented a court. In so many years I never took 
an obol nor a garment from any one. Not one of my domestics ever received a loaf or an egg. I could not 
endure the thought of possessing anything save the rags I wore. From the revenues of my see I erected 
public porticoes; I built two large bridges; I looked after the public baths. On finding that the city was not 
watered by the river running by it, I built the conduit, and supplied the dry town with water. But not to mention 
these matters I led eight villages of Marcionists with their neighbourhood into the way of truth; another full of 
Eunomians and another of Arians I brought to the light of divine knowledge, and, by God's grace, not a tare 
of heresy was left among us. All this I did not effect with impunity; many a time I shed my blood; many a time 
was I stoned by them and brought to the very gates of death. But I am a fool in my boasting, yet my words 
are spoken of necessity, not of consent. Once the thrice blessed Paul was compelled to act in the same 
way to stop the mouths of his accusers. Yet I put up with seeming ignominy and count it high honour, for I 
hear the voice of the Apostle crying, "All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. "(1) But I 
beseech your excellency to give heed to the affairs of the Church, and calm the storm that has arisen, for in 
fact not even at the beginning of the dispute was the Church beset by such confusion. No one informs you of 
the greatness of the peril, of the lamentations of the Christians in Phoenicia and of the wails of our holiest 
monks. Wherefore I have written to you at some length, that on learning the agitation of the Church your 
excellency might stay it, and reap, the fruits of the benefit which such action will produce. 

LXXXII. To Eusebius, bishop of Ancyra.(2) 

I had hoped at this time to hear frequently from your holiness. Suffering as I do under charges which are 
plain calumny I stand in need of brotherly consolation. For they who are now renewing the heresy of 
Marcion, Valentinus, Manes, and of the other Docetae, annoyed at my publicly pillorying their heresy, have 
endeavoured to deceive the imperial ears, by calling me a heretic and falsely accusing me of dividing into 
two sons our one Lord Jesus Christ, the divine Word made man. Their utterances did not meet with the 
success that they expected. A despatch was therefore written to the right honourable and glorious 
commander and consul, containing indeed no accusation of heresy, but certain other charges no less 
unfounded. They alleged that I was endeavouring to assemble frequent synods at Antioch; that certain 
persons thereupon took umbrage; that for this reason I ought to desist from these proceedings and manage 
the churches entrusted to my charge. When this communication was shewn me I caught at the sentence as 
an opportunity of good. For in the first place I gained the rest I so much longed for; furthermore I trust in the 
wiping out of the stains of the many errors I have committed, on account of the wrong devised against me by 
the enemies of truth. Even in this present life our supreme Ruler very plainly shews us what care He takes of 
them that suffer wrong. While I have been remaining at rest, prisoned within the boundaries of my own 
country; while throughout the East all men have been distressed and have been bitterly lamenting though 
compelled to silence by the terror that has fallen on them (for what has befallen me has stricken terror into 
the hearts of all) the Lord has stooped from heaven, has convicted my calumniators of their falsehood, and 

laid bare their impious intent. They armed even Alexandria against me and by means of their worthy 

instruments are dinning into all men's ears that I am preaching two sons instead of one. 

I, on the contrary, am so far from holding this abominable opinion, that, on finding some of the holy fathers of 

the Nicene Council opposing in their treatises the madness of Arius and forced in their struggle against their 

opponents to make too marked a distinction, I have objected, and refused to admit such distinction, for I 

know how the exigencies of the distinction result in exaggeration. 

And lest any one should suppose that I am speaking as I do through fear, let any one who likes get hold of 

my ancient writings written before the Council of Ephesus, and those written after it twelve years ago. For by 

God's grace I interpreted all the Prophets and the Psalms and the Apostles: I wrote long ago against the 

Arians, the Macedonians, the sophistry of Apollinarius and the madness of Marcion: and in every one of my 

books by God's grace the mind of the Church shines clear. Moreover I have written a book on the Mysteries, 

another on Providence, another on the Questions of the Magi, a life of the Saints, and besides these, not to 

name every one in detail, many more.(1) 

I have enumerated them not for ambition's sake, but to challenge my accusers and my judges to put any of 

my writings they may choose to the test. They will find that by God's grace I hold no other opinion than just 

that which I have received from holy Scripture. 

When, then, your holiness has heard this from me, I beg you to inform the ignorant and to persuade the 

unbridled tongues that revile me and all who are deceived by them, not to believe what they have heard of 

me from my calumniators. Beg them to believe rather the Lawgiver when he exclaims "Men shall not receive 

a false report."(1) Ask them to wait till the facts are proved. 

My prayer is that the churches may enjoy a calm and that this long and painful storm may vanish away. But if 

the multitude of our sins suffer not this to come to pass; if for their sakes we are delivered to the sifter; we 

pray that we may share the perils undergone for the faith, in order that since we have not the confidence that 

comes from this life, at least for guarding the faith in its integrity we may meet with pity and pardon in the day 

of the appearance of the Lord. And for this we beseech your holiness to join us in our prayers. 

LXXXIII. Of Theodoretus, bishop of Cyrus, to Dioscorus, Archbishop of Alexandria. 

To them that suffer under false accusation the greatest comfort is given by the words of Scripture. When 
such a sufferer is wounded by the lying words of an unbridled tongue, and feels the sharp stings of distress, 
he remembers the story of the admirable Joseph, and as he beholds that model of chastity, an exemplar of 
every kind of virtue, suffering, trotter a calumnious charge, imprisoned and lettered for invading another 
man's bed, and spending a long time in a dungeon, his pain is lightened by the remedy that the story 
furnishes. So again when he finds the gentle David, hunted as a tyrant by Saul, and then catching his enemy 
and letting him go unharmed, an anodyne is given him in his distress. But when he sees the Lord Christ 
Himself, Maker of the ages, Creator of all things, very God, and Son of the very God, called a gluttonous 
man and a wine bibber by the wicked Jews, it is not only consolation but rather great joy that is given him in 
that he is deemed worthy of sharing the sufferings of the Lord. 

Thus I was compelled to write when I read the letters of your holiness to the most pious and sacred 
archbishop Domnus, for there was contained in them the statement that certain men have come to the 
illustrious city administered by your holiness, and have accused me of dividing the one Lord Jesus Christ 
into two sons, and this when preaching at Antioch, where innumerable hearers swell the congregation. I wept 
for the men who had the hardihood to contrive the vain calumny against me. But I grieved, and, my Lord, 
forgive me, forced as I am by pain to speak, that your pious excellency did not reserve one ear unbiassed 
for me instead of believing the lies of my accusers. Yet they were but three or four or about a dozen while I 
have countless hearers to testify to the orthodoxy of my teaching. Six years I continued teaching in the tithe 
of Theodotus bishop of Antioch, of blessed and sacred memory, who was famous alike for his 
distinguished career and for his knowledge of the divine doctrines. Thirteen years I taught in the time of 
bishop John of sacred and blessed memory, who was so delighted at my discourses as to raise both his 
hands and again and again to start up: your holiness in your own letters has borne witness how, brought up 
as he was from boyhood with the divine oracles, the knowledge which he had of the divine doctrines was 
most exact. Besides these this is the seventh year of the most pious lord archbishop Domnus. (1) Up to this 
present day, after the lapse of so long a time, not one of the pious bishops, not one of the devout clergy has 
ever at any time found any fault with my utterances. And with how much gratification Christian people hear 
our discourses your godly excellency can easily learn, alike from those who have travelled thence hither, 
and from those who reached your city from us. 

All this I say not for the sake of boasting, but because I am forced to defend myself. It is not the fame of my 
sermons to which I am calling attention; it is their orthodoxy alone. Even the great teacher of the world who is 
wont to style himself last of saints and first of sinners, that he might stop the mouths of liars was compelled to 
set forth a list of his own labours; and in shewing that this account of his sufferings was of necessity, not of 

free will, he added "I am become a fool in glorying; ye have compelled me. "(2) I own myself wretched-aye 

thrice wretched. I am guilty of many errors. Through faith alone I look for finding some mercy in the day of the 

Lord's appearing. I wish and I pray that I may follow the footprints of the holy Fathers, and I earnestly desire 

to keep undefiled the evangelic teaching which was in sum delivered to us by the holy Fathers assembled 

in council at the Bithynian Nicaea. I believe that there is one God the Father and one Holy Ghost proceeding 

from the Father:(1) so also that there is one Lord Jesus Christ, only begotten Son of God, begotten of the 

Father before all ages, brightness of His glory and express image of the Father's person, (2) on account of 

man's salvation, incarnate and made man and born of Mary the Virgin in the flesh. For so are we taught by 

the wise Paul "Whose are the Fathers and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over all, 

God blessed for ever. Amen, "(3) and again "Concerning His Son Jesus Christ our Lord which was made of 

the seed of David according to the flesh and declared to be the Son of God with power according to the 

spirit of holiness. "(4) On this account we also call the holy Virgin "Theotokos,"(5) and deem those who 

object to this appellation to be alienated from true religion. 

In the same manner we call those men corrupt arid exclude them from the assembly of the Christians, who 

divide our one Lord Jesus Christ into two persons or two sons or two Lords, for we have heard the very 

divine Paul saying "One Lord, one faith, one baptism"(6) and again "One Lord Jesus Christ by Whom are all 

things"(7) and again "Jesus Christ the same yesterday and to-day and for ever"(8) and in another 

place-"He that descended is the same also that ascended up far above all heavens. "(9) And countless 

other passages of this kind may be found in the Apostle's writings, proclaiming the one Lord. 

So too the divine Evangelist exclaims, "And the Word was made flesh and dwelt among us and we beheld 

His glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth. "(10) 

And his namesake exclaimed, "After me cometh one who is preferred before me for He was before me."(1 1) 

And when he had shewn one person, he expressed both the divine and the human, for the words "man" and 

"comes" are human, but the phrase "He was before me" expresses the divine. But nevertheless he did not 

recognise a distinction between Him who came after and Him who was before, but owned the same being 

to be eternal as God, but born man, after himself, of the Virgin. 

Thus too, the thrice blessed Thomas, when he had put his hand on the flesh of the Lord, called Him Lord 

and God, saying "My Lord and my God."(1) For through the visible nature he discerned the invisible. 

So do we know no difference between the same flesh and the Godhead but we own God the Word made 

man to be one Son. 

These lessons we bare learnt alike from the holy Scripture and from the holy Fathers who have expounded 

it, Alexander and Athanasius, loud voiced heralds of the truth, who have been ornaments of your apostolic 

see; from Basil and from Gregory and the rest of the lights of the world; and that, in our endeavour to shut the 

mouths of them that dare to oppose the blessed Theophilus and Cyril, we use their works, our own writings 

testify. For we are most anxious by the medicines supplied by very holy men to heal them that deny the 

distinction between the Lord's flesh and the Godhead, and who maintain at one moment that the divine 

nature was changed into flesh, and at another that the flesh was transmitted into nature of Godhead. 

For they clearly instruct us in the distinction between the two natures, and proclaim the immutability of the 

divine nature, calling the flesh of the Lord divine as being made flesh of God the Word; but the doctrine that it 

was transmuted into nature of Godhead they repudiate as impious. 

I think that your excellency is well aware that Cyril of blessed memory often wrote to me, and when he sent 

his books against Julian to Antioch, and in like manner his book on the scapegoat, he asked the blessed 

John, bishop of Antioch, to shew them to the great teachers of the East; and in compliance with this request 

the blessed John sent us the books. I read them with admiration, and I wrote to Cyril of blessed memory; 

and he wrote back to me praising my exactitude and kindness. This letter I have preserved. 

That I twice subscribed the writings of John of blessed memory concerning Nestorius my own hand bears 

witness, but this is the kind of thing whispered about me by men who try to conceal their own unsoundness 

by calumniating me. 

Therefore I implore your holiness to turn your back on the liars; to give heed to the Church's quiet and either 

to heal by salutary medicines them that are trying to destroy the doctrines of the truth, or, if they refuse to 

accept your treatment, to expel them from the fold, to the end that the sheep may be spared from contagion. 

I beg you to give me your customary salutation. That I have written you my true sentiments is proved by my 

works on the holy Scriptures and against the Arians and Eunomians. 

I will in addition write yet a brief word. If any one refuses to confess tile holy Virgin to be "Theotokos," or calls 

our Lord Jesus Christ bare man, or divides into two sons Him who is one only begotten and first born of 

every creature, I pray that he may fall from hope in Christ, and let all the people say amen, amen. 

Now that I have thus spoken, deign, my lord, to give me your sacred prayers, and to cheer me by a letter in 

reply telling me that your holiness has turned your back on my accusers. 

I and my household salute all thy brotherhood in piety in Christ. 

LXXXIV. To the bishops of Cilicia .(1 ) 

Your piety has heard of the calumnies directed against me. The opponents of the truth allege that I divide 
our one Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, into two sons, and it is said by some that a ground 
for their calumny is derived from a handful of men among you who hold these opinions, and who divide God 
the Word made man into two sons. They ought to listen to those words of the Apostle which openly declare 
"out Lord Jesus Christ by whom are all things, "(2) and again "one Lord, one faith, one baptism. "(3) They 
ought to have followed the Master's teaching, for the Lord Himself says "And no man hath ascended up to 
heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man which is in Heaven. "(4) And again "If ye 
shall see the Son of Man ascend up where He was before. "(5) And the tradition of holy baptism teaches us 
that there is one Son, just as there is one Father and one Holy Ghost. I hope then that your piety will deign, if 
there really are any, though I cannot believe it, who disobey the apostolic doctrines to close their mouths, to 
rebuke them as the laws of the Church require, and teach them to follow the footsteps of the holy Fathers and 
preserve undefiled the faith laid down at Nicaea in Bithynia by the holy and blessed Fathers, as summing 
up the teaching of Evangelists and Apostles. For it becomes you who love God to give heed both to God's 
glory and our common credit, and not to overlook the attacks which are made upon us all through the 
ignorance or contentiousness of these few I men-if they really are guilty, and if they are not, like ourselves, 
suffering from the whetted tongues of false accusers. 
Deign to remember us in your prayers to God, for so the law of love ordains. 

LXXXV. To the bishop Basil. (1) 

The chief good is said by the divine Paul to be love, (2) and by love he ordered the nurslings of the faith to 
be fed. Of this love your piety possesses great wealth, and so has told me what was befitting and given me 
pleasant news. For to them that fear the Lord what can be pleasanter than the health and harmony of the 
doctrines of the truth? Be well assured, most godly sir, that we were much delighted to hear the intelligence 
of our common friend; and in proportion to our previous distress at hearing that he described the nature of 
flesh and of Godhead as one, and openly attributed the passion of salvation to the impossible Godhead, so 
were all rejoiced to read the letters of your holiness, and to learn that he maintains in their integrity the 
properties of the natures and denies both the change of God the Word into flesh, and the mutation of the 
flesh into the nature of Godhead, maintaining on the contrary that in the one Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, God 
the Word made man, the properties of either nature abide unconfounded. We praise the God of all for the 
harmony of divine faith. We have however written to either Cilicia, (3) although our intelligence is imperfect, 
as to whether there are really any opponents of the truth, and have charged the godly bishops to search 
and examine if there are any who divide the one Lord Jesus Christ into two sons, and either to bring them to 
their senses by admonition, or cut them off from the roll of the brethren. For in fact we equally repudiate both 
those who dare to assert one nature of flesh and Godhead, and those who divide the one Lord Jesus Christ 
into two sons and strive to go beyond the definitions of the Apostles. 

But let your holiness be well assured that we are disposed to peace. For if the prophet says, "With them that 
hate peace I was peaceful. "(1) much more readily do we welcome the peace of God. 
Some of those men who have been fed on lies have hurried to Alexandria and patched up calumnies 
against me, with the result that the godly bishop of that city, led away by their statements, although he had 
been fully informed by my letters, has sent a pious bishop to the imperial city. I beg you therefore to shew 
your accustomed kindness to him, and to confront falsehood with the truth. 

LXXXVI.(2) To Flavianus, bishop of Constantinople. 

At the present time, most God-beloved lord, I have received many buffetings of billows, but I called upon the 
great Pilot, and have been able to stand firm against the storm; the attacks, however, now made upon me 
transcend every story in tragedy. In relation to the attacks which are being plotted against the apostolic faith, 
I thought that I should find an ally and fellow-worker in the most godly bishop of Alexandria, the lord 
Dioscorus,(3) and so sent him one of our pious presbyters, a man of remarkable prudence, with a synodical 
letter informing his piety that we abide in the agreement made in the time of Cyril of blessed memory, and 
accept the letter written by him as well as that written by the very blessed and sainted Athanasius to the 
blessed Epictetus, and, before these, the exposition of the faith laid down at Nicaea in Bithynia by the holy 
and blessed Fathers. We exhorted him to induce those who are unwilling to abide by these documents at 
once to abide by them. But one of the opposite party, who keep up these disturbances, by tricking some of 
those who are on the spot and contriving countless calumnies against myself has stirred an iniquitous 
agitation against me. 
But the very godly bishop Dioscorus has written us a letter such as never ought to have been written by one 

who has learnt from the God of all not to listen to vain words. He has believed the charges brought against 
me as though he had made personal enquiry into every one of them, and had arrived at the truth after 
questioning, and has thus condemned me. I however have bravely borne the calumnious charge, and have 
written him back a courteous letter, representing to his piety that the whole charge is false, and that not one 
of the godly bishops of the East holds opinions contrary to the apostolic decrees. Moreover the pious 
clergy whom he sent as messengers have been convinced by the actual evidence of the facts. These 
however he has dismissed unheeded, and, lending his ears to my calumniators, has acted in a manner 
quite incredible, were it not that the whole church bears witness to if. He put up with them that were crying 
Anathema against me; nay he stood up in his place and confirmed their words by adding his voice to theirs. 
Besides all this he sent certain godly bishops to the imperial city, as we learnt, in the hope of increasing the 
agitation against me. I in the first place have for champion Him who seeth all things, for it is on behalf of the 
divine decrees that I am wrestling-next after Him I invoke your holiness to fight in defence of the faith that is 
attacked, and do battle on behalf of the canons that are being trodden under foot. When the blessed 
Fathers were assembled in that imperial city(1) in harmony with them that had sat in council at Nice, they 
distinguished the dioceses, and assigned to each diocese the management of its own affairs, expressly 
enjoining that none should intrude from one diocese into another. They ordered that the bishop of 
Alexandria should administer the government of Egypt alone, and every diocese its own affairs. (2) 
Dioscorus, however, refuses to abide by these decisions; he is turning the see of the blessed Mark upside 
down; and these things he does though he perfectly well knows that the Antiochene metropolis possesses 
the throne of the great Peter, who was teacher of the blessed Mark, and first and coryphaeus of the chorus of 
the apostles. (3) 

But I know the majesty of the see, and I know and take measure of myself. I have learnt from the first the 
humility of the Apostles. I beseech your holiness not to overlook the trampling underfoot of the holy canons, 
and to stand forward zealously as champion of the divine faith, for in that faith we have hope of our salvation 
and on its account are confident that we shall meet with mercy. 

But that your holiness may not be ignorant of this, know, my lord, that he shewed his ill-will towards me from 
the time of my assenting, in obedience to the canons of the holy Fathers, to the synodical letters issued in 
your see in the time of Proclus of blessed memory; on this point he has chidden me once and again on the 
ground of my violating the rights of the church of Antioch and, as he says, of that of Alexandria. 
Remembering this, and finding, as he thinks, an opportunity, he has exhibited his hostility. But nothing is 
stronger than the truth. Truth is wont to conquer even with few words. I beseech your holiness to remember 
me in your prayers to the Lord that I may have power to prevail against the waves that are beating me hither 
and thither. 

LXXXVII. To Domnus, bishop of Apamea.(1) 

The law of brotherly love demanded that I should receive many letters from your godliness at this time. For 
the divine Apostle charges us to weep with them that weep and rejoice with them that do rejoice. (2) I have 
not received a single one, although just lately I was visited by some of the pious monks of your monastery 
with the pious presbyter Elias. Nevertheless I have written, and I salute your holiness; and I make you 
acquainted with the fact that the consolation of the Master has stood me in stead of all other, for in truth not 
even had I as many mouths as I have hairs on my head, could I worthily praise Him for my being deemed 
worthy of suffering on account of my confession of Him, and for the apparent disgrace which I hold more 
august than any honour. And if I be banished to the uttermost parts of the earth all the more will I praise Him 
as being counted worthy of greater blessings. Nevertheless I hope your holiness will put up prayers for the 
quiet of the holy churches. It is because of the storm that is assailing them that I wail and groan and lament. 
That quiet, as I know, was driven away by the Osrhoene clergy, (3) who poured out countless words against 
me, although I had no share in their condemnation, nor in the sentence passed upon them; on the contrary, 
as your holiness knows, I besought that the communion might be given to them at Easter. But slanderers find 
no difficulty in saying what they like. My consolation lies in the blessing of the Master who said, "Blessed are 
ye when men shall revile you and persecute you and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my 
sake; rejoice and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the 
prophets which were before you."(1) 

LXXXVIII. To Taurus the Patrician. (2) 

Slanderers have forced me to go beyond the bounds of moderation, and compel me to write to you who 
have adorned the highest offices, and obtained the most distinguished honours. I therefore implore you to 
pardon me, for I do not write in self sufficiency, but because I am thrust forward by necessity. It is not 
because I expect to fall unjustly into trouble and distress, for this is the common fate of all who have 

sincerely served God, but because I desire to persuade your excellency that those who accuse my 
opinions are producing false charges against me. From my mother's breast I have been nurtured on 
apostolic teaching, and the creed laid down at Nicaea by the holy and blessed Fathers I have both learnt 
and teach. All who bold any other opinion I charge with impiety, and if any one persists in asserting that I 
teach the contrary, let him not bring a charge which I cannot defend, but convict me to my face. For this is 
agreeable to the laws alike of God and of man, but to whom is it so becoming to champion the wronged as 
to you, O friend of Christ, to whom boldness of utterance is given by the splendour of your lineage, the 
greatness of your rank and your foremost place in the law? 

LXXXIX. To Florentiusthe patrician. (3) 

In sending a letter to your greatness I am daring what is beyond me, but the cause of my daring is not 
self-confidence, but the slanders of my calumniators. I have thought it well worth while to instruct your 
righteous ears how openly the impugners of my opinions are calumniating me. I have been guilty, I own, of 
many errors, but up to now I have ever kept the faith of the apostles undefiled, and on this account alone I 
have cherished the hope that I shall meet with mercy on the day of the Lord's appearing. On behalf of this 
faith I continue to contend against every kind of heresy; this faith I am ever giving to the nurslings of piety; by 
means of this faith I have metamorphosed countless wolves into sheep, and have brought them to the 
Saviour who is the Arch-shepherd of us all. So have I learnt not only from the apostles and prophets but also 
from the interpreters of their writings, Ignatius, Eustathius, Athanasius, Basil, Gregory, John, and the rest of the 
lights of the world; and before these from the holy Fathers in council at Nicaea, whose confession of the faith 
I preserve in its integrity, like an ancestral inheritance, styling corrupt and enemies of the truth all who dare to 
transgress its decrees. I invoke your greatness, now that you have heard from me in these terms, to shut the 
mouths of my calumniators. It is in my opinion wholly unreasonable to accept as true what is charged 
against men in their absence; rather is it lawful and right that those who wish to appear as prosecutors 
should accuse the defendants in their presence, and endeavour to convict them face to face. Under these 
conditions the judges will without difficulty be able to arrive at the truth. 

XC. To Lupicinus the Master.(1) 

I have passed through the contests of my prime. I see before me the confines of old age, and have 
expected as an old man to have more honour given me. But I am a mark for the shafts of slander, and am 
driven to meet by defence accusations levelled against me. Under these circumstances, I beseech your 
excellency not to believe the lies of my accusers. Had I been living a life of silence, there might have been 
room for the suspicion of unorthodoxy. But I am continually discoursing in the churches, and therefore have, 
by God's grace, innumerable witnesses to the soundness of what I teach. I follow the laws and rules of the 
apostles. I test my teaching by applying to it, like a rule and measure, the faith laid down by the holy and 
blessed Fathers at Nicaea. If any one maintain that I hold any contrary opinion, let him accuse me face to 
face; let him not slander me in my absence. It is fair that even the defendant should have an opportunity of 
speech, and meet with his defence the charges brought against him, and that then and not till then should the 
judges lawfully pronounce their sentence. This favour I beg through your excellency's assistance. If any 
men wish to condemn me unheard, I accept with willingness even their unjust sentence. For I wait for the 
judgment of the Master, where we need neither witnesses nor accusers. Before Him, as says the divine 
Apostle, "all things are naked and opened. "(1) 

XCl.Tothe prefect Eutrechius. (2) 

I well know, and need no words to tell me, how your excellency regards me. Actions speak more clearly 
than words, but I have been anxious for you to know the cause of the accusation that is brought against me. 
For I am suffering under a most extraordinary charge, being at one and the same time attacked as 
unmarried, and as having been married twice. (3) If my present calumniators assert that I am falsifying the 
apostolic doctrine, why in the world, instead of accusing me in my absence, do they not attempt to convict 
me face to face? This fact alone is enough to give utter refutation to their lies, for it is because they know that 
I have innumerable witnesses to the apostolic character of my doctrines that they have urged an 
undefended indictment against me. Lawful judges must on the contrary keep one ear unbiassed for the 
accused. If they give both to the pleadings of the opponents, and deliver a sentence acceptable to them, I 
shall put up with the injustice as bringing me nearer to the kingdom of heaven, and shall await that impartial 
tribunal, where there is neither prosecutor, nor counsel, nor witness, nor distinction in rank, but judgment of 
deeds and words and righteous retribution. "For," it is said, "we must all appear before the judgment seat of 
Christ that every one may receive the things done in his body according to that he hath done whether it be 

good or bad. "(4) 

XCII. To Anatolius the Patrician. (5) 

The very holy lord archbishop Domnus has arranged for the most pious bishops to repair to the imperial 
city, with a view to the complete refutation of the false accusation made against us all. At this time we stand 
in especial need of the aid of your magnificence, since the Lord of all has endowed you with the gifts of pure 
faith, of warm zeal in its behalf, of intelligence and capacity, and power withal to carry out your prudent 
counsels. I beg you therefore to defend the cause of the wronged, to contend against lies, and champion 
the apostolic teaching now assailed. Without doubt the master and guide of the churches will bless your 
endeavour, will scatter the lowering cloud, and bless the nurslings of the faith with clear sky. Even should He 
permit the tempest to prevail, your greatness will reap your perfect reward, and we shall bow our heads 
before the storm, ready to live with cheerfulness wheresoever it may drive us, and waiting the judgment of 
God and his true and righteous sentence. 

XCIII. To Senatorthe Patrician. 

I cherish an indelible memory of your magnificence, and now by very religious and holy bishops I salute 
you. The very holy lord bishop Domnus has arranged for them to journey to the imperial city in order to put 
an end to the false charges raised against me. For certain men have contrived manifest calumnies against 
me, and have grievously disturbed the churches for whose sake the Lord Christ "endured the Cross 
despising the shame";(2) in whose behalf the band of the divine apostles and companies of victorious 
martyrs were delivered to many kinds of death. On behalf of their peace I call on your magnificence to 
contend. It had been easy for the God of all to have nodded His head and scattered the lowering clouds; 
but He bides His time, and thereby at once shews the endurance of them that are assailed, and gives us 
opportunities of doing good. 

XCIV. To Protogenes(3) the Praefect. 

The loving-kindness of the Lord has already given you an opportunity of carrying out your good intentions. 
He has given you a greater opportunity now, that your excellency may the more easily champion the cause 
of the truth that is assailed, bring lies to nought, and give the churches the calm for which they so intensely 
long. Your excellency has already learned from many other sources bow great is the surge by which the 
churches in the East are overwhelmed, but you will acquire more accurate information concerning it from the 
very religious bishops who, on account of it, have undertaken their long journey in the winter, relying, next 
after the Grace of God, on the providence of your authority. Disperse for us, then, O Christian man, the storm, 
change the moonless night into clear sunshine, and bridle the tongues set wagging against us. We by 
God's grace are ever fighting for the apostolic decrees, and we preserve undefiled the faith laid down at 
Nicaea, and style impious all who dare to violate its dogmas. In evidence of the truth of what I say may be 
cited my catechumens, those who are from time to time baptized by me, and the hearers of my discourses 
in the churches. If they mean to accuse me in accordance with the law, they must convict the in my presence, 
not slander me in my absence. In this manner your excellency, when giving judgment in other cases, is wont 
to deliver your sentences, perceiving on which side lies the right from the pleadings both of the prosecution 
and of the defence. 

XCV. To the praefect Antiochus.(l) 

You have laid aside the cares of your very important government, but your fame flourishes among all; for 
they that have reaped the fruit of your benevolence, and they are many and everywhere, persistently extol it, 
proclaiming your good report in all directions, and stirring their hearers' tongues to join in the chorus of 
acclamation. When I behold the worthy fruit which adorns with its beauty its far-famed stem, I am delighted. 
For this reason I call your excellency to greater and higher deeds, and beseech you to give heed to the 
tranquillity of the churches. They have been overwhelmed with a great storm by the contrivers of calumnies 
against me, and under these circumstances the very religious bishops, making light of a long journey, of 
infirmity, and of old age, have left their own flocks unshepherded, and undertaken to travel this great 
distance, in their eagerness to confute the lies told against us all. I beseech your greatness to give them 
your protection, to shew care for the calumniated East, and your forethought for the welfare of the apostolic 
faith. It is only fitting that you should add this further glory to the rest of your good deeds. 

XCVI. To Nomusthe Patrician. (2) 

I have written to you two letters, indeed I think three, but without getting any answer. I had wished to say no 
more, but to know my own place and the greatness of dignities, and to beg you to inform me of the cause of 
your silence. Really I do not know what offence I can have given to your excellency. We err unwillingly as 
well as willingly, and sometimes are quite ignorant in what way we are transgressing. I therefore beg your 
greatness, remembering the divine laws which plainly charge us "If thy brother shall trespass against thee 
go and tell him his fault between him and thee alone"(1) to deign to make plain to me the origin of the 
annoyance, that I may either prove myself innocent, or, made aware of where I was wrong, may beg your 
pardon. In my confidence in the evidence of my conscience I hope for the former. All men are adorned by 
magnanimity, and not least those who, following the example of your excellency, trained in outside 
education as well as instructed in divine principles, both hear the apostolic laws loudly exclaiming "Let not 
the sun go down upon your wrath"(2) and remember the words of Homer(3) 
"In fit bounds contain thy mighty mind; Benignity is best." 

I have thus written not as though giving you information, but to remind one who is much occupied, and I do so 
in remembrance of the law of the Lord, who says "Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there 
rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee; leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; 
first be reconciled to thy brother and then come and offer thy gift. "(4) In obedience to these words I have 
thought it right to salute your excellency by the most pious bishops, and to exhort you to give heed to the 
tranquillity of the churches. They are indeed overwhelmed by a great storm. 

XCVII. To the Count Sporacius.(5) 

I am delighted with your excellency's letter. My pleasure has been increased by the very religious presbyter 
and monk lamblichus, who has told me of your warm zeal, your earnestness in religion, and your real 
goodwill to me. On hearing of this as well as of the efforts of the glorious and pious lord Patricius(l) on my 
behalf I give you the apostolic blessing which the blessed Onesiphorus obtained from that holy tongue; 
"The Lord give mercy to your house, for he oft refreshed, me and was not ashamed of my chain;" "The Lord 
grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day. "(2) This I pray for you, even though the enemies 
of the truth inflict on me yet greater miseries as they suppose; for we have been taught to regard men's 
purpose; but be sure of this, that with true religion death to me is very pleasant, and exile to the ends of the 
earth. Still we are distressed at the storm of the churches, which the Lord of all is mighty to disperse. 

XCVIII. To Pancharius. 

WE are distressed to see the tempest of the churches, but their Master and Ruler ever through mighty 
billows shows to men His own wisdom and power. He rebukes the winds and brings about a calm as He did 
when He was in the apostles' boat.(3) So though I am distressed, nevertheless because I know this power 
of our Saviour and am aware of what He arranges for us, even though adversity befall me. I give thanks and 
accept it as a gift of God. I have learned the lesson to care little for the present, and to wait for the expected 
blessings. But it behoves your excellency zealously to defend the apostolic faith, that you may receive from 
the God of all the recompense of such conduct. 

XCIX. To Claudianus the Antigrapharius.(4) 

Although you have not yet met me, I think that your excellency is aware of the open calumnies that have 
been published against me, for you have often heard me preaching in church, when I have proclaimed the 
Lord Jesus, and have pointed out the properties alike of the Godhead and of the manhood; for we do not 
divide one Son into two, but, worshipping the Only-begotten, point out the distinction between flesh and 
Godhead. This, indeed, is I think confessed even by the Arians, who do not call the flesh Godhead, nor 
address the Godhead as flesh. Holy Scripture clearly teaches us both natures. Nevertheless, though I have 
ever thus spoken, certain men are uttering lying words against me. But I rely on my conscience and have as 
witness to my teaching Him who looks into the hearts. So, as the prophet says, I regard the contrivances of 
calumny as "a spider's web."(1) I await the great judgment which needs no words, but makes manifest what 
in the meanwhile is unknown. 

I send this by the very religious bishops, thinking it worth while to salute your excellency by them and to 
remind you of your promise. For attacked as I am I do not cease to go a-hunting, for I know that even the 
sacred apostles in the midst of the assaults made upon them did not cease to ply the net of the spirit. 

C. To Alexandra. (2) 

I have recently received your excellency's letter. For the zeal you have shewn on my behalf I thank you, and 
pray the God of all to guard the goods you have, to increase them with further boons, and to grant you the 
enjoyment of future and everlasting blessings. I think that He hears the prayer even of them that are 
sentenced to relegation, and all the more when it is for the sake of His divine doctrine that they are 
undergoing apparent disgrace. I am writing by the very religious bishops, and I beg that they may meet with 
your kindly care. It is for the sake of the faith of the gospel and the peace of the churches that they have 
undertaken this long journey. 

CI. To the Deaconess Celarina. 

The flames of the war against us have been lit up again. After yielding awhile, the enemy of men has once 
more armed against us men nurtured in lies, who utter open slander against me, and say that I divide our 
one Lord Jesus Christ into two sons. I however know the distinction between Godhead and manhood, and 
confess one Son, God the Word made man. I assert that He is God eternal, who was made man at the end 
of days, not by the change of the Godhead, but by the assumption of the manhood. It is however needless 
for me to inform your piety of my sentiments, for you have exact knowledge of what I preach, and how I 
instruct the ignorant. I beseech you therefore since the workers of lies have poured their insults upon all the 
godly bishops of the East at once, and overwhelmed the churches with a storm, that your piety will show all 
possible zeal on behalf of the doctrines of the gospel anti the peace of the churches. On this account the 
very godly bishops have left the churches shepherded by them, have disregarded the inclemency of winter, 
and endured the labours of their long journey, that they may calm the tempest which has arisen. I am sure 
that your godly excellency will regard them as champions of piety and governors of the churches. 

CM. To Bishop Basilius.(l) 

There is nothing remarkable in the reproaches that are directed against me being heard in silence by men 
who do not know me; but that your holiness should not refute the lies of my revilers, or at least should do so 
only to a certain extent, and with no great heartiness, passes the belief of any one who knows your character 
and conduct. And I say this not because friendship ought to be preferred to truth, but because the witness of 
truth is on the side of friendship. Your reverence has very often heard me preaching in church, and, in other 
assemblies where I have spoken on doctrinal questions; you have listened to what I have said, and I do not 
know of any occasion on which you have found fault with me for expressing unorthodox opinions. But what is 
the case at the present moment? Why in the world, my dear friend, do you not utter a word against 
falsehood, while you allow a friend to be calumniated and the truth to be assailed? If this is because you 
disregard the helpless and insignificant, remember the plain proclamation of the commandment of the Lord 
"Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones which believe in me, for I say unto you that in heaven 
their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven. "(2) If however it is the influence of 
my calumniators which imposes silence upon you, you must listen to the other law which says "Thou shalt 
not honour the person of the mighty"(3) and "Judge righteous judgment"(4) and "Thou shalt not follow a 
multitude to do evil"(5) and "He that shutteth his eyes from seeing evil and stoppeth his ears from hearing of 
blood. "(6) You may find innumerable similar passages in holy Scripture, which I have thought it needless to 
collect when writing to a man brought up in the divine oracles, and watering Christian people with his 
teaching. But this I will say, that we shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ, and shall give account 
of our words and deeds. I, who for every other reason dread this tribunal, now that I am encompassed with 
calumny, find my chief consolation in the thought of it. 

Clll. To the Count Apollonius.(l) 

The very godly bishops have been led to travel to the imperial city by the calumnies uttered against me, 
and I by their holinesses send your excellency my salutation, and pay the debt of friendship, not indeed to 
wipe out the cherished obligation, but to make it greater. For in truth the obligations of friendship are 
increased by their discharge. That I should now be reaping the fruits of calumny is not extraordinary, for, in 
that I am human, there is nothing that I must not expect. All troubles of this kind must be borne by them that 
have learned wisdom; one thing only is distressing-that harm should accrue to the soul. 

CIV. To Flavianus,(2) Bishop of Constantinople. 

I have already in another letter informed your holiness how openly the calumniators of our teaching are 
slandering us. (3) Now in like manner by means of the very godly bishops I do the so, me, having not only 
these as witnesses of the orthodoxy of my teaching but also countless other men who are my hearers in the 

churches of the East. Above and beyond all these I have my conscience, and Him who sees my 
conscience. And I know too how the divine Apostle often appealed to the testimony of his conscience, for 
"our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience "(4) and again "I say the truth in Christ I lie not, my 
conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost. "(5) Know then, O holy and godly sir, that no one has 
ever at any time heard us preaching two sons; in fact this doctrine seems to the abominable and impious, 
for there is one Lord Jesus Christ through whom are all things. Him I acknowledge both as everlasting God 
and as man in the end of days, and I give Him one worship as only begotten. I have learned however the 
distinction between flesh and Godhead, for the union is unconfounded. Thus drawn up as it were in battle 
array to oppose the madness of Arius and Eunomius, we very easily refute the blasphemy hazarded by 
them against the only begotten, by applying what was spoken in humility about the Lord, and suitably to His 
assumed nature, to man, and, on the other hand, what becomes the divine and signifies the divine nature, to 
God; not dividing Him into two persons, but teaching that both the former and latter attributes belong to the 
only begotten, the latter to Him as God the Creator and Lord of all, and the former as made man on our 
account. For divine Scripture says that He was made man, not by mutation of the Godhead, but by 
assumption of human nature, of the seed of Abraham. This the divine Apostle openly says in the words "For 
verily He took not on Him the nature of angels, but He took on Him the seed of Abraham, wherefore in all 
things it behoved Him to be made like unto His brethren. "(1) And again "Now to Abraham and his seed 
were the promises made: he saith not and to seeds, as of many; but as of one, and to thy seed, which is 
Christ."(2) 

These and similar passages have been cut out of divine Scripture by Simon, Basilides, Valentinus, 
Bardesanes, Marcion, and the man who is named after his maniacal heres.(3) So they style the Master 
Christ God only, and describe Him as having nothing human about Him, but appearing in imagination and 
appearance as man to men. On the other hand the Arians and Eunomians say that God the Word assumed 
only a body, and that He Himself supplied the place of a soul in the body. And Apollinarius describes the 
Master's body as endued with a soul;(4) but, deriving, I know not whence, the idea of a distinction between 
soul and intelligence, (5) deprives intelligence of its share in the achieved salvation. (6) The teaching of the 
divine Apostles lays down on the contrary that a soul both reasonable and intelligent was assumed 
together with flesh, and the salvation of which the hope is held out to them that believe is complete. 
There is yet another gang of heretics who hold differently. Photinus, (7) Marcellus,(8) and Paul of 
Samosata,(9) assert that our Lord and God was only man. When arguing with these we are tinder the 
necessity of advancing proofs of the Godhead, and of shewing that the Master Christ is everlasting God. 
When, on the other band, we are contending with the former faction, which calls our Lord Jesus Christ God 
only, we are obliged to marshal against them the forces of the divine Scripture, and collect from it evidence 
of the assumption of the manhood. For a physician must use remedies appropriate to the disease, and suit 
the medicine to the case. 

Now, therefore, I beseech your holiness to scatter the slander raised against me, and bridle the tongues 
now vainly reviling me. For, after the incarnation, I worship one Son of God, one Lord Jesus Christ, and 
denounce as impious all who hold otherwise. Deign, sir, to give me too your holy prayers, that, by God's 
grace, I may reach the other side of the ocean of danger, and drop my anchor in the windless haven of the 
Lord. 

CV. To Eulogius the OEconomus.(l) 

We have heard from many sources of your piety's efforts on behalf of true religion. It is therefore right that 
you should readily succour one who is calumniated for the same cause, and should refute the revilers' lies. 
You, O godly Sir, know what I hold, and what I teach, and that no one has ever heard of my preaching two 
sons. Exert, I implore you, in this case too your divine energy, and stop the months of the evil speakers. In 
conflicts of this kind one must help not only one's friends but even those who have caused us pain. 

CVI. To Abraham the OEconomus. 

By the godly bishops I salute you. I beseech you to give heed to the churches' calm, and to disperse the 
waves of calumny. "Whatsoever a man soweth that shall he also reap, "(2) as says the divine Apostle. 
Without doubt then he who fights for the apostolic doctrines shall reap the fruit of the apostolic blessing and 
enjoy the Apostles' devotion. 

CVII. To the presbyter Theodotus. 

The struggles which your piety has undergone on behalf of the apostolic doctrines are not unknown, but are 
frequently mentioned alike by those who have known them by experience, and by others who have heard of 

them from these. Continue, my dear sir, your efforts, and fight for the doctrines of the Fathers. For these I too 
am buffeted in all directions and, while I receive the shock of the great waves, I beseech our Governor either 
to nod his head and scatter the tempest, or enable the victims of the storm by His grace to play the man. 

CVIII. To Acacius the Presbyter. 

True indeed is the promise of David's Psalm, for through him the Spirit of truth gave this promise to them that 
believe, "Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also to him; and he shall bring it to pass; and he shall bring forth 
thy righteousness as the light and thy judgment as the noonday. "(1) This we find too has come to pass in the 
case of your piety. For the great care yon bestow upon them that are weeping for their orphanhood, and 
your struggles on behalf of the apostolic doctrines, are in every one's mouth, and so, as the prophets say, 
"Hidden things are made manifest." Since I too have beard of your piety's admirable exertions I write to 
salute you, most godly sir, and beseech you to increase your glory by adding to your labours, and to fight 
on behalf of the doctrine of the Gospels, that we may both keep the inheritance of our fathers unimpaired, 
and bring our Master His talent with good usury. (2) 

CIX. To Eusebius, Bishop of Ancyra.(3) 

Many are the devices secretly plotted against me, and through me patched up against the faith of apostles. 
I am however comforted by the sufferings of the Saints, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and men famous in the 
churches in the word of Grace; and besides these by the promises of our God and Saviour, for in this 
present life He has promised us nothing pleasant or delightful, but rather trouble, toil, and peril, and attacks 
of enemies. "In the world," He says, "ye shall have tribulation, "(4) and "if they have persecuted me they will 
also persecute you, "(5) and "If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub how much more shall 
they call them of his household, "(8) and "The time cometh when whosoever killeth you will think he doeth 
God service, "(7) and "Straight is the gate and narrow the way which leadeth unto life, "(8) and "When they 
persecute you in this city flee you into another,"(9) and I might quote all similar passages. The divine 
Apostle too speaks in the same strain. "Yea and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer 
persecution, but evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived. "(1) 
These words give me the greatest comfort in this distress. As the calumnies uttered against me have 
probably reached your holiness's ears, I beseech your holiness to give no credence to the lies of my 
slanderers. I am not aware of ever having taught anyone up to the present time to believe in two sons. I have 
been taught to believe in one only begotten, our Lord Jesus Christ, God the Word made man. But I know the 
distinction between flesh and Godhead, and regard as impious all who divide our one Lord Jesus Christ into 
two sons, as well as those who, travelling in an opposite direction, call the Godhead and manhood of the 
master Christ one nature. For these exaggerations stand opposed to one another, while between them lies 
the way of the doctrines of the Gospel, beautified by the footprints of prophets and apostles, and of all who 
after them have been conspicuous for the gift of teaching. I was anxious to adduce their opinions, and to 
point out how they bear witness in favour of my own, but I want more words than a letter allows room for, 
wherefore I have written summarily what I have been taught about the incarnation of the only begotten; I send 
my statement to your godly excellency. (2) I bare written not with the object of teaching others, but of making 
my defence against the accusations brought against me, and of explaining my sentiments to those who are 
ignorant of them. After your holiness has read what I have written, if you find it in conformity with the apostolic 
doctrines, I hope you trill confirm my opinion by what you reply— if, on the contrary, anything that I have said 
jars with the divine teaching, I request to be told of it by your holiness. For, though I have spent much time in 
teaching, I still need one to teach me. "We know," says the divine Apostle "in part,"(3) and again he says, "If 
any man think that he knoweth anything he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know."(4) So I hope that I may 
hear the truth from your holiness, and that you may also give heed to the calm of the Church, and fight for the 
divine doctrines. It is for their sakes that the very godly bishops, making light of the difficulties of the journey, 
and of the winter, have set out for the imperial city, in the endeavour to bring about some end to the storm. 
Send them I pray you, on their way with your prayers and with your prayers too strengthen me.(1) 

CX. To Domnus, bishop of Antioch.(2) 

When I read your letter I remembered the very blessed Susannah, who when she saw the famous villains, 
and believed that the God of all was present, uttered that remarkable cry, "I am straitened on every side;"(3) 
but nevertheless preferred to fall into the snares of slander rather than to despise the just God. And I, sir, 
have two alternatives as I have often said, to offend God and wound my conscience, or to fall by man's 
unjust sentence. The most pious emperor, I think, knows nothing of this. For what hindered him from writing, 
and ordering the ordination to take place, if in truth it so pleased him? Why in the world do they utter threats 

without and cause alarm, and yet do not send letters openly ordering it? One of two things must be true; 
either the very pious emperor is not induced to write, or they are trying to make us break the law and 
afterwards be indicted by them for illegality. I have before me the example of the blessed Principius,(4) for in 
that case, when they had given orders by writing, they punished him for obedience. Moreover the letters 
which I read on the very day of the letter-bearer's arrival are of a contrary tenour. For one of the holy monks 
has written to some one that he fins received letters both from the very illustrious guardsman and the very 
glorious ex-magister stating that the case of the very godly lord bishop Irenaeus will stand more favourably, 
and in return for this good will they ask prayers on their behalf. I think therefore that a reply ought to be written 
to the clergy who have written from the imperial city to the effect that(3) "in obedience to the sentence of the 
very godly bishops of Phoenicia, and knowing both the zeal and the magnanimity and love for the poor and 
all the other virtues of the very godly bishop Irenaeus, and in addition to this the orthodoxy of his opinions, I 
have ordained him. I am not aware that he has ever objected to apply to the holy Virgin the title Theotokos,' 
or has ever held any other opinions contrary to the doctrines of the Gospel. As to the question of digamy, I 
have followed my predecessors; for Alexander of blessed and sacred memory, the ornament of this 
apostolic see, as well as the very blessed Acacius, bishop of Beroea, ordained Diogenes of blessed 
memory who was a 'digamus;'(1) and similarly the blessed Praylius ordained Domninus of Caesarea who 
was a 'digamus.'(2) We have therefore followed precedent, and the example of men well known and 
illustrious both for learning and character. Proclus, bishop of Constantinople, of blessed memory well aware 
of this and many other instances, both himself accepted the ordination, and wrote m praise and admiration 
of it. So too did the leading godly bishops of the Pontic Diocese, (3) and all the Palestinians. 
"No doubt has been raised about the matter, and we hold it wrong to condemn a man illustrious for many 
and various noble actions." In my opinion it is becoming to write in these terms. If your holiness holds any 
other view, let what seems good to you be done. I, as they suppose, have undergone one punishment, and 
am ready by God's help to undergo yet another. Even a third and fourth, if they like, by the stay of God's 
grace I will endure, praising the Lord. If your holiness thinks right, let us see what answer comes from 
Palestine, and, after considering more exactly what course is to be taken, let us so write to Constantinople. 

CXI. To Anatolius the Patrician. (4) 

Your excellency will be recompensed for the kindness you have shewn me by the God of all, for all that is 
done for His sake has its reward. I laugh at all my slanderers. The bodies of them who are most severely 
scourged do not feel the pain, because the scourged flesh is deadened. Still I lament over them whose 
unrestrained mouths utter such lies. In what way have the accusers of the godly bishop lbas(1) been 
wronged by me that they should utter such calumnies against me? To begin with, I was not even one of the 
judges, for in obedience to the imperial decree I was living at Cyrus. Moreover, as I have heard from many, 
they all along treated my absence as a grievance, for I had arranged for their partaking of the Holy 
Communion at the Easter feast of salvation, (2) and as they often expressed a wish to meet me, I received 
them with kindness and advised them as to the proper course to take. But that I may also speak in the 
defence of the very godly bishop the lord Domnus, what was the proper course for him to take? He was 
openly attacked; he saw men deposed by a synodical sentence sent into another diocese, and resuming 
their priestly functions in violation of the laws of the Church; he saw things holy and divine laughed at and 
turned into ridicule by the enemies of the Church; what was he to do? When he knew this he handed over the 
case to others, and not only to the very godly lord Ibas, but also to the holy lord bishop Symeon of Amida, 
that the metropolitans of the two provinces might hear the charges. What fairness is there in charging the 
same persons with cruelty and kindness? If we excommunicate, we run into danger; if we do not 
excommunicate, we do not escape it. We alone of all the world are objects of attack. Other dioceses are at 
peace. We alone are exposed to calumniators, -specially I myself, though I took no part in the trial, and am 
absolutely without responsibility in the matter. 

Thus have I been forced to write on reading your lordship's letter, and on learning from it how for these 
reasons a great commotion has been made against me, a man confined to my diocese; a man of peace; 
one not even deliberating with the godly bishops of the province. As a matter of fact, although there have 
been already two episcopal ordinations in our province, I took part in neither. Were I not restrained by the 
imperial decree I would have gone away, and spent the remainder of my days in some remote spot. I am 
faint for the plots hatched against me. I am sure those Edessenes never put together their slander against 
me of their own accord. They were prompted to these attacks on me by their truly truthful neighbours. I thank 
our Saviour that he has deemed me worthy of the beatitudes of the Gospel, all unworthy though I be. For this 
reason I have gladly accepted the sentence of relegation. I am ready for exile, and, for the sake of the 
"hope laid up for me,"(1) welcome whatever fate they may inflict. I pray without ceasing for your excellency, 
and beseech all the saints to share in my petitions. 

CXII. To Domnus, bishop of Antioch.(2) 

When news was brought to me that the pettiness of the victorious emperor had been put an end to, a 
reconciliation effected between him and the very godly bishop, (5) the summons to the council cancelled, 
and the peace of the churches restored, I hoped that our troubles were a thing of the past. But I am deeply 
distressed at what I hear from your holiness. It is impossible to hope for any good from this notorious 
council, unless the merciful Master with His wonted providence shall undo the riotous demons' devices. 
Even in the great synod, I mean that of Nicaea, the Arian party voted with the orthodox and set their hands to 
the apostolic exposition. But they did not cease to war against the truth till they had torn asunder the body of 
the Church. For thirty years the supporters of the apostolic doctrines and they who were infected with the 
Arian blasphemy continued in communion with one another. But at Antioch,(4) when the latest council was 
finished, when they had seated the man of God, the great Meletius, on the apostolic throne, and then after a 
few days ejected him by the imperial authority, Euzoius who was affected with the undoubted plague of Arius 
was put forward, and straightway the champions of apostolic doctrines seceded and thereafter the division 
continued. 

As I look back on what happened then, and look forward to similar events in the future, my wretched spirit 
sighs and wails, for I see no prospect of good. The men of the other dioceses do not know the poison which 
lies in the Twelve Chapters;(1) having regard to the celebrity of the writer of them, they suspect no mischief, 
and his successor in the see(2) is I think adopting every means to confirm them in a second synod. For 
supposing he who lately wrote them at command, and anathematized all who did not wish to abide by them, 
were presiding over an oecumenical council, what could he not effect? And be well assured, my lord, that no 
one who knows the heresy they contain will brook to accept them, though twice as many men of this sort 
decree them. Before now, though a larger number have rashly confirmed them, I resisted at Ephesus, and 
refused to communicate with the writer of them till he had agreed to the points laid down by me, and had 
harmonized his teaching with them, without making any mention of the Chapters. This your holiness can 
ascertain without any difficulty if you order the acts of the synod to be investigated; for they are preserved as 
is customary with the synodical signatures, and there are extant more than fifty synodic acts shewing the 
accusation of the Twelve Chapters. For before the journey to Ephesus the blessed John(3) had written to the 
very godly bishops Eutherius of Tyana, Firmus of Caesarea, and Theodotus of Ancyra, denouncing these 
Chapters as Apollinarian,(4) And at Ephesus the exposition and confirmation of these Chapters was the 
cause of our deposition of the Alexandrian and of the Ephesian.(6) Moreover at Ephesus many synodic 
letters were written both to the victorious emperor, and to the great officers, about these Chapters; and in like 
manner to the laity at Constantinople and to the reverend clergy. Moreover when we were summoned to 
Constantinople we bad five discussions in the imperial presence, and afterwards sent the emperor three 
protestations. And to the very godly bishops of the West, of Milan I mean, of Aquileia, and of Ravenna, we 
wrote on the same subject, protesting that the Chapters were full of the Apollinarian novelty. Furthermore 
their writer received a letter from the blessed John by the hands of the blessed Paul,(1) openly blaming 
them; and in like manner from Acacius of blessed memory. And to give your holiness concise information 
on the subject I have sent you both the letter of the blessed Acacius, as well as that of the blessed John to 
the blessed Cyril, in order that you may perceive that though they were writing to him on the subject of 
agreement they blamed these Chapters. And the blessed Cyril himself, in his letter to the blessed Acacius 
plainly indicated the drift of these Chapters in the words "I have written this against his innovations and when 
peace is made they will be made manifest." The very defence proves the accusation. I have sent you the 
copy of what he wrote at the tithe of the agreement, that you may see, my lord, that he made no mention of 
them, and that those who attend the Council are under an obligation to bring forward what was written at the 
time of the agreement, and to state plainly what had caused the difference and on what terms the sundered 
parts were atoned. For they who are summoned to fight for the truth must flinch from no toil, and must invoke 
the divine aid, that we may preserve unimpaired the heritage bequeathed us by our forefathers. 
Your holiness must look out for men of like mind among the godly bishops and make them companions of 
your journey; and likewise of the reverend clergy those who are zealous for the truth, lest betrayed even by 
them of our own side we are either driven to do something displeasing to the God of all, or, in our 
abandonment, fall an easy prey to our foes. 

It is faith in which we have our hopes of salvation, and we must leave no means untried to prevent aught 
spurious being brought into it, and the apostolic teaching from being corrupted. 
I write you these words from far away, with sighs and with groans, and I beseech our common Master to 
scatter this dark cloud and bestow on us once more the boon of the bright sunshine. 

CXIII. To Leo, Bishop of Rome. 

If Paul, the herald of the truth, the trumpet of the Holy Ghost, hastened to the great Peter(2) in order that he 

might carry from him the desired solution of difficulties to those at Antioch who were in doubt about living in 
conformity with the law, much more do we, men insignificant and small, hasten to your apostolic see(3) in 
order to receive from you a cure for the wounds of the churches. For every reason it is fitting for you to hold 
the first place, inasmuch as your see is adorned with many privileges. Other cities are indeed adorned by 
their size, their beauty, and their population; and some which in these respects are lacking are made bright 
by certain spiritual boons. But on your city the great Provider has bestowed an abundance of good gifts. 
She is the largest, the most splendid, the most illustrious of the world, and overflows with the multitude of her 
inhabitants. Besides all this, she has achieved her present sovereignty, and has given her name to her 
subjects. She is moreover specially adorned by her faith, in due testimony whereof the divine Apostle 
exclaims "your faith is spoken of throughout the whole world. "(4) And if even after receiving the seeds of the 
message of salvation her boughs were straightway heavy with these admirable fruits, what words can fitly 
praise the piety now practised in her? In her keeping too are the tombs that give light to the souls of the 
faithful, those of our common fathers and teachers of the truth, Peter and Paul. (5) This thrice blessed and 
divine pair arose in the region of sunrise, and spread their rays in all directions. Now from the region of 
sunset, where they willingly welcomed the setting of this life, they illuminate the world. They have rendered 
your see most glorious; this is the crown and completion(l) of your good things; but in these days their God 
has adorned their throne(2) by setting on it your holiness, emitting, as you do, the rays of orthodoxy. Of this I 
might give many proofs, but it is enough to mention the zeal which your holiness lately shewed against the 
ill-famed Manichees, proving thereby your piety's earnest regard for divine things. Your recent writings, too, 
are enough to indicate your apostolic character. For we have met with what your holiness has written 
concerning the incarnation(3) of our God and Saviour, and we have marvelled at the exactness of your 
expressions. 

For both writings agreed in setting forth both the everlasting Godhead of the Only-begotten derived from the 
everlasting Father, and the manhood derived from the seed of Abraham and David; and that the nature 
assumed was in all things like unto us, being unlike to us in this respect alone, that it remained free from all 
sin; since it springs not of nature but of free will. 

The letters moreover contain this, that the Only-begotten Son of God is one, and his God head impassible, 
immutable, and invariable, like the Father who begat Him and the Holy Spirit; and that on this account He 
took the passible nature, divine nature being incapable of suffering, that by the suffering of His own flesh He 
might bestow freedom from suffering on them that have believed in Him. These statements and others of 
like nature were contained in your letters. We, in admiration of your spiritual wisdom, have landed the grace 
of the Holy Ghost uttered through you, and we invoke and beseech and beg and implore your highness to 
protect the churches of God that are now assailed by the storm. 

We had expected that through the instrumentality of the representatives^) sent by your holiness to 
Ephesus, the tempest would have been done away, but we have fallen under severer attacks of the storm. 
For the very righteous bishop of Alexandria was not content with the illegal and very unrighteous deposition 
of the most holy and godly bishop of Constantinople, the lord Flavianus, nor was his soul satisfied with a 
similar slaughter of the rest of the bishops, but me too in my absence he stabbed with a pen, without 
summoning me to the bar, without trying me in my presence, without questioning me as to my opinions about 
the incarnation of our God and Saviour. Even murderers, tomb-breakers, and adulterers, are not 
condemned by their judges until they have themselves confirmed by confession the charges brought 
against them, or have been clearly convicted by the testimony of others. Yet I, nurtured as I have been in the 
divine laws, have been condemned by him at his pleasure, when all the while I was five and thirty days' 
march away. 

Nor is this all that he has done. Only last year when two fellows tainted with the unsoundness of Apollinarius 
had gone thither and patched up slanders against me, he stood up in church and anathematized me, and 
that after I had written to him and explained my opinions to him. 

I lament the disturbance of the church, and long for peace. Six and twenty years have I ruled the church 
entrusted to me by the God of all, aided by your prayers. Never in the time of the blessed Theodotus,(1) the 
chief bishop of the East; never in the time of his successors in the see of Antioch, did I incur the slightest 
blame. By the help of God's grace working with me more than a thousand souls did I rescue from the plague 
of Marcion; many others from the Arian and Eunomian factions did I bring over to our Master Christ. I have 
done pastoral duty in eight hundred churches, for so many parishes does Cyrus contain; and in them, 
through your prayers, not even one tare is left, and our flock is delivered from all heresy and error. He who 
sees all things knows how many stones have been cast at me by evil heretics, how many conflicts in most of 
the cities of the East I have waged against pagans, against Jews, against every heresy. After all this trial 
and all this danger I have been condemned without a trial. 

But I await the sentence of your apostolic see. I beseech and implore your holiness to succour me in my 
appeal to your fair and righteous tribunal. Bid me hasten to you, and prove to you that my teaching follows 
the footprints of the apostles. I have in my possession what I wrote twenty years ago; what I wrote eighteen, 

fifteen, twelve, years ago; against Arians and Eunomians, against Jews and pagans; against the magi in 
Persia; on divine Providence; on theology; and on the divine incarnation. By God's grace I have interpreted 
the writings of the apostles and the oracles of the prophets. From these it is not difficult to ascertain whether I 
have adhered to the right rule of faith, or have swerved from its straight course. Do not, I implore you, spurn 
my prayer; regard, I implore you, the insults piled after all my labours on my poor grey head. 
Above all, I implore you to tell me whether I ought to put up with this unrighteous deposition or not; for I await 
your decision. If you bid me abide by the sentence of condemnation, I abide; and henceforth I will trouble no 
man, and will wait for the righteous tribunal of our God and Saviour. God is my witness, my lord, that I care 
not for honour and glory. I care only for the scandal that has been caused, in that many of the simpler folk, 
and especially those whom I have rescued from various heresies, cleaving to the authority of my judges 
and quite unable to understand the exact truth of the doctrine, will perhaps suppose me guilty of heresy. 
All the people of the East know that during all the time of my episcopate I have not acquired a house, not a 
piece of ground, not an obol, not a tomb, but of my own accord have embraced poverty, after distributing, at 
the death of my parents, the whole of the property which I inherited from them. 

Above all I implore you, O holy sir, beloved of God, to grant me the help of your prayers. I have told you this 
by the reverend and godly presbyters Hypatius and Abramius chorepiscopi(l) and by Alypius exarch(2) of 
our monks. I would hasten to you myself were I not kept back by the chains of the imperial order, which 
imprison me as they do others. Treat my messengers, I beseech you, as a father might his sons; give them 
kindly and unbiassed audience; deign to grant your protection to my old age, (3) slandered as it is and 
attacked in vain. Above all, regard, to the utmost of your power, the faith conspired against; preserve for the 
churches the inheritance of their fathers unimpaired. So will your holiness receive the recompense due for 
such deeds from the great Giver of all good gifts. (1) 

CXIII. (a). (2) From Pope Leo to Theodoret. 

To our much beloved brother Theodoretus, bishop, Leo, bishop. 

CXIV.(3)To Andiberis. 

The reverend presbyter Peter is distinguished not only by his priestly rank, but also by his wise practice in 
medicine. During his long residence with us he has won all hearts by his conciliatory manners. On learning 
of my departure he has now determined to leave Cyrus; I therefore commend him to your excellency, and 
hope that,, fully capable as he is of doing good service to the city,-for when he lived at Alexandria he 
practised the same profession, -he will meet with kindness at your hands. 

CXV. To Apella. 

When I undertook the direction of the see of Cyrus, I procured for it from all directions men who practised 
necessary arts, and besides this induced skilful physicians to live there. Of these one is the reverend 
presbyter Peter, who practises his profession with wisdom, and adorns it by his character. On my departure, 
several have left the city and Peter also has determined to leave. Under these circumstances I beseech 
your excellency to give him your kind care. He is well able to attend the sick and to wage war against their 
ailments. 

CXVI.(4) To the presbyter Re natus. 

We have heard of the warm and righteous zeal of your holiness, and the just and lawful boldness of speech 
which you employed in condemning the audacious proceedings at Ephesus. Nor is this known to us alone, 
but the fame of your orthodoxy has gone out into all lands, and all men are celebrating your righteousness, 
your zeal, your boldness, and your denunciation of my unfair treatment. And your holiness took this course 
after seeing one massacre. If you had seen the others which took place after your departure you would 
perhaps have emulated the fervour of the famous Phinehas.(l) I am one of those who was subsequently 
condemned, being forbidden by the imperial order to attend the council, and sentenced in my absence. (2) 
Six and twenty years have I been a bishop; innumerable labours have I undergone; I have struggled hard 
for the truth; I have freed tens of thousands of heretics from their errors and brought them to the Saviour; and 
now they have stripped me of my priesthood; they are exiling me from the city. For my old age, for my hairs 
grown gray in the truth, they have no respect. Wherefore, I beseech your sanctity, persuade the very sacred 
and holy archbishop(3) to bid me hasten to your council. For that holy see has precedence over all 
churches in the world, for many reasons; and above all for this, that it is free from all taint of heresy, and that 
no bishop of heterodox opinion has ever sat upon its throne, but it has kept the grace of the apostles 

undefiled.(4) Confident in your justice I shall accept your decisions, whatever they may be, and shall claim to 
be judged by my writings. More than thirty books have I written against Arius and Eunomius, against 
Marcion, against Macedonius, against the heathen and against Jews; I have interpreted the holy Scriptures, 
and any one who likes may easily learn that I have followed in the steps of the apostles, proclaiming the 
one Son, one Father, and one Holy Ghost; one Godhead of the Trinity, one sovereignty, one power, eternity, 
immutability, impassibility, one will;(3) that the Godhead of the Lord Jesus Christ was perfect, perfect the 
manhood taken for our salvation and for our sakes delivered unto death. I do not know one Son of man and 
another Son of God, but one and the same, Son of God and God begotten of God, and Son of man, through 
the form of the servant, of the seed of Abraham and David. These and like doctrines I continue to teach; 
these also I have found in the writings of the most holy and sacred lord archbishop Leo, and I praise the 
Lord of all that I agree with his apostolic doctrines. Receive, I beseech you, my supplication, and do not 
overlook the wrongs under which I suffer. On this account I have sent to your holiness the godly presbyters 
Hypatius and Abramius, chorepiscopi, and Alypius exarch of our monks, adorned as they are by good 
lives, and able by word of mouth to give you exact information as to the affairs of my insignificant self. 

CXVII. To the bishop Florentius.(l) 

Truly the grace of our God and Saviour has not yet abandoned the human race, but has left us a seed in 
your holiness "lest we should become as Sodom, and be made like unto Gomorrah. "(2) This seed suffers 
us not altogether to faint, but charges us to wait for the passing away of the dire storm; this renders us 
hopeful. 

We have therefore sent to your holiness, the very godly presbyters Hypatius and Abramius, chorepiscopi, 
and Alypius, exarch of our monks, that you may put an end to the disaster which has befallen the churches of 
the East; that in the first place you may confirm the faith handed down to us from the first by the holy Apostles, 
may proscribe the heresy that has started up, and openly convict the men who have the hardihood to 
debase the preaching of the OEconomy;(3) and secondly may fight as champion of them who are being 
attacked for the truth's sake. For it is in the cause of the apostolic Faith, most holy, that we have undergone 
that unrighteous massacre, because we refused to abandon the truth of the Gospel doctrines. Now it 
behoves your holiness not to overlook the unjust persecution of men of like mind with yourself, but by your 
just help to put a stop to injustice, and teach the assailants of the truth that men who strive to act 
unscrupulously at their own good pleasure cannot be allowed to work out their ends. 

CXVIII. To the Archdeacon of Rome.(1) 

A terrible storm has attacked our churches, but the adherents of the apostolic faith have in your holiness a 
safe and quiet haven. Not only do you champion the cause of the doctrines of the Gospel, but you utterly 
detest the wrong done to me. I was living far away at a distance of thirty-five days' journey, when I was 
condemned at their good pleasure by those most righteous judges. Teaching which has obtained in the 
churches from the coming of God our Saviour till this day they have abandoned. They have introduced a 
novel and bastard doctrine, diametrically contrary to the tradition of the apostles, and are openly at war with 
them that hold to the ancient instruction. Deign, then, most godly sir, to kindle the zeal of the very sacred and 
holy archbishop, that the churches of the East too may enjoy your kindly care. Above all fight in behalf of the 
faith delivered from the beginning by the holy apostles; preserve the heritage of our fathers unimpaired, and 
scatter the mist that oppresses us. Give us instead of moonless night clear sunshine, and condemn the 
wickedness of the massacre unrighteously wrought against us. It is becoming to your holiness to add yet 
this act of zeal to your other good deeds. 

CXIX. To Anatolius the patrician. (2) 

Your excellency has been fully informed as to the acts of the most righteous judges at Ephesus, for their 
sound has gone out into all lands and their most just judgment to the ends of the wo rid. (3) What church has 
not felt the storm that has been raised by it? The one side wronged, the other were wronged, but they who 
neither suffered nor did the wrong share the distress of the wronged, and lament over them that so savagely 
and against all laws human and divine massacred their own members. Even house breakers caught in the 
very act are first tried and then punished by their judges; even murderers, violators of sepulchres, and 
adulterers, are first haled before the bench, and their accusers ordered to make their indictment, and the 
motive of the witnesses is tested to see that they are not giving evidence to curry favour with the prosecutors 
or are prejudiced against the defendants and after this they are bidden to make their defence to the 
charges brought against them. This is done twice, thrice; sometimes even four times; and then, and not till 
then, after the truth has been sought in the words of both accuser and accused, the sentence is given. As to 

how these men judged in the case of the rest I will say nothing, lest I may seem a meddler in what does not 
concern me. I am forced to speak on behalf of myself alone, for the unrighteous deed of violence compels 
me. The imperial order kept me at home, and prevented me from travelling beyond the bounds of the city 
placed under my pastoral care. The decision of the synod went against me, and a man was condemned 
who was five and thirty days' journey away. 

Now the God of all said to the patriarch Abraham about Sodom and Gomorrah: "Because the cry of Sodom 
and Gomorrah is very great and because their sin is very grievous; I will go down now and see whether they 
have done altogether according to the cry of it which is come unto me; and if not, I will know."(1) He knew 
quite well the wickedness of those men, and nevertheless He said, "I will go down and see," so teaching us 
to wait for the proof of facts. But these men never summoned me to trial, they never heard the sound of my 
voice, they refused to hear from me a statement of my opinions, and handed me over, as a victim to be 
slaughtered, to the rage of the enemies of the truth. 

I, however, welcome my rest, and especially so at the present time, when the apostolic decrees have been 
by many destroyed, and the new heresy strengthened. But lest any one who does not know me should 
believe that the slanders uttered against me are true, and should be scandalized at the idea of my holding 
opinions other than those of the gospel, I implore your excellency to ask as a favour from the victorious 
sovereign that I may go to the West, and there plead my cause before the very godly and holy bishops; and 
if I be found transgressing in the least degree the rule of the faith, that I may be plunged into the midst of the 
deep sea. If he will not grant you this request, let him at least command me to inhabit my monastery, (2) which 
is a hundred and twenty miles away from Cyrus, seventy-five from Antioch. and lies three miles away from 
Apamea. 

Of these petitions, if possible, I ask the former; if not at least I implore that, through your excellency's 
interposition, the second may be granted me. I shall ever carry the memory of your kindness in my heart 
and on my lips, supplicating the Lord of hosts to requite your excellency as well with present as with future 
blessings. I am compelled to write to you in these terms because I have heard that certain persons are 
endeavouring to compass my removal from this place. 

CXX. To Lupicius.(l) 

Even the enemies of the truth must, I think, be indignant at the injustice and illegality of the violence done us. 
It is only reasonable that the nurslings of the truth, at whose head stands your excellency, should be still 
more distressed at this new and surprising tragedy. It is only right that those who are the more grieved 
should show the more earnestness and zeal to counteract the deeds impiously and illegally done; and 
restore to its previous concord the Church's body now in peril of being torn asunder. Wherefore I beseech 
your excellency to reckon the present crisis an opportunity for spiritual reciprocity; to give on your side 
earnestness on behalf of the truth, and to receive from our generous Master alike His kindly care in this 
present life and in the life to come the kingdom of heaven. 

LETTERS OF THE BLESSED THEODORET, BISHOP OF 
CYRUS, LETTERS CXXI TO CL 

CXXI. To Anatolius the patrician. (2) 

The Lord who overlooks and governs all things has shewn both the apostolic truth of my doctrines, and the 
falsehood of the slander laid at my door. For the writings sent from the right godly and holy lord Leo, 
archbishop of Great Rome, to Flavianus of holy memory and to the rest assembled at Ephesus, are entirely 
in harmony with what I myself have written and have always preached in church. So soon therefore as I had 
read them, I praised the loving-kindness of the Lord, in that He had not wholly forsaken the churches, but 
had protected the spark of orthodoxy; or-shall I not rather say?-not a spark, but a very great torch, such as 
might enkindle and enlighten the world; for he has truly, in his writings, observed the apostolic stamp, and in 
them we have found at once what has been delivered by the holy and blessed prophets and apostles, and 
their successors in the preaching of the Gospel, and moreover the holy Fathers assembled at Nicaea. By 
these I confess that I abide, and indict all who hold other doctrines as guilty of impiety. Side by side with 
these writings of mine I have set one of the letters sent by him to Ephesus, to the end that when your 
excellency reads them you may remember the words which I have often spoken in church, may recognise 
the harmony of the doctrines, and may bate the utterers of the lie as well as those who have set up their new 
heresy in opposition to the doctrines of the Apostle. 

CXXII.(1) To Uranius(2) bishop of Emesa. 

I have been greatly delighted that we who correspond in character should have corresponded by letter. But 
I do not quite see what you mean by saying "Are not these my words?" If it were said only for the sake of 
salutation, I am not annoyed at it; but if it is intended to remind me of the advice which recommended 
silence, and of the so-called oeconomy,(3) I am very much obliged, but I do not accept the suggestion. For 
the divine Apostle charges us to take quite the opposite course. "Be instant in season and out of 
season. "(4) And the Lord says to this very spokesman, "Be not afraid, but speak"(5) and to Isaiah, "Cry 
aloud, spare not"(8) and to Moses "Go down, charge the people"(7) and to Ezekiel "I have made thee a 
watchman unto the house of Israel," and it shall be "if thou warn not the wicked, "(8) and the like: for I think it 
needless to write at length to one who knows. Not only therefore are we not distressed at having spoken 
freely, but we even rejoice and are glad, and laud Him who has thought us worthy of these sufferings; aye 
and call on my friends to encounter the same perils. 

If they know that we do not keep the apostolic rule of the faith, but swerve to the right hand or the left, let them 
hate us; let them join the opposite side; let them be ranked with them that are at war with us. But if they bear 
witness to our holding the right teaching of the gospel message, we hail them with the cry, "Do you too 'stand 
having your loins girt about with truth, ... and your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace, '"(1) 
and so on, for it is said that virtue comprises not only temperance, righteousness, and prudence, but also 
courage, and that by means of courage the rest of its component parts are preserved. For righteousness 
needs the alliance of courage in its war against wrong; temperance vanquishes intemperance by the aid of 
courage. And for this reason the God of all said to the prophet "The just shall live by his faith, and if any man 
draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. "(2) Shrinking he calls cowardice. Hold fast then, my dear 
friend, to the apostolic doctrines, for "He that shall come will come, and will not tarry, "(3) and "He shall 
render to every man according to his deeds, "(4) for "the fashion of this world passeth away, "(5) and the truth 
shall be made manifest. 

CXXIM.Tothe same. 

Your letter was a long one, and a pleasant one, and it shews how warm and genuine is your affection. So 
delighted am I with it that I am not at all sorry for having erroneously conjectured the meaning of the 
beginning of your former one. For my misapprehension of the intention of your letter has disclosed your 
brotherly love, made plain the sincerity of your faith, and shewn your zeal for the true religion. We have 
indeed shared between us the words and the trials of the prophet; your holiness has used the words; I am 
buffeted by the hurricane and billows, and against the towers of the ship I exclaim in his words "They that 
observe lying vanities forsake their own mercy. "(6) Perhaps He who is Jonah's Lord and mine will grant that 

I too may rise and be released from the monster. But if the surge continue to boil I trust that even thus I shall 
enjoy the divine protection, and learn by my own experience how His strength is "made perfect in 
weakness, "(7) for He has measured the peril by my infirmity. The divine prophet whom I have mentioned 
was flung into the sea by his shipmates one and all, but I am granted the consolation of your holiness, and of 
other godly men. For them and for your godliness I pray that the blessing bestowed upon the excellent 
Onesiphorus may be yours, for you have not blushed at my gibes; nay rather you have shared in my 
afflictions for the faith's sake. 

And one thing which I wish you to know is that, though other godly bishops have sent me their bounty, I have 
declined to receive it;— not from any want of respect to the senders, God forbid;-but because hitherto food 
convenient for me has been provided by Him Who gives it even to the ravens without stint. In the case of 
your reverence I have acted differently, for really the warmth of your affection has overcome what has 
hitherto been my fixed principle. For be well assured, thy godly friend, that ever since friendship grew up 
between us the fire of our love has been kindled to greater heat. 

CXXIV. To the learned Maranas.(1) 

I too am distressed at the calamities of the Church, and wail over the storm that is raging; for myself I am 
glad to be quit of agitation, and to be enjoying a calm which is delightful to me. As to the men whom your 
learning states to be still carrying on their iniquities, the day is not far distant when they will pay the penalty of 
their present rash lawlessness. All things are governed by the Lord of all with weight and rule, and whenever 
any fall away into unbounded iniquity His long suffering comes to an end, and He then acts as Judge and 
appoints punishment. Foreseeing this I pray that they may cease from their license that I may not be 
compelled to weep once more for them as I behold them undergoing chastisement. 
Your excellency I can never forget, and I beg our common Master to fill your house with blessing. 

CXXV. To Aphthonius, Theodoritus, Nonnus, Scylacius, Apthonius, Joannes, Magistrates of 
the Zeugmatensis. 

I know the strength and stability of your faith, and have been filled with the greatest possible delight, for, 
since we worshippers of the eternal Trinity constitute one body, it is only natural that together with the 
members that are sound the rest of the members should rejoice. So says the divine Apostle; "Whether one 
member be honoured all the members rejoice with it."(2) I therefore rejoice with you in your struggles on 
behalf of the apostolic doctrines and your following of the famous Naboth in more excellent things. Naboth 
for his vineyard's sake suffered most unrighteous slaughter, because he would not give up the heritage of 
his fathers. You are fighting not for vineyards, but for divine doctrines, and reject this new-fangled and 
spurious heresy as blackening the brightness of the teaching of the gospel; you do not suffer the number of 
the blessed Trinity to be diminished or increased. For it is diminished by those who ascribe the passion of 
the only begotten to the Godhead; it is increased by those who have the audacity to introduce a second 
son. You believe in one only begotten, as you do in one Father and in one Holy Ghost. In the only begotten 
made flesh you behold the assumed nature which He took from us and offered on our behalf. The denial of 
this nature puts our salvation far from us; for if the Godhead of the only begotten is impassible, as the nature 
of the Trinity is impassible, and we refuse to acknowledge that which is by nature adapted to suffer, then the 
preaching of a passion which never happened is idle and vain. For if that which suffers has no existence 
how could there be a passion? We declare that the divine nature is impassible;-a doctrine confessed by 
our opponents as well as by ourselves. How then could there be a passion when there is no subject 
capable of suffering? The great mystery of the oeconomy will appear an appearance, a mere seeming 
instead of the reality. This is the fable started by Valentinus, Bardesanes, Marcion and Manes. But the 
teaching handed down to the churches from the beginning recognises, even after the incarnation, one Son, 
our Lord Jesus Christ, and confesses the same to be everlasting God, and man made at the end of days; 
made man not by the mutation of the Godhead but by the assumption of the manhood. For suppose the 
divine nature to have undergone mutation into the human nature, then it did not remain what it was; and if it is 
not what it was, they who have these objects of worship are false in calling Him God. We, on the contrary, 
recognise the only begotten Son of God to be immutable as God, and Son of the very God. For we have 
learnt from the divine Scripture that being in the form of God He took the form of the servant;(1) and took on 
Him the seed of Abraham, not was changed into Abraham's seed; and shared just as we do both in flesh 
and blood and in a soul immortal and immaculate. Preserving these for our sinful bodies He offered His 
sinless body and for our souls His soul free from all stain. It is for this reason that we have the hope of the 
common resurrection for the race will assuredly share with its first fruits, and as we have shared with Adam in 
his death, so too with Christ our Saviour shall we be sharers in His life. This the divine Apostle has plainly 
taught us, for "now" he says "is Christ risen from the dead and become the first fruits of them that slept. For 

since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead for as in Adam all die, even so in 
Christ shall all be made alive. "(1) 

I write thus not to inform you but to remind you. I have tried to be brief, but I fear I have transgressed the limits 
of a letter. I was however urged to write by the very reverend and godly presbyter and archimandrite 
Mecimas, who, in obedience to the law of love, has undertaken so long a journey, told us of your 
excellency's zeal, and begged us to inflame it by a letter. I have therefore granted his supplication, and 
written my letter, and I implore the Lord of all to keep you safe in the faith and make stronger than him who 
sifts us.(2) 

CXXVI. To the Bishop Sabinianus.(3) 

I praised your holiness on your quitting the envied see. Once it was venerable; now it is ridiculous, for we 
have made it a thing to be bought and sold. I was astounded to hear of your having appealed to the men 
who ejected you. You ought to have done just the contrary, and, on being invited to grasp the tiller, to have 
declined to do so, on the ground that your shipmates had become your foes. Are you not aware, most godly 
sir, what our Saviour, through His sacred apostles, taught us to preach? Do you not know what the heirs of 
the apostolic doctrines have just now laid down as objects of worship? For who of the old teachers from the 
time when the message was first preached down to the period of the darkness that now obtains, ever 
listened to any one preaching one nature of flesh and Godhead or dared at any time to call the nature of the 
only begotten passible? These doctrines in our day are by some men openly and boldly uttered, while 
among others their utterance is overlooked, and by silence men become participators in the blasphemy. 
What then, may well be asked, is the proper course to be taken by, those who abominate such doctrines? 
They have, I should reply, two alternatives before them; they may either come to close quarters, and prove 
the spuriousness of the doctrines, or they may decline communion with their opponents as openly impious. 
I, indeed, have received the wrong done me as a divine blessing. I do not mean that I have thanked them 
that have wronged me; how could I thank fratricides, and men who have become followers of Cain? 
But I praise my Master for thinking me worthy of the lot of them that suffer wrong, for separating me from 
wrong-doers and blasphemers, and for giving me my most delightful rest. 

CXXVII. To Jobius, presbyter and archimandrite.(l) 

The patriarch Abraham won a victory in his old age. (2) The great Moses was now an old man when, so long 
as he stretched out his hands in prayer, he vanquished Amalek.(3) The divine Samuel(4) was an old man 
when he put the aliens to flight. These are emulated by your venerable old age. In our wars for true religion's 
sake you are playing the man, and championing the cause of the gospel doctrines, and putting young men 
in the shade by the vigour of your spirit. 

I rejoice to hear it, and am glad, and long to embrace your right venerable gray hairs. This I cannot do, for 
your reverence is kept at home by your years, and I am kept in durance here by the imperial decree. But I 
cheat my love by this letter, and give your piety this most loving embrace. I call upon you in your prayers to 
help the churches now whelmed in the storm, and to win for me the divine support, assailed as I am for the 
sake of the doctrines of the gospel, and standing sorely in need of help from above. 

CXXVIII. To Candidus, presbyterand archimandrite. (5) 

I am afraid that the vigour of your godly soul has been overcome by old age, and that you do not keep your 
hands stretched out as usual. So Amalek is trying to win. May there be some to succour your weakness, as 
once of old Ur and Aaron supported the hands of the law-giver, that you may overthrow Amalek and save 
Israel. These are days when we specially need more earnest prayers, when Gentiles and Jews and every 
heresy are at peace, and the Church alone is beaten by the storm and surrounded by the boisterous 
billows. 

We indeed specially need the aid of your prayers, for those whom we reckoned to be fighting on our side 
are fighting on that of our foes. 

CXXIX. To Magnus Antoninus the presbyter.(l) 

Sailors at night are cheered by the sight of the harbour lights, and so are they who are in peril for the sake of 
the apostolic faith by the zeal of them that share the faith. We have great comfort in what we hear of your 
godliness's efforts on behalf of the divine doctrines, for this mind has been given you by the Giver of all 
good gifts and for the safe keeping of these doctrines you undergo every toil. Now I , comforted by your zeal, 
make an insignificant return, calling on you to persevere in your divine labours, to despise your adversaries 

as an easy prey, (for what is weaker than they who are destitute of the truth?) and to trust in Him who said "I 
will not fail thee nor forsake thee, "(2) and "Lo I am with you alway even unto the end of the world. Help me 
too with your prayers that I may confidently say "The Lord is on my side; I will not fear: what can man do unto 
me?"(4) 

CXXX. To Bishop Timotheus.(5) 

Not without purpose does the supreme Ruler allow the spirits that are against us to agitate the waves of 
impiety. He does so that He may try the courage of the sailors, and, while He exhibits some men's 
manliness, convicts others of cowardice, stripping the mask from the faces of some who put on an 
appearance of piety, and proclaiming others as foremost fighters in the ranks of the truth. We have seen an 
instance of this in the present time. The storm rose high; some shewed their secret impiety; some 
abandoned the truth which they were holding, went over to the phalanx of our foes, and now, with them, are 
smiting the very men whom they used to call their chiefs. The witnesses of these things detest the enemy 
and pity the deserters, but are afraid to give aid to the victims of the attack upon the apostolic doctrines. 
Nay, suppose the traitors to urge them with greater insistency, they will perhaps themselves pass over to 
the side of the assailants, will give no quarter to their fellow-believers, but will drive against them their barbs 
side by side with the very men whom they accuse. They will act thus though they have been taught by the 
divine Scripture that a wrong done to one's neighbour incurs punishment, while the suffering of injustice 
entails great and lasting rewards. 

Your own piety, your zeal for the faith, and your good will to myself, have been proved by this agitation. 
Twice you have written me a letter in contempt of all that might deter you, and have thus shewn your 
brotherly affection. You have also indicated the conflict you are sustaining on behalf of the apostolic 
doctrines. You ask me to tell you by letter what we ought to think and preach concerning the passion of 
salvation. I have received your request with delight, and, not indeed to give you information but only to 
remind one who is beloved of God, will proceed to tell you what I have learnt from the divine Scripture and 
from the Fathers who have interpreted it. 

Know then, most godly sir, that before all things it is necessary to observe the distinction of terms, and, in 
addition to this, the cause of the divine incarnation. Once let these be made clear, and there will be no 
ambiguity left about the passion. We will therefore first, to those who endeavour to contradict us, put this 
enquiry. Which of the names given to the only begotten Son of God are anterior to the incarnation, and which 
posterior, or rather, connected with the operation of the economy? They will reply that the terms anterior are, 
"God the Word," "only begotten Son," "Almighty," and "Lord of all creation"; and that the names "Jesus 
Christ" belong to the incarnation. For, after the incarnation, God the Word, the only begotten Son of God is 
called Jesus Christ; for "Behold" He says "unto you is born this day Christ the Lord"(1) and because others 
had been called christs, priests, kings, and prophets, lest any one should suppose Him to be like unto them, 
the angels conjoined the title Lord with that of Christ, in order to prove the supreme dignity of Him that was 
born. And, again, Gabriel says to the blessed Virgin, "Behold thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring 
forth a son and shalt call His name Jesus"(1) "for He shall save His people from their sins. "(2) Before the 
incarnation, however, He was never called either Christ or Jesus. For truly the divine Prophets, in their 
predictions of things to come, used the words, just as they prophesied about the birth, the cross, and the 
passion, when the events had not yet come to pass. Nevertheless, even after the incarnation He is called 
God the Word, Lord, Almighty, only begotten Son, Maker, and Creator. For He was not made man by 
mutation, but, remaining just what He was, assumed what we are, for "Being in the form of God," to use the 
words of the divine Apostle "He took the form of a servant."(3) On this account, therefore, even after the 
incarnation, He is called also by the titles which are anterior to the incarnation, since His nature is invariable 
and immutable. But when relating the passion the divine Scripture nowhere uses the term God, since that is 
the name of the absolute nature. No one on bearing the words "In the beginning was the Word and the Word 
was with God, and the Word was God"(4) and similar expressions, would suppose that the flesh existed 
before the ages, or is of one substance with the God of the universe, or was Creator of the world. Every one 
knows that these terms are proper to the Godhead. Nor would any one on reading the genealogy of St. 
Matthew suppose that David and Abraham according to nature were forefathers of God, for it is the 
assumed nature which is derived from them. 

Since then these points are plain and indubitable even among extreme heretics, and we acknowledge both 
the nature which is before the ages, and that which is of recent time, so are we bound to recognise at once 
the passibility of the flesh, and the impassibility of the Godhead, not dividing the union nor separating the 
only begotten into two persons, but contemplating the properties of the natures in the one Son. In the case of 
soul and body, which are of natures contemporary and naturally united, we are accustomed to make this 
distinction, describing the soul as simple, reasonable, and immortal, but the body as complex, passible, 
and mortal. We do not divide the union, nor cut one man in two. Far rather, then, in the case of the Godhead, 

begotten of the Father before the ages, and of the manhood assumed of David's seed, is it becoming to 
adopt a similar course, and distinctly to recognise the everlasting, eternal, simple, uncircumscribed, 
immortal, and invariable character of the one nature, and the recent, complex, circumscribed, and fluctuating 
nature of the other. We acknowledge the flesh to be now immortal and incorruptible, although before the 
resurrection it was susceptible of death and of passion; for how otherwise was it nailed to the tree, and 
committed to the tomb? And though we recognise the distinction of the natures, we are bound to worship one 
Son, and to acknowledge the same as Son of God and Son of man, form of God, and form of a servant, Son 
of David, and Lord of David, seed of Abraham, and creator of Abraham. The union causes the names to be 
common, but the community of names does not confound the natures. With them that are right-minded some 
names are plainly appropriate as to God, and others as to man; and in this way both the passible and the 
impassible are properly used of the Lord Christ, for in His humanity He suffered, while as God He remained 
impassible. If, according to the argument of the impious, it was in the Godhead that He suffered, then, I 
apprehend, the assumption of the flesh, was supererogatory; for suppose the divine nature to have been 
capable of undergoing passion, then He did not need the passible manhood. But grant that, as even their 
own argument contends, the Godhead was impassible, and the passion was real, let them beware of 
denying that which suffered, lest they deny with it the reality of the passion; for if that which suffers does not 
exist, then the passion is unreal. Now for any one who likes to open the quaternion(l) of the sacred 
evangelists, it is easy to perceive that the divine Scripture distinctly proclaims the passion of the body, and 
to learn from them how Joseph of Arimathaea came to Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus; how Pilate 
ordered the body of Jesus to be delivered, how Joseph took down the body of Jesus from the tree and 
wrapped the body of Jesus in the linen cloth, and laid it in the new tomb. All this is described by the four 
evangelists with frequent mention of the body. But if our opponents adduce the words of the angel to Mary 
and her companions, "Come where the Lord lay,"(1) let them be referred to the passage in the Acts which 
states that devout men "carried Stephen to his burial"(2) and observe that it was not the soul, but the body, of 
the victorious Stephen, to which the customary rites were paid. And to this very day, when we approach the 
shrines of the victorious martyrs, we commonly enquire what is the name of him who is buried in the grave, 
and those who are acquainted with the facts reply peradventure "Julian the martyr," or "Romanus," or, 
"Timotheus."(3) 

Very often it is not entire bodies that are buried, but only very small remains, yet nevertheless we speak of 
the body by the name that belongs to the whole man. It was in this sense that the angel called the body of 
the Lord, "Lord," because it was the body of the Lord of the universe. Moreover the Lord Himself promised 
to give on behalf of the life of the world, not His invisible nature, but His body. "For," He says, "the bread that 
I will give is my flesh which I will give for the life of the world, "(4) and when He took the symbol of divine 
mysteries, He said, "This is my body which is given for you. "(5) Or according to the version of the Apostle, 
"broken. "(6) In no place where He spoke of the passion did He mention the impossible Godhead. 
It is therefore before all things necessary that the question should be put to those who are endeavouring to 
contradict us whether they confess that the perfect manhood was assumed by God the Word, and assert the 
union to have been made without confusion. Once let these points be admitted, and the rest will follow in due 
course, and the passion will be attributed to the passible nature. I have now summed up these heads and 
have exceeded the limits of my letter. I have sent also what I lately wrote at the suggestion of a very godly 
and holy man of God, the lord(7) in the form of a concise instruction designed to teach the truth of the 
apostolic doctrines. Should I find a good copyist, I will also send your holiness what I have written in the form 
of a dialogue, (8) extending the argument, and strengthening my positions, by the teaching of the Fathers. I 
have moreover now sent a few statements of the ancient teachers, sufficient to shew the drift of their 
instruction. Give me in return, most godly sir, the succour of your prayers, that I may pass through the terrible 
tempest and reach the quiet haven of the Saviour. 

CXXXI. To Longinus, Archimandrite of Doliche.(1) 

You have shewn alike your zeal for the true religion, and your love for your neighbour, both of which are at 
the present time clearly connected, for it is for the sake of the apostolic decrees that I am being attacked, 
because I refuse to give up the heritage of my fathers, and prefer to undergo any suffering to looking lightly 
on the robbery of one tittle from the faith of the Gospel. You have accepted fellowship in my sufferings, not 
only by comforting me by means of your letter, but further by sending to me the very honourable and pious 
Matthew and Isaac. You shall hear, I am well assured, from the lips of the righteous Lord, "I was in prison, 
and ye visited me. "(2) We are small and of no account, and burdened by a great load of sins, but the Lord is 
bountiful and generous. He remembers the small rather than the great, and says, "Inasmuch as ye have 
done it unto one of the least of these"(3) "which believe in me"(4) "ye have done it unto me. "(5) I pray you in 
that yon are conspicuous for right doctrine, and shine by worthiness of life, and therefore have great 
boldness before God, help me in your prayers, that I may be able "to stand," to use the words of the 

Apostle, (6) "against the wiles of error," escape the sins of the destroyer, and stand, though with little 
boldness, in the day of the appearing before the righteous Judge. 

CXXXII. To Ibas, bishop of Edessa.(7) 

The Lord has taught them that suffer wrong not to be east down, but to rejoice, and to derive consolation 
from the examples of old. For from the period of the first men down to our own days we find instances of men 
who have been zealous in the worship of the God of all, and vet have been wronged by those with whom 
their lot was cast, and have fallen into many and grievous troubles. Of these I would have gone through the 
entire list, had I not been writing to one of accurate knowledge of the divine Scriptures. But since you, O 
beloved of God, have been nurtured from your boyhood in tim divine oracles, I have thought it needless so 
to do. I only ask you to cast your eyes on them, and to look on all the kind-hearted clergy that have done 
wrong, with sorrow; on all that look lightly on wrong doing, with pity; and to be sorrowful for the disquiet of the 
Church. I ask you to rejoice and be glad that I am a sharer in suffering for the sake of true religion, and to 
praise without ceasing Him who has imposed this lot on me. As for honour and comfort and the dignity of 
sees and wretched reputation, let us yield them to the murderers. (1) 

Let us cleave only to the doctrines of the gospel, and with them, if need be, endure any extremity of pain, 
and choose honourable penury rather than wealth with its many cares. 

I am not writing ill these terms in order to give you exhortation, for I know the courage of your holiness in 
trouble. My object is to make my own mind known to your piety, and to inform you that you have on your side 
comrades who are gladly incurring peril for the truth's sake. I have been anxious for some time to write thus 
to you, but I have been unable to find anyone to convey my letter. Now I have met with the very honourable 
and pious presbyter Ozeas, a man who is at once engaged in the battle for truth and attached to your piety. 
So I write and salute your holiness, and beg you to give me both the prop of your prayers and the comfort of 
a letter from you. 

CXXXIII. To John, bishop of Germanicia.(2) 

I have always known, sir, that you are not unmindful of our friendship. And it has ever been my wish and 
prayer that your piety should give heed to exact truth, and shun the communion of traitors to true religion, 
ascribing to the Supreme Ruler His care on our behalf. For indeed, while I have been silent and inactive, He 
has put an end to our very keen and terrible sufferings, and has replaced the dire tempest by this bright 
calm. And now that the loving-kindness of the Lord has granted us this blessing, I find the quiet of my retreat 
indeed delightful, for I feel the necessity of persuading those who have been led away by the slanders 
launched against me, and of both convincing them of the truth of the teaching of the gospels, and refuting the 
attack of falsehood. When once this refutation is finished, and the victory of the truth is secured, it is my 
purpose to quit public life, and withdraw to the rest that I so greatly long for. As to the foes of the truth I cry with 
the prophet, "Their memorial is perished with a noise, but the Lord shall endure for ever."(1) As to ourselves, 
I sing with the Psalmist, "He sent from above, He took me, He drew me out of many waters, He delivered me 
from my strong enemy. "(2) 

This letter is in reply to two received from your holiness, one conveyed by Anastasius, the presbyter of 
Beroea, and one by the standard-bearer Theodotus. In your last letter you mention another, but this has not 
been delivered. As to my journey thither I can say nothing till I know what orders are given concerning me by 
the most pious emperor. His letter has not yet arrived. 

CXXXIV. To Theoctistus, Bishop of Beroea. (3) 

Our Saviour, Lawgiver, and Lord, was once asked, "What is the first commandment?" His reply was "Thou 
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind." And He added "This 
is the first commandment: and the second is like unto it, Thou shall love the neighbour as thyself." Then He 
said further "On these two commandments bang all the law and tim prophets. "(4) 
He then who keeps these, according to the definition of the Lord, plainly fulfils the Law; and he who 
transgresses them is guilty of transgressing the whole Law. Let us then examine, before the exact and 
righteous tribunal of our conscience, whether we have fulfilled the divine commandments. Now the first is 
kept by him who guards the faith given by God in its integrity, who abominates its assailants as enemies of 
the truth and hates heartily all those who hate the beloved; and the second by him who most highly esteems 
the care of his neighbour and who, not only in prosperity but also in apparent misfortunes, observes the laws 
of friendship. They, on the other hand, who look after their own safety, as they suppose, who on its account 
make little of the laws of friendship and take no heed of their friends when assaulted and attacked, are 
reckoned to belong to the number of the wicked and of them that are without. The Lord of all requires better 

things at the hands of His disciples. "Love" He says "your enemies, for if ye love them which love you, what 
reward have ye? for the sinners and the publicans do this."(1) I, however, have not received even such 
kindness as publicans receive. Publicans, do I say? I have not even received the consolation given to 
murderers and wizards in their dungeons. If every one had imitated this cruelty, nothing else would have 
been left then for me in my life time but to be wasted by want, and, at my death, instead of being committed 
to a tomb, to be made meat(2) for dogs and wild beasts. But I have found support in those who care nought 
for this present life, but await the enjoyment of everlasting blessings, and these furnish me with manifold 
consolation. But the loving Lord "caused judgment to be heard from heaven; the earth feared and was still, 
when God arose to judgment."(3) But the wicked shall perish. (4) The falsehood of the new heresy has been 
proscribed, and the truth of the divine Gospels is publicly proclaimed. I for my part exclaim with the blessed 
David, "Blessed be the Lord God whet only doeth wondrous things, and blessed be His glorious name: and 
let the whole earth be filled with His glory; amen and amen. "(5) 

CXXXV. To Bishop Romulus. (6) 

You have reminded me of the ancient story, and remarked how the King of the Syrians, bethinking him of the 
loving kindness of the kings of Israel, assumed the form of a suppliant and failed not to obtain his petition. 
Remember therefore, sir, the divine wrath. God delivered Ahab to utter destruction for using mercy, and 
delivered his sentence through the mouth of the prophet, saying "Thy life shall go for his life and thy people 
for his people. "(1) We are thus commanded to temper mercy with justice, since not every kind of mercy is 
pleasing to the God of all. The present state of affairs specially requires prudent council; for we are 
contending on behalf of the divine doctrines, wherein we have the hope of our salvation. But herein, too, may 
be seen the great difference between man and man. Some men are verily infected with the common 
impiety; while others, without distinction, advance at one time one doctrine, and at another its opposite. 
Some who know the truth conceal it in the secret chambers of their soul, while they preach impiety with the 
rest; others again who are filled with envy have made their private ill-will an occasion of waging war against 
the truth, and wreak all kinds of mischief against the prophets of the truth. Again, there are who embrace the 
truth of the apostolic doctrines, and yet because they are afraid of the power of the dominant party are too 
cowed to proclaim it, and though they lament at the abundance of our misfortunes, nevertheless side with 
them that set the mighty surge a-rolling. It is in this last category that we place your reverence. We have 
believed you to be sound in the divine doctrines, and think that you keep your affection for me, and are 
borne along with the time for no other reason than your cowardice. Under these circumstances though I am 
not writing to any of the rest, I write to year holiness, and receive your reply. I see your drift and to some 
extent I pardon your pusillanimity. But the loving Lord has now removed all occasions of cowardice, by 
exhibiting the new-fangled impiety, and shewing the plain truth of the gospels. I, even though my mouths 
were as many as my hairs, cannot praise as I ought the loving-kindness of the Lord for compelling my 
strongest opponents openly to preach what has been preached by me. For I have heard that he who shares 
your holiness's roof, when he heard that anathemas had been published in the great cities, ceased to 
imitate the crooked gait of crabs, and, after disputing in a certain assembly about doctrines, walked in the 
straight road. Never must we suit our words to the season, but ever preserve the unbending rule of truth. 

CXXXVI. To Cyrus Magistrianus.(l) 

I was very much distressed to hear of the trouble which had befallen you. How indeed could I fail to suffer, 
making as I do your interest mine, and remembering the apostolic law which bids us not only "rejoice with 
them that do rejoice, but also weep with them that weep"?(2) Suffering itself is able to draw even those that 
are at enmity with one another into sympathy. 

What is so grievous as to lose a wife; one who bore blamelessly the yoke of wedlock, one who made her 
husband's life pleasant, one who shared the care of the family; one who managed the household and 
shared in the direction of everything; one who was ready to suggest whatever might be likely to be of 
service, and to comply with the wishes of her husband? But what sorrow could surpass the committal to the 
tomb of the mother at the same moment as the son whom she bore; a son who had been carefully trained 
and had received a learned education; one who, you hoped, would be the stay of your old age; buried in 
the very spring of his manhood, when the down was just beginning to grow upon his cheeks? Did we only 
look at the character of the calamity, it admits of no consolation. But when we bethink us how our race is 
doomed to die; that against that race the divine fiat has gone forth; that suffering is common, for life is full of 
such woes; we shall bravely bear what has happened, shall repel the assaults of despair, and shall raise 
that wonderful song of praise "The Lord gave and the Lord hath taken away; the Lord hath done what 
seemed to him good; blessed be the name of the Lord. "(3) But we have many more reasons for 
consolation. We have been distinctly taught the hopes of the resurrection, and we look for the time when the 

dead shall live again. We know how the Lord many times called death sleep. If we trust, as in truth we do, the 
Saviour's words we are bound not to mourn those that have fallen asleep, even though their sleep lasts 
somewhat longer than it is wont. We must await the resurrection. We must remember that the Ruler of the 
world in His wisdom, and clearly knowing as He does not the present only but the future also, guides events 
for our good. A wise man who knew all this full well reasons about deaths of this kind and says, "Yea; 
speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding. "(1) 
Let us submit I beg you to the wise Ruler of all; let us submit to His decrees. Whether they be pleasant or 
whether they be grievous, they are good and profitable, they make men wise; for them that endure they 
ordain crowns. 

CXXXVII. To the Archimandrite John. (2) 

The blessed David fell into several errors, which God, who wisely orders all things, has caused to be 
recorded for the good of them that were to come after. But it was not on their account that Absalom, 
parricide, murderer, impious, and altogether vile, started his wild war against his father. The reason of his 
beginning that most unrighteous struggle was because he coveted the sovereignty. The divine David, 
however, when these events were coming to pass, began to remember the wrong that he had done. I too 
am conscious within myself of the guilt of many errors, but I have kept undefiled the dogmatic teaching of the 
Apostles. And they who have trampled upon all laws human and divine, and condemned me in my 
absence, have not sentenced me for what I have done wrong, for my secret deeds are not made manifest to 
them; but they have contrived false witness and calumny against me, or rather in their open attack upon the 
doctrines of the Apostles have proscribed me for my obedience to them. "So the Lord awaked as one out of 
sleep; He smote His enemies in the hinderparts and put them to a perpetual shame. "(3) Counterfeit and 
spurious doctrines tie has scattered to the winds, and has provided for the free preaching of those which He 
has handed down to us in the holy Gospels. To me this suffices for complete delight. I do not even long for a 
city in which I have passed all my time in hard work; all I long for is to see the establishment of the truth of the 
Gospels. And now the Lord has satisfied this longing. I am therefore very glad and happy, and I sing praises 
to our generous Lord, and I invite your reverence to rejoice with the, and, with our praises, to put up the 
earnest prayer that the men who say now one thing and now another and change about to suit the hour, like 
the chameleons who assume the colour of the leaves, may be strengthened by the loving-kindness of the 
Lord, established upon the rocks and, of His mercy, made to pay the highest honour to the truth. 

CXXXVIII. To Anatolius the patrician.(l) 

I have cordially welcomed the rest which has fallen to my lot, and am harvesting its beneficial and pleasant 
results. Our Christ-loving Emperor,"(2) after reaping the empire as fruit of his true piety, has offered as 
first-fruits of his sovereignty to Him that bestowed it, the calm of the storm-tossed churches, the triumph of the 
invaded faith, the victory of the doctrines of the Gospel. To these he has added the righting of the wrong 
done to me. Of a wrong so great and of such a kind who ever heard? What murderer was ever doomed in 
his absence? What violator of wedlock was ever condemned without a hearing? What burglar, 
grave-breaker, wizard, church-robber, or doer of any other unlawful deed, was ever prevented, when eager 
to appeal to the law, and slain when far away by the sentence of his judge? In their cases nothing of the kind 
was ever known. For, by our law, plaintiff and defendant are bidden to stand face to face before the judge, 
while the judge has to wait for the production of plain truth, and then and not till then, either dismiss the 
accused as innocent, or punish him as being reached by the indictment. In my case the course pursued has 
been just the opposite. The emperor's letter forbade me to approach the far-famed synod, and the most 
righteous judges condemned me in my absence, not after fair trial, but after extravagant laudation of the 
documents which were produced to incriminate me. Neither the law of God nor shame of man staved the 
deed of blood. Orders were given by the president, (3) flinging the truth to the winds, and courting the power 
of the hour. He was obeyed by men who think as I do, whose doctrines are my doctrines, and who had 
expressed admiration of me and mine. None the less did that day convict some men of treachery; some of 
cowardice; while to me a ground of confidence was given by my sufferings for the truth's sake. And to me 
our master Christ hath granted the boon "not only of believing on Him but also of suffering for His sake."(1) 
For the greatest of all gifts of grace are sufferings for the Master's sake, and the divine Apostle puts them 
even before great marvels. 

In these boons I too glory, humble and insignificant as I am, and having no other ground of boasting. And I 
beseech your excellency to offer on behalf of my poor self expressions of thanksgiving to the emperor, 
lover of Christ, and to the most pious Augusta, (2) clear to God, instructress of the good, for that she has 
requited our generous Lord with such gifts, and has made her zeal for true religion the Connotation and 
groundwork of bet sway. Besides this, beg their godly majesties to complete the work that has been so well 

marked out, and to summon a council, not, like the last, composed of a turbulent rabble, but-kept quite clear 
of all of these-of men who decide on and highly value divine things, and esteem all human affairs as of less 
account than the truth. If their majesties wish to bring about the ancient peace for the churches, and I am sure 
that they do, beg their pious graces to take part in the proceedings, that their presence may overawe those 
of a contrary mind and the truth may have none to gainsay her, but may herself by her own unaided powers 
examine into the position of affairs, and the character of the apostolic doctrines. 

I make this request to your excellency, not because I long to see Cyrus again, for your lordship knows what 
a solitary town it is, and how I have somehow or other managed to conceal its ugliness by my great 
expenditure on all kinds of buildings, but to the end that what I preach may be shewn to be in agreement with 
apostolic doctrines while the inventions of my opponents are counterfeit and base. Once let this come to 
pass, by God's help be it spoken, and I shall pass the remainder of my days in cheerful contentment, 
wherever the Master may bid me dwell. To you who have been brought up in the true religion, and are 
dowered with the wealth of goodness it is becoming to make this effort, and by your urgent counsel to render 
yet more zealous our most pious emperor and the Christ-loving Augusta, zealous already as they are to 
strengthen their glorious empire by laudable and rightful energy. 

CXXXIX. To Aspar, Consular and Patrician. (1) 

To the other good deeds of your excellency must be added your having acquainted our pious and most 
christian emperor, whom God's grace has appointed for the blessing of his subjects, of the enormous wrong 
done against me, and your having by a righteous edict annulled an edict which was nothing of the kind. 
Supported by divine Providence I have made what they reckoned a punishment a means of good, and I 
have welcomed my rest with delight; but none the less I have been wrongly and illegally treated, though in 
no single point guilty of the errors which the enemies of the truth slanderously laid at my door, but yet made 
to suffer the penalty of the greatest criminals. Nay, my fate has been yet harder than theirs. I was judged 
without a trial; I was doomed in my absence; when forbidden by the emperor's orders to go to Ephesus I 
received the most righteous sentence of my holy judges. All this has now been undone by his most serene 
majesty, through the active interposition of your excellency. I, for my part, feeling that I should be wrong to 
keep silent and not offer yon my thanks, have availed myself of this letter, whereby I beseech your 
excellency to speak in warm terms in my behalf both to the victorious and Christian emperor and to the very 
godly and pious Augusta. On their behalf I implore our good Lord as earnestly as lies in my power to guard 
their empire in security, and to grant that it may be at once a source of loving protection for their subjects, 
and of terror to their foes, and establish honourable peace for all. May your excellency be induced to 
petition them completely to put an end to the agitation of the Church, and order the assembling of the 
council; not, like the last, of men who from their habits of unruliness throw the synod into confusion, but, in 
peace and quiet, of members instructed in divine things, and in the habit of confirming the apostolic decrees 
and rejecting what is spurious and at variance with the truth. And I express this hope to the end that your 
excellency may reap the good which such a course of conduct is likely to produce. 

CXL. To the Master Vincomalus.(l) 

I have been much astonished to learn that your magnificence, though quite unacquainted with me and mine, 
and knowing only the wrong that had been done me, stood up as my advocate, and left no means untried to 
undo the results of the conspiracy against me. But your excellency will assuredly receive recompense from 
our bountiful Lord, for He who promised to give a reward for a little water will doubtless give greater 
recompense to the givers of greater gifts. 

I have indeed endured such sufferings as none, or at least very few, of the ancients have undergone, and 
this not only from my open foes, but, as I apprehend, from my real friends. The former attacked me, the latter 
betrayed me. 

Who in the world ever heard of such a trial? Who ever commanded a criminal to be tried in his absence 
after chaining him up at a distance of more than five and thirty stages? What judge has ever been so 
savage and inhuman as not only to try men, aye but to condemn men the sound of whose voice he has 
never heard, and this in most savage and inhuman fashion? The Lord has ordered the erring brother, who 
spurns advice, after a first, second and third admonition, to be treated as "an heathen man and a 
publican"(2) Now these most equitable and righteous judges have not even given to them of the same faith 
with themselves the treatment which they give to heathen men and publicans. These indeed they do see 
and occasionally converse with, and that with all honour and deference where they appear to be of rank and 
dignity. But they have ordered me to be cut off from home, from water, from everything. This is the way in 
which they have wished to become imitators of our Father in heaven "Who maketh His sun to rise on the evil 
and on the good and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust."(1) But of these men I will say no more. The 

tribunal of the Lord is at hand where is required not stage pretence but the reality of life. Now I beseech your 
excellency to express my thanks to the emperor, the lover of Christ and victorious, and to the very pious and 
godly Augusta, for having made true religion the firm root of their pious empire, and to implore their 
majesties to make the peace of the churches firm by commanding the assembling of a council, not • of men 
of violence who throw the discussion into confusion, but of the lovers of the truth who confirm the apostolic 
teaching, and repudiate this new tangled and spurious heresy. And I pray that of these honourable 
endeavours you may reap the fruit at the hands of our loving Lord. 

CXLI. To Marcellus, Archimandrite of the Acoemetae.(2) 

Bright is made your holiness by your goodly life, exhibiting on earth the image of the conversation of the 
angels, but it is made still brighter by your zeal for the apostolic faith. As keel to boat, as corner-stone to 
house, so to them that choose to live in piety is the truth of the doctrines of the Gospel. For this truth when 
assailed you have bravely fought, not striving to protect it as though it were weak, but shewing your godly 
disposition; for the teaching of our Master Christ is gifted with stability and strength, in accordance with the 
promise of the same Saviour, "that the gates of hell shall not prevail against it."(3) It is the loving and 
bountiful Lord who has thought right that I too should be dishonoured and slain on behalf of this doctrine. For 
truly we have reckoned dishonour honour, and death life. We have heard the words of the apostle "For unto 
us it is given by God not only to believe on Him, but also to suffer for His sake. "(4) But the Lord arose like the 
sleeper, and stopped the mouths of them that uttered blasphemy against God and injustice against me. But 
He has made the tongues of the pious pour forth their fountains in their wonted message. I, however, am 
gathering the delightful fruits of rest; as I look at the agitation of the churches I am grieved, but I rejoice and 
am glad at being freed from cares. I have ever been gratified at your admirable piety, but heretofore I have 
not written, not from any lack of regard for the dictates of charity, but because I have waited for some 
suitable occasion. Just now, having fallen in with the most pious and prudent monks who have been sent by 
your holiness on other business, I have lost no time in carrying out my wish. I salute your godliness. I beg 
you in the first place to support me with your prayers, and further to cheer me by a letter, for by God's grace I 
have been attacked for the Gospel's sake. 

CXLII. To the same. 

I have already addressed your reverence in another letter, and have delivered it to your much respected 
brethren. Now again I address your holiness. I am induced to do so both by your admirable life, and by the 
praiseworthy zeal which you have shewn on behalf of the apostolic faith, fearless alike of imperial power 
and of episcopal combination. For granted that the majority of the council consented under coercion, still 
they did confirm the new tangled heresy by their signatures. Your holiness, however, was shaken by none of 
these things, but abided by the ancient doctrines which the Lord, by means of both the prophets and the 
apostles, has taught the churches to hold. These decrees I pray that I may preserve, and keep to the end 
my faith and confession in one Father, one Son and one Holy Ghost. For the incarnation of the only begotten 
made no addition to the number of the Trinity. Even after the incarnation the Trinity is still a Trinity. This is the 
teaching I have received from the beginning; this has been my faith; in this was I baptized; this have I 
preached; in this have I baptized, this I continue to hold. Of them that utter a lie about the Father the Lord has 
said "When he speaketh a lie he speaketh of his own,"(1) for what is said of the teacher is appropriate to the 
disciples. So these men who employ lies against me speak of their own, and do not describe what is mine. I 
am comforted by my Master's words "Blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you and 
shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad for great is your 
reward in heaven. "(1) 

I entreat your piety to pray that I may not have my part among the wrong doers, but among them that suffer 
wrong on account of the truth of the Gospels. 

CXLIII. To Andrew, Monk of Constantinople. (2) 

I have never seen your piety nor have we ever communicated by letter, but I have become warmly attached 
to you. What has wrought the charm and continues to inflame it is the report unanimously brought by the 
tasters of your honey. All express admiration of the orthodoxy of your faith, the brightness of your life, the 
constancy of your soul, the harmoniousness of your character, the attractiveness and sweetness of your 
society and all the other characteristics of the true foster child of philosophy. For all these reasons I am 
attached to your godliness, and my longing has made me even begin a correspondence; but, my dear sir, 
grant me as soon as possible what I desire and let me have written communication from you. For when 
friends are at a distance considerable comfort is given them by epistolary communication. You will write to 

no man of heterodox opinions, but to one nurtured in the teaching of the apostles and preacher not of a 
quaternity but of a Trinity, for in reality I see little difference in the impiety of those who have the hardihood to 
endeavour to contract into one the two natures of the Only-begotten and those who endeavour to divide our 
Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, God the Word made man, into two sons; if such indeed there 
be; I cannot think so; but Arians, Eunomians, and Apollinarians too have ever shamelessly fabricated this 
slander against the Church, and indeed laborious students may easily perceive that our far famed 
Fathers, (3) lights of the churches, laboured at the hands of the foes of the truth under this accusation which is 
now levelled against me by the most excellent champions of the new tangled heresy. Our wise Lord has laid 
bare their impiety, for He could not endure to confirm the unholy heresy by His long suffering. 
Be sure then, sir, that you will be writing to one of like sentiments with your own; and of this you can easily 
assure yourself from my copious writings. 

Write then to me in return, and again your letter, by God's leave, shall serve to kindle affection. And before 
you write, give me the help of your prayers, and beseech our good Lord to guide my feet into the right road, 
that I may travel the rest of my journey in accordance with His laws. You who have won right of access from 
your unstained life will easily persuade Him Who is eager to give us His good gifts. 

CXLIV. To the soldiers. (1) 

Human nature is everywhere the same, but pursuits in life are many and various. Some men prefer a sailor's 
career, some a soldier's; some men become athletes, some husbandmen; some ply one craft trod some 
another. To pass by all other differences, some men are zealous and diligent about divine things, and get 
themselves instructed in the exact teaching of the apostolic doctrines; while others, on the contrary, become 
slaves of the belly, and suppose that the enjoyment of base pleasures is happiness. Others again are 
there, lying in a mean between these two extremes, who do not exhibit this praiseworthy enthusiasm, nor 
embrace a life of incontinence, but still honour the simplicity of the faith. Men who attack the statement that 
some things are altogether impossible with God must not, I apprehend, be classed with the zealous and the 
well instructed in divine things, but rather either with those who have no exact knowledge of the apostolic 
doctrines, or those who have been enslaved by pleasures and shift hither and thither at the caprice of a 
moment, setting forth now one thing and now another. 

You have asked me to write on these points. I should prefer at the present time to keep silence. But in 
obedience to the commandment of the Lord, "Give to every man that asketh of time, "(2) I am constrained 
briefly to reply. 

I say then that the God of the universe can do all things, but that in the word "all" is comprehended only what 
is right and good, for He who is naturally both wise and good admits of nothing that is of a contrary nature, 
but only what becomes his nature. If any objectors gainsay this statement, ask them if the God of the 
universe, the lawgiver of truth, can lie. If they say that lying is possible to God, expel them from your 
company as impious and blasphemous. Should they agree that lying is not possible to the God of the 
universe, ask them in the second place, if He who is the fount of justice can become unjust. Should they 
allow that this too is impossible to the God of all, you must yet again enquire if the unfathomable depth of 
wisdom can become unwise, God cease to be God, the Lord cease to be the Lord, the Creator be no 
Creator, the Good not good but evil and the true Light not light but its opposite. If they admit that all these 
things and the like are impossible to God, you must say to them therefore many things are impossible with 
God; and that their being impossible so far from being a proof of want of power, indicates on the contrary the 
greatest power. 

Even in the case of our own soul, when we say that it cannot die, we do not predicate weakness of it, but we 
proclaim its capacity of immortality. And similarly when we confess the immutability, impassibility, and 
immortality of God, we cannot attribute to the divine nature change, passion, or death. Suppose them to urge 
that God can do whatever He will, you must reply to them that He wishes to do nothing which it is not His 
nature to do; He is by nature good, therefore He does not wish anything evil; He is by nature just, therefore 
He does not wish anything unjust He is by nature true, therefore He abominates falsehood; He is by nature 
immutable, therefore He does not admit of change; and if He does not admit of change He is always in the 
same state and condition. This He Himself asserts through the prophet. "I am the Lord I change not."(1) And 
the blessed David says "Thou art the same and Thy years shall have no end. "(2) If He is the same He 
undergoes no change. If He is naturally superior to change and mutation He has not become from immortal, 
mortal nor from impassible, passible, for had this been possible He would not have taken on Him our 
nature. But since He has an immortal nature, He took a body capable of suffering, and with the body a 
human soul. Both of these He kept unstained from the defilements of sin, and gave His soul for the sake of 
the souls that had sinned, and His body for the sake of the bodies that had died. And since the body that 
was assumed is described as body of the very only begotten Son of God, He refers the passion of the 
body to Himself. But the four evangelists testify that it was not the divine nature but the body which was 

nailed to the cross, all teaching with one voice that Joseph of Arimathea came to Pilate and begged the 

body of Jesus; that he took down the body of Jesus from the tree and wrapped in fine linen, and laid in his 

own new tomb the body of Jesus; that Mary the Magdalene came to the tomb seeking the body of Jesus 

and ran to His disciples, and reported these things when she could not find the body of Jesus. 

This is the unanimous teaching of the evangelists. But if your opponents urge that the angels said "Come 

see the place where the Lord lay"(1) let the foolish folk learn that the divine Scripture says also about the 

victorious Stephen "And devout men carried Stephen to his burial. "(2) And yet it was the body only which 

was deemed proper for burial, while the soul was not buried together with the body; nevertheless the body 

alone was spoken of by the common name. Similarly the blessed Jacob said to his sons "Bury me with my 

fathers. "(3) He did not say "Bury my body." Then he went on "There they buried Abraham and Sarah his 

wife; there they buried Isaac and Rebekah his wife; and there I buried Leah. "(4) He did not say "their 

bodies." The names are common to bodies or souls, but nevertheless it is only the bodies which he called 

by the common names. In this manner too we constantly describe the shrines of the holy apostles, prophets 

and martyrs, one it may be of Dionysius, another of Julianus another of Cosmas.(5) And yet we know that 

only fragmentary remains of bodies lie there, while the souls in diviner regions are at rest. Precisely the 

same custom is to be found in common use, for such an one, We say, died; and such all one lies in this 

place; although we know that the soul is immortal and does not share the tomb with the body. In this sense 

the angel said "Come see the place where the Lord lay"(6) not because he shut the Godhead in the tomb, 

but because he spoke of the Lord's body by the Lord's name. 

In proof of this being the view of the holy Fathers let them mark the words of Athanasius, illustrious 

archbishop of Alexandria, who adorned his episcopate with confession. He exclaims "Life cannot die, but 

rather quickens the dead." 

Let them hear too the words of the farfamed Damasus bishop of Rome, "If anyone allege that on the cross 

pain was undergone by the Godhead and not by the body with the soul, the form of the servant which He 

had taken in its completeness, let him be anathema. "(1) 

Let them hear too the very sacred and holy bishop of the Church of the Romans, the lord Leo, who has now 

written "The Son of God suffered as He was capable of suffering, not according to the nature which 

assumed but that which was assumed. For the impassible nature assumed the passible body, and gave it 

for us, to the end that He might work out our salvation and at the same time preserve His own nature 

impassible." 

And again "For He did not come to destroy His own nature but to save ours. "(2) 

If therefore they accuse us for saying that God can do what He wishes, but that He wishes what is becoming 

to His own nature, and what is unbecoming He neither wishes nor is capable of; let them accuse too these 

saints and all the rest who maintain this position. Let them accuse even the Apostle who say's 'That by two 

immutable things in which it was impossible for God to lie. "(3) And again "If we believe not, yet He abideth 

faithful: He cannot deny Himself."(4) 

Repeat these passages to your opponents, and if they are convinced, praise the good Lord for that, by 

means of your zeal, He has benefited them. If they remain unconvinced, enter into no discussion with them 

about doctrines, for it is forbidden by the divine apostle to "strive about words to no profit but to the 

subverting of the hearers. "(5) But do you keep inviolate the teaching of the Gospels, that in the day of His 

appearing you may bring to the righteous Judge what has been entrusted to you with its due interest, and 

may hear the longed for words "Well done good and faithful servant; thou hast been faithful over a few things 

I will make thee ruler over many things. Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. "(6) 

CXLV. To the Monks of Constantinople. (7) 

There is nothing new or surprising in the fact that the men who have made their tongues weapons against 
our God and Saviour should also aim their shahs of falsehood against His right minded servants. It must 
needs be that the servants who grieve sorely at the outrage inflicted on their Master should share it. That so 
it should be they have been forwarned by their Lord Himself, Who consoles His holy disciples with the 
words "If they have persecuted me they will also persecute you."(1) "If they have called the Master of the 
house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of His household. "(2) Then He cheered them by 
pointing out that calumny is easily detected, for He went on "There is nothing covered that shall not be 
revealed and hid that shall not be known. "(3) I have often seen the truth of the divine prediction, but I see it 
with special clearness now. The authors of the calumny against me, who have bought my destruction for 
large sums of money, have been distinctly seen to be involved in the unsoundness of Valentinus and 
Bardesanes. They had hoped to cloke their own iniquity if only they could whet their tongues on the hone of 
falsehood in order to wound me. For ever since I saw that the heresy long ago extinguished had been 
renewed by these men I never ceased to cry aloud, hearing my testimony in private and in public, as well in 
social gatherings as in the temples of God, and strive to confute their conspiracy against the faith. They 

have consequently poured out their insults on my head, and allege that I preach two sons. But they ought to 
have convicted me to my face, not slandered me behind my back. They have done just the contrary. They 
tied me band and foot at Cyrus by the imperial decree; they compelled the very righteous judges to 
condemn me without a trial, and delivered their most equitable sentence against a man who was five and 
thirty stages away. Such treatment was never suffered by any criminal charged with witchcraft or robbery of 
the dead, by murderer or by adulterer. But for the present I will leave the judges alone, for the Lord is at hand 
"Who judges the world with righteousness and the people with his truth;"(4) Who exacts an account not only 
of words and deeds, but even of evil thoughts. But think it right to refute the false charge which has been 
made. What proof have they of my asserting two sons? Had I been one of the silent kind there might have 
been some ground for the suspicion, but my task has been to contend on behalf of the apostolic decrees, to 
bring the pasture of instruction to the Lord's flocks, and to this end I have written five and thirty books 
interpreting the divine Scripture, and proving the falsehood of the heresies. The falsehoods these men have 
concocted are therefore easy of refutation. Tens on tens of thousands of hearers testify that I have taught the 
truth of the doctrines of the Gospel, and for any one who likes to bring them to the test my writings lie before 
the world. Not on behalf of a duality of sons, but of the only begotten Son of God, against the heathen, 
against Jews, against the recipients of the plague of Arius and Eunomius, against the supporters of the 
madness of Apollinarius, against the victims of the corruption of Marcion, I have never ceased to struggle; 
trying to convince the heathen that the Eternal Son of the ever living God is Himself Creator of the Universe; 
the Jews that about Him the prophets: uttered their predictions, the Arians and Eunomians that He is of one 
substance, of one dignity and of equal power with the Father; Marcion's mad adherents that He is not only 
good but just; and Saviour not, as they fable, of another's works, but of His own. Once for all, fighting against 
each heresy, I charge men to fall clown and worship the one Son. 

And what need is there of many words, when it is possible to refute falsehood in few? We provide that those 
who year by year come up for holy baptism should carefully learn the faith set forth at Nicaea by the holy 
and blessed Fathers; and initiating them as we have been bidden, (1) we baptize them in the name of the 
Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, pronouncing each name singly. Furthermore when performing 
divine service in the churches, both at the beginning and the decline of day and when dividing the day itself 
into three parts, we glorify the Father the Son and the Holy Ghost. (2) If, as our slanderers allege, we preach 
two sons, which do we glorify and which do we leave unworshipped? It were the wildest folly to believe that 
there are two sons, and to give the doxology to one alone. And who is so distraught as, while hearing the 
words of the divine Paul "one Lord, one faith, one baptism, "(2) and again "there is one Lord Jesus Christ by 
Whom are all things, "(4) to lay down the law at variance with the teaching of the Spirit, and cut the one in two. 
But I am prating unnecessarily, for these men, nurtured in falsehood as they are, do not even dare to assert 
that they have ever heard me say anything of the kind; but they affirm that I preach two sons because I 
confess the two natures of our Master Christ. And they refuse to perceive that every human being has both 
an immortal soul and a mortal body; yet no one has hitherto been found to call Paul two Pauls because he 
has both soul and body, any more than Peter two Peters or Abraham or Adam. Everyone recognises the 
distinction of the natures, and does not call one man two Pauls. Precisely in the same way, when styling our 
Lord Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of God, God the Word incarnate, both Son of God and Son of Man, 
as we have been taught by the divine Scripture, we do not assert two sons, but we do confess the peculiar 
properties of the Godhead and of the manhood. The party however who deny the nature assumed of us 
men cannot hear these arguments without irritation. 

It is only right that I should point out from what sources they have derived this impiety. Simon, Menander, 
Cerdo, and Marcion absolutely deny the incarnation, and call the birth from a Virgin fable. Valentinus, 
however, Basilides, Bardesanes, and Harmonius and their following, accept the conception of the Virgin 
and the birth; but they deny that God the Word took anything from the Virgin, but made as it were a transit 
through her as through a conduit, and appeared to mankind in semblance only, and seeming to be a man, 
in like manner as He was seen by Abraham and certain others of the ancients: Arius and Eunomius on the 
contrary held that He assumed a body, but that the Godhead played the part of the soul, in order that they 
may attribute to it what was lowly in His words and deeds. Apollinarius did indeed assert that He assumed a 
soul with the body, not the reasonable soul, but the soul which is called animal or phytic.(1) Their contention 
is that the Godhead took the part of the mind. He had learnt the distinction of soul and of mind from the 
philosophers that are without while divine Scripture says that man consists of soul and body. For we read 
"And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life and 
man became a living soul. "(2) And the Lord in the sacred Gospels said to His apostles "Fear not them 
which kill the body but are not able to kill the soul. "(3) 

So great is the divergence between the doctrines. These men have now done their best to outdo 
Apollinarius, Arius and Eunomius, in their impiety and have now endeavoured to plant anew the heresy 
sown of old by Valentinus and Bardesanes, and afterwards uprooted by most excellent husbandmen. Like 
Valentinus and Bardesanes they have denied that the body of our Lord was assumed of our nature. But the 

Church, following the footprints of the Apostles, contemplates in the Lord Christ both perfect Godhead and 
perfect manhood. For just as He took a body, not that He needed a body, but by its means to give 
immortality to all bodies; so too He took a soul, the guide of the body, that every soul by its means might 
share His immutability. For even if souls are immortal, they are not however immutable; for they undergo 
many and frequent changes, as they experience pleasure, now from one object, and now from another. 
Whence it cometh about that we err when we are changed and are inclined to what is worse. But after the 
resurrection our bodies enjoy immortality and incorruptibility, and our souls impassibility and immutability. 
For this reason the only begotten Son of God took both a body and a soul, preserved them free from all 
blame, and offered the sacrifice for the race. And this is why He is called our high priest; and He is named 
high priest not as God but as man. He makes the offering as man, and accepts the sacrifice with the Father 
and the Holy Spirit as God. If only Adam's body had sinned, it alone should have benefited by the cure. But 
since the soul not only shared in the sin but was first in the sin, for first the thought forms an image of the sin 
and then carries it out by means of the body, it was just, I ween, that the soul too should be healed. But it is 
perhaps superfluous to demonstrate these points by reasoning, when the divine Scripture clearly proclaims 
them. This doctrine is distinctly taught by the holy David and the very divine Peter, the one foretelling from 
distant ages, and the other interpreting his prediction. The words of the first of the apostles are "David 
therefore being a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins, 
according to the flesh, He would raise up Christ to sit on his throne; he seeing this before spake of the 
resurrection of Christ that His soul was not left in hell neither His flesh did see corruption. "(1) Now he has 
given us much instruction on the same point in these few words. First he states that the assumed nature 
derives its descent from the loins of David; secondly that He took not a body only, but also an immortal soul, 
and thirdly that He delivered body and soul to death, and, after taking them again, raised them as He would. 
His own words are "Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up."(1) But we have learnt that the 
divine nature is immortal. What suffered was the passible, and the impassible remained impassible. For 
God the Word was made math not to render the impassible nature passible, but on the passible nature, by 
means of the Passion, to bestow the boon of impassibility. And the Lord Himself in the holy Gospels at one 
time says "I have power to lay down my life and I have power to take it again, no man taketh it from me but I 
lay it down of myself;" "That I may take it again. "(2) Anti again "Therefore doth my Father love me because I 
lay down my life for the sheep, "(3) and again "Now is my soul troubled"(4) "my soul is exceeding sorrowful 
even unto death. "(5) and of His body He says "The bread that I will give is my flesh which I will give for the 
life of the world, "(6) and when He delivered the divine mysteries and broke the symbol and distributed it, He 
added "This is my body which is being broken for you for the remission of sins, "(7) and again "This is my 
blood which is shed for many for the remission of sins, "(8) and again "Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of 
Man and drink His blood ye have no life in you"(9) and "Whosoever eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood 
hath eternal life" "in himself he adds. (10) Innumerable passages of the same character may be quoted, 
both in the old Testament find the new, pointing out the assumption both of the body and of the soul, and that 
they are descended from Abraham and David. Joseph of Arimathea when he came to Pilate begged the 
body of Jesus, and the fourfold authority(11) of the holy Gospels tells us how he received the body, 
wrapped it in the linen cloth, and committed it to the tomb. I do, indeed, sorrow and lament that I am 
compelled by the attacks of error to adduce against men supposed to be of one and the same faith with 
myself the arguments which I have already urged against the victims of the plague of Marcion,-of whom, by 
God's grace, I have converted more than ten thousand, and brought them to Holy Baptism. What child of the 
church ever had any doubts on these points? Who has not cited this teaching of the holy Fathers? The 
works of the great Basil are full of it; as well, as those of his fellow soldiers Gregory and Amphilochius, and 
of those who in the West have been illustrious teachers of grace, Damasus, bishop of great Rome, and 
Ambrose of Milan; and Cyprian of Carthage who for the sake of these doctrines won the martyr's crown. Five 
times was the famous Athanasius driven from his flock and compelled to dwell in exile; and in the cause of 
these doctrines strove too his master Alexander. Eustathius, Meletius, and Flavianus, luminaries of the East, 
and Ephraim, harp of the Spirit, who daily waters the people of Syria with the streams of grace; John and 
Atticus, lend heralds of the truth; and men of an earlier age than they, Ignatius, Polycarp, Irenaeus, Justin, 
and Hippolytus, of whom the more part not only shine at the head of the company of bishops, but also adorn 
the martyr's band. 

He, too, who now rules great Rome and diffuses in all directions from the West the rays of right teaching, the 
most holy Leo, has expressed to me this distinctive mark of the faith in his own letters. All these have clearly 
taught that the only begotten Son of God and everlasting God, ineffably begotten of the Father, is one Son; 
and that after the incarnation He was called both Son of man and man, not because He was changed into 
manhood, for His nature is immutable, but because He took what was ours. They teach too that He was both 
impassible and immortal as God, and mortal and passible as man; but after the resurrection even in relation 
to His humanity He received impassibility and immortality, for, though the body remained a body, still it is 
impassible and immortal, verily a divine body and glorified with divine glory. This is distinctly told us by the 

blessed Paul in the words "For our conversation is in heaven from whence also we look for the Saviour, our 
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body that it may be fashioned like unto the body of His 
glory. "(2) He does not say to "His glory" but to "the body of His glory," and the Lord Himself, when He had 
said to His apostles "There be some standing here which shall not taste of death till they see the Son of 
man coming in His Father's glory, "(1) took them after six days into an exceeding high mountain, and was 
transfigured before them, and His face became as the sun, and His raiment was bright like the light.(2) By 
these means He shewed the manner of the second advent. He taught that the assumed nature is not 
uncircumscribed (for this is characteristic of the Godhead alone) but that it shall send forth flashes of the 
divine glory, and emit rays of light transcending the powers of the sense of sight. With this glory He was 
taken up; with this the angels said that He should come; for their words were "He who was taken from you 
into heaven shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven. "(2) When moreover He was 
seen by the divine apostles after the resurrection, He shewed them both hands and feet; and to Thomas He 
shewed also His side and the wounds of the nails and of the spear. For on account of those men who 
positively deny the assumption of the flesh, and further of those others who assert that after the resurrection 
the nature of the body was changed into the nature of Godhead, He preserved unaltered the prints of the 
nails and of the spear. And while raising all other bodies free from every disfigurement, (4) in His own body 
He left the marks of His sufferings, to the end that deniers of the assumption of the body may be convicted of 
their error by means of His sufferings; and holders of the notion that His body was changed into another 
nature may be taught by the print of the nails that it abides in its own proper qualities. Suppose any one to 
imagine that he has a proof that the body of the Lord did not remain a body after the resurrection in the fact 
that He came in to the disciples when the doors were shut, let such an one remember how He walked upon 
the sea while His body was still mortal, how He was born after keeping the seals of virginity intact, and how 
again when encircled by them that were plotting against Him He frequently escaped from their hands. But 
why need I mention the Lord, who was not only man, but God before the ages, and to whom it was easy to 
do whatsoever He would? Let them tell how Habakkuk was translated from Judaea into Babylon in a 
moment of time and passed through the covering of the den, and brought the food to Daniel, and returned 
again, without destroying the seals of the den. (5) It is sheer foolishness to enquire into the manner of the 
miracles of the Lord, but in addition to what has been said it ought also to be known that after the resurrection 
our bodies also will be incorruptible and immortal, and being released from what is earthly will become light 
and aethereal. This moreover is distinctly taught us by the divine Paul in the words "It is sown in corruption, it 
is raised in incorruption, it is sown in weakness it is raised in power; it is sown in dishonour it is raised in 
glory; it is sown a natural body it is raised a spiritual body'" and in another place "We shall be caught up in 
the clouds to meet the Lord in the air."(2) If then the bodies of the saints become light and aethereal and 
easily travel through the air, we cannot wonder that the Lord's body united to the Godhead of the only 
begotten, when, after the resurrection, it had become immortal, entered in when the doors were shut. 
Countless other proofs might be quoted without difficulty from apostles and prophets. But what has been 
already said is enough to show the drift of my teaching. I believe in one Father, one Son and one Holy 
Ghost; and I confess one Godhead, one Lordship, one substance and three hypostases. For the incarnation 
of the only begotten did not add to the number of the Trinity, and make the Trinity a quaternity, but, even after 
the incarnation the Trinity was still a Trinity. And while confessing that the only begotten Son of God was 
made man I do not deny the nature which He took, but confess, as I have said, both the nature which took 
and the nature which was taken. The union did not confound the properties of the natures. For if the air by 
receiving the light through all its parts does not cease to be air, nor yet at the same time destroy the nature 
of the light, for with our eves we behold the light and by our feeling we recognise the air, as it meets us cold 
or hot, or moist or dry, so it were sheer folly to call the union of the Godhead and the manhood confusion. If 
created natures which share at once subordinate anti temporal existence, when united and in some sense 
mingled, yet remain unimpaired, and, when the light withdraws, the nature of the air is left alone, much more 
proper is it, I apprehend, for the nature which fashioned all things, when conjoined with and united to the 
nature which it assumed from us, to be acknowledged to continue itself in its purity, and in like manner to 
preserve unimpaired that which it had assumed. Gold, too, when brought in contact with the fire, participates 
both in the colour and power of fire, but it does not lose its own nature, but at the same time remains gold 
and has the active qualities of fire. In this manner also the Lord's body is a body, but impassible, 
incorruptible, immortal, of the Lord, divine and glorified with the divine glory. It is not separated from the 
Godhead, nor yet is of any one else, save of the only begotten Son of God Himself. For it does not show to 
us another person, but the only-begotten Himself clad in our nature. 

This is the doctrine which I am continually preaching. They on the other hand who deny the incarnation 
wrought on our behalf have called me a heretic, adopting a course something like that of unchaste females, 
who, while they sell their own charms, assail honest women with the insults of their profession, and apply 
language proper to their own wantonness to women who hold such wantonness in abhorrence. This is how 
Egypt has acted. She has herself fallen willingly into the thraldom of base desire. She has lavished her 

servile adulation on a man of chaste character. Then, failing to entice him by her wiles, or to trap him in the 
snares of her voluptuous passion, she describes one who is faithful to purity as an adulterer. 
But these men will be called to account by God, as well for their devices against the faith as for the snares 
they have laid against me. I only charge those who have been influenced by the false accusations uttered 
against me to keep one ear for the accused, and not to give both to the accusers. In this manner they will 
fulfil the divine law which lays down "Thou shall not raise a false report, "(3) and "Judge righteously between 
every man and his brother."(2) In these words the divine law charges us not to believe the calumnies uttered 
against the absent but to judge the accused face to face. 

CXLVI. To John the OEconomus.(3) 

Rest and a life free from care are very grateful to me. I have therefore blocked the door of the monastery, 
and decline intercourse with my friends. 

But I have received information that fresh attacks are being made against the Faith of the Gospels, and 
therefore conclude that there may be danger in my silence. When wrong has been done some mortal 
prince, not only the guilty authors of the outrage but they also who have been standing by and made no 
effort to drive off the assailants, are in peril of punishment: What penalty then ought not to be undergone by 
men who can venture to look lightly on the utterance of blasphemy against our God and Saviour? This is the 
fear which has impelled me now to write and expose the innovations of which I have been informed. 
It is said that a common report in the city represents that after certain presbyters had offered prayer, and 
concluded it in the wonted manner, while some said "For to Thee belongs glory and to thy Christ and to the 
Holy Ghost;" and others "Through grace and loving kindness of thy Christ, with whom belongs glory to Thee 
with thy holy Spirit," the very wise archdeacon prohibited the use of the expression, "the Christ" and said that 
the "only begotten" ought to be glorified. If this is true it were impossible to exceed the impiety. For he either 
divides the one Lord Jesus Christ into two sons and regards the only begotten Son as lawful and natural, but 
the Christ as adopted and spurious, and consequently unmeet for being honoured in doxology; or else he is 
endeavouring to support the heresy which has now burst in on us with the riot of wild revelry. Had a grievous 
tempest been now oppressing us, any one might have supposed that the blasphemer suited his 
blasphemy to the necessity of the moment, through fear of the power of the originators of the heresy. But now 
that He who is blasphemed has rebuked the winds and the sea, and blessed the storm-tossed churches 
with a calm, while everywhere by land and sea the proclamation of the apostles is preached, what room is 
there for the blasphemy? While not even they who have lately basely inserted among the doctrines of the 
Church that flesh and godhead are of one and the same nature have ever forbidden the offering of praise to 
the Lord Christ. This fact may be easily ascertained from those who have returned thence. A man holding 
the foremost place in the ecclesiastical rank ought to have known the divine Scripture, and to have learnt 
from it that just as the heralds of the truth rank the only begotten Son with the Father, so accordingly using the 
title of "the Christ" instead of that of "Son" they number Him sometimes with the Father and sometimes with 
the Holy Ghost; for the Christ is none other than the only begotten Son of God. So we may quote the divine 
Paul writing to the Corinthians, but teaching the world, that "There is one God the Father of whom are all 
things and one Lord Jesus Christ by whom are all things. "(1) Thus he calls the same person, Christ, Jesus, 
Lord, and Creator of all things. And writing to the Thessalonians he says "Now God Himself and our Father 
and our Lord Jesus Christ direct our way unto you. "(2) And in his second epistle to the same he puts the 
Christ before the Father, not to invert the order, but to teach that the order of the haines does not indicate a 
distinction of dignity and nature. His words are "Now our Lord Jesus Christ Himself, and God, even our 
Father, which hath loved us, and hath given us everlasting consolation and good hope through grace, 
comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and work."(3) And at the end of his Epistle to the 
Romans after certain exhortations he adds "I beseech you brethren for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake and for 
the love of the spirit."(4) Now if he had known the Christ as being any other than the Son he would not have 
put Him before the Holy Ghost. Writing to the Corinthians, at the very beginning of his letter, he mentions the 
name of Christ as alone sufficient to influence the faithful. "Now I beseech you brethren by the name of our 
Lord Jesus Christ that ye all speak the same thing"(5) and when writing to them a second time he thus 
concludes "The peace of our Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God the Father and the communion of the 
Holy Ghost be with you all. "(6) Here he puts the name of Christ not only before the Spirit, but also before the 
Father and this in all the churches is the beginning of the Liturgy of the Mystery. 

According, then, to this extraordinary regulation the august name of our God and Saviour, Jesus Christ, 
ought to be omitted from the mystic writings. But it is unnecessary to say more on this point. The opening of 
every one of his letters is distinguished by the divine Apostle with this address. At one time it is "Paul a 
servant of Jesus Christ called to be an apostle."' At another "Paul called to be an apostle of Jesus 
Christ."(8) At another "Paul a servant of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ."(9) And suiting his benediction 
to his exordium he deduces it from the same source and links the title of the Son with God the Father, saying 

"Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ."(10) And he graces the conclusion 
of his letters with the blessing "The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, amen."(1) 
Copious additional evidence may be found whereby it may be learnt without difficulty that our Lord Jesus 
Christ is no other person than the Son which completes the Trinity. For the same before the ages was only 
begotten Son and God the Word, and after the resurrection He was called Jesus and Christ, receiving the 
names from the facts. Jesus means Saviour; "Thou shall call His name Jesus for He shall save His people 
from their sins. "(2) 

He is named Christ from being as man anointed with the Holy Ghost, and called our High Priest, Apostle, 
Prophet and King. Long ago the divine Moses exclaimed "The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a 
prophet, from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me. "(3) And the divine David cries "The Lord hath 
sworn and will not repent, Thou art a priest forever after the order of Melchisedek."(4) This prophecy is 
confirmed by the divine Apostle. (5) And again "seeing then that we have a great High Priest that has 
passed into the heavens. Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession. "(6) 
That as God, He is king before the ages that prophetic minstrelsy teaches us in the words "Thy throne, O 
God, is for ever and ever; the sceptre of Thy kingdom is a right sceptre. "(7) 

His majesty as man is also shown us. For having the sovereignty of all things as God and Creator, He 
assumes this majesty as man, wherefore it is added "Thou lovest righteousness and hatest wickedness, 
therefore God thy God hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. "(8) And in the second 
psalm the anointed one himself says "Yet was I set as king by Him upon the holy hill of Sion, I will declare 
the decree of the Lord. The Lord hath said unto me 'Thou art my Son this day have I begotten Thee; ask of 
me and I shall give Thee the heathen for thine inheritance and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy 
possession. '"(9) This He said as man, for as man He receives what as God He possesses. And at the very 
beginning of the psalm the gift of prophecy ranks Him with God the Father in the words "Why do the heathen 
rage and the people imagine a vain thing. The kings of the earth set themselves and the rulers take counsel 
together against the Lord and against His anointed. "(10) 

Let no one then foolishly suppose that the Christ is any other than the only begotten Son. Let us not imagine 
ourselves wiser than the gift of the Spirit. Let us hear the words of the great Peter, "Thou art the Christ, the 
Son of the living God."(1) Let us hear the Lord Christ confirming this confession, for "On this rock," He says, "I 
will build my church and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it."(2) Wherefore too the wise Paul, most 
excellent master builder of the churches, fixed no other foundation than this. "I," he says, "as a wise master 
builder have laid the foundation, and another buildeth thereon. But let every man take heed how he buildeth 
thereon. For other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ."(3) How then can they 
think of any other foundation, when they are bidden not to fix a foundation, but to build on that which is laid? 
The divine writer recognises Christ as the foundation, and glories in this title, as when he says, "I am 
crucified with Christ: nevertheless I live; yet not I but Christ liveth in me. "(4) And again "To me to live is Christ 
and to die is gain, "(5) and again "For I determined not to know anything among you save Jesus Christ and 
Him crucified. "(6) And a little before he says, "But we preach Christ crucified to the Jews a stumbling-block 
and to the Greeks foolishness, but unto them which are called both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of 
God and the wisdom of God. "(7) And in his Epistle to the Galatians be writes, "But when it pleased God who 
separated me from my mother's womb and called me by His grace to reveal His Son in me that I might 
preach Him among the heathen. "(8) But when writing to the Corinthians he does not say we preach "the Son" 
but "Christ crucified," herein doing no violence to his commission, but recognising the same to be Jesus, 
Christ, Lord, only begotten, and God the Word. For the same reason too at the beginning of his letter to the 
Romans he calls himself "servant of Jesus Christ" and describes himself as "separated unto the gospel of 
God, which He had promised afore by His prophets in the Holy Scriptures, concerning His Son Jesus Christ 
our Lord, which was made of the seed of David according to the flesh; and declared to be the Son of God 
with powers"(1) and so on. He calls the same both Jesus Christ, and Son of David, and Son of God, as God 
and Lord of all, and yet in the middle of his epistle, after making mention of the Jews, he adds, "whose are 
the fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over all God blessed for ever, 
amen. "(2) Here he says that He who according to the flesh derived His descent froth the Jews is eternal 
God and is praised by the right minded as Lord of all created things. The same teaching is given us in the 
Apostle's words to the excellent Titus "Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the 
great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ."(3) Here he calls the same both Saviour, and great God, and 
Jesus Christ. And in another place he writes, "In the kingdom of Christ and of God. "(4) Moreover the chorus 
of the angels announced to the shepherds " Unto you is born this day in the city of David ... Christ the 
Lord."(5) 

But to men who meditate on God's law day and night, it is indeed needless to write all the proofs of this kind; 
the above are sufficient to persuade even the most obstinate opponents not to divide the divine titles. One 
point, however, I cannot endure to omit. He is alleged to have said that there are many Christs but one Son. 
Into this error I suppose he fell through ignorance. For if he had read the divine Scripture, he would have 

known that the title of the Son has also been bestowed by our bountiful Lord on many. The lawgiver Moses, 
the writer of the ancient history, says "And the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair and 
they took them wives of them, "(6) and the God of all Himself said to this Prophet "Thou shalt say unto 
Pharaoh, Israel is my son even my first-born. "(7) In the great song he says "Rejoice O ye nations with His 
people and let all the sons of God be strong in Him;"(8) and by the mouth of the prophet Isaiah He says "I 
have nourished and brought up sons (children) and they have rebelled against me;"(9) and through the 
thrice blessed David "I have said ye are gods and all of you are children of the Most High, "(10) and to the 
Romans the wise Paul wrote in this manner, "For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons 
of God. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have received the I spirit of 
adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. For the Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the 
children of God. And if children, then heirs; heirs of God and joint-heirs with Christ: if so be that we suffer with 
Him that we may be also glorified together;"(1) and to the Galatians he writes "And because ye are sons 
God hath sent forth the spirit of His Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Wherefore thou art no more a 
servant but a son; and if a son then an heir of God through Jesus Christ."(2) The lesson he gives to the 
Ephesians is "in love having predestinated us into the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to Himself."(3) 
If then, because the name of the Christ is common, we ought not to glorify the Christ as God, we shall equally 
shrink from worshipping Him as Son, since this also is a name which has been bestowed upon many. And 
why do I say the Son? The very name of God itself has been given by God to many. "The Lord the God of 
gods hath spoken and called the earth. "(4) And "I have said Ye are gods, "(5) and "Thou shalt not revile the 
gods. "(6) Many too have appropriated tiffs name to themselves. The daemons who have deceived 
mankind have given this title to idols; whence Jeremiah exclaims, "The gods that have not made the 
heavens and the earth even they shall perish from the earth and from under these heavens;"(7) and again 
"They made to themselves gods of silver and gods of gold;"(8) and the prophet Isaiah when he had 
mocked the making of the idols, and said " He burneth part thereof in the fire with part thereof he eateth flesh 
he warmeth himself and saith Aha I am warm I have seen the fire, "(9) went on "and the residue thereof he 
maketh a god and falleth down unto it and saith 'Deliver me for thou art my god'"(10) and so the prophet 
laments over them and says "Know that their heart is ashes. "(1 1) And the Psalmist David has taught us to 
sing "For all the gods of the nations are idols, but the Lord made the heavens. "(12) 
But this common use of titles gives no offence to men who are instructed in true religion. We are aware that 
the daemons have falsely bestowed upon themselves and on idols the divine name, while the saints have 
received this honour of free grace. 

In reality and by nature it is the God of all, and His only-begotten Son and the Holy Spirit which are God. This 
is distinctly taught us by the admirable Paul in the words "For though there be that are called gods whether 
in heaven or in earth, as there are gods many and lords many, but to us there is but one God, the Father, of 
whom are all things, and we in Him; and one Lord by whom are all things and we by Him."(1) And the Holy 
Spirit is called the Spirit of God and so also is the soul of man, for, it is written, "His breath goeth forth, "(2) and 
"O ye spirits and souls of the righteous bless ye the Lord, "(3) and the Psalmist David called the angels 
spirits. "Who maketh His angels spirits and His ministers a flame of fire. "(4) Why indeed do I mention the 
angels and the souls of men? Even the daemons are so called by the Lord "He shall take unto him seven 
other spirits more wicked than himself and they shall enter in, and the last state of that man shall be worse 
than the first."(5) But even this application of the name does not offend the pious reader, for the Father and 
His only begotten Son and His Holy Spirit are one God by nature; and the divine Word made man, our Lord 
Jesus Christ, is by nature one Son, only begotten of the Father; and the Comforter who completes the 
number of the Trinity is one Holy Ghost. Thus though many are named fathers, we worship one Father, the 
Father before the ages, who Himself gave this title to men, as the Apostle says, "For this cause I bow my 
knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom every fatherhood in heaven and earth is named. "(6) 
Let us not then, because others are called christs, rob ourselves of the worship of our Lord Jesus Christ. For 
just as though many are called gods and fathers, there is one God and Father over all and before the ages; 
and though many are called sons, there is one real and natural Son; and though many are styled spirits 
there is one Holy Ghost; just so though many are called christs there is one Lord Jesus Christ by Whom are 
all things. And very properly does the Church cling to this name; for she has heard Paul, escorter of the 
Bride, exclaiming "I have espoused you to one husband that I may present you as a chaste virgin to 
Christ,"(7) and again "Husbands love your wives as Christ also loved the Church, "(1) and again "For this 
cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall be joined unto his wife, and they two shall be one 
flesh. This is a great mystery; but I speak concerning Christ and the Church. "(2) Listen to him as he says 
"Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us, "(3) and elsewhere "Know ye 
not that so many of us as were baptized unto Jesus Christ were baptized into His death, "(4) and in another 
place, "For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ, "(5) and again "Put ye on 
the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lust thereof."(6) 
They who are blessed by the boons of God and have learnt to know these passages and others like them, 

kindled with warm love for their bountiful Master, constantly carry on their lips this His dearest name and cry 
in the words of the Song of Songs "My beloved is mine and I am his;" "I sat down under his shadow with 
great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste. "(7) And besides all this that name of ours which we love so 
well we have derived from the name of Christ. We are called Christians. (8) 

Of this name the Lord of all says, "The Lord God shall call His servants by another name which shall be 
blessed on the earth"(9) and the following is the reason why the Church specially clings to this name. When 
the only-begotten Son of God was made man, then He was named Christ, then human nature received the 
beams of intellectual light; then the heralds of the truth shed their beams upon the world. Teachers of the 
Church, however, constantly used the names of the only begotten without distinction; at one time they glorify 
the Father the Son and the Holy Ghost; at another the Father with Christ and the Holy Ghost; yet as far as the 
sense is concerned there is here no difference. Wherefore after the Lord had commanded to baptize in the 
name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost the blessed Peter said to them who received his 
preaching and asked what they must do, "Believe and be baptized every one of you in the name of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, "(1) as though this name contained in itself all the potency of the divine command. The same 
teaching is clearly given us by the great Basil, luminary of the Cappadocians,(2) or rather of the world. His 
words are "the ham e of Christ is the confession of the whole." It indicates at once the Father, who anointed, 
the Son, who was anointed, and the Holy Ghost whereby He was anointed. Furthermore the thrice blessed 
Fathers assembled in council at Nicaea, after saying that we must believe in one God, the Father, added 
"and in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God." Thereby they teach that the Lord Jesus Christ 
is Himself the only begotten Son of God. 

To what has been said it must also be added that we must not affirm that after the ascension the Lord Christ 
is not Christ but only begotten Son. The divine Gospels and the history of the Acts and the Epistles of the 
Apostle himself were, as we know, written after the ascension. It is after the ascension that the divine Paul 
exclaims "Seeing then that we have a great High Priest that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of 
God, let us hold fast our profession. "(3) And again, "For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with 
hands, which are the figures of the true; but into Heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for 
us. "(4) And again after speaking of our hope in God he adds" which hope we have as an anchor both sure 
and stedfast, and which entereth into that within the veil; whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus 
made an High Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec."(1) And when, writing to the blessed Titus about 
the second advent he says," Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God 
and our Saviour Jesus Christ."(2) And to the Thessalonians he wrote in similar terms "For they themselves 
show of us what manner of entering in we had unto you, and how we turned to God from idols to serve the 
living and true God; and to wait for His Son from heaven, whom He raised from the dead, even Jesus, which 
delivered us from the wrath to come. "(3) And again "And the Lord make you to increase and abound in love 
one toward another, and toward all men, even as we do toward you: to the end he may stablish your hearts 
unblamable in holiness before God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his 
saints. "(4) And again when writing to the same a second time he says, "Now we beseech you, brethren, by 
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him. "(5) And a little further on when 
predicting the destruction of antichrist he adds, "Whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, 
and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming. "(6) And when exhorting the Romans to concord he says, 
"But why dost thou judge thy brother? or why dost thou set at naught thy brother? for we shall all stand before 
the judgment seat of Christ. For it is written, as I live, saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every 
tongue shall confess to God. "(7) And the Lord Himself when announcing His second advent besides other 
things says too this "Then if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there; believe it not. For as the 
lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west, so shall also the coming of the Son of Man 
be."(8) 

And after the immortality and incorruptibility of His body He called Himself Son of Man, naming Himself from 
the nature which was seen, inasmuch as the divine nature is indeed invisible to angels, as the Lord Himself 
had said "No one hath seen God at any time. "(9) And to the great Moses He said "There shall no man see 
me and live."(10) 

The words "Henceforth know we no man after the flesh; yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh; yet 
now henceforth know we Him no more,"(1) were not written by the divine Apostle in order to annul the 
assumed nature, but for the confirmation of our own future incorruption, immortality, and spiritual life. 
The Apostle therefore continues "Therefore if any man be in Christ he is a new creature; old things are 
passed away; behold all things are become new. "(2) He speaks of what is to be in the future as though it 
had already come to pass. We have not yet been gifted with immortality, but we shall be; and when so gifted 
we shall not become bodiless, but we shall put on immortality. "For" says the divine Apostle, "we would not 
be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life. "(3) And again "For this 
corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality. "(4) Thus he did not speak of the 
Lord as bodiless, but taught us to believe that even the visible nature is incorruptible, and glorified with the 

divine glory. This instruction he has given us yet more clearly in the Epistle to the Philippians; "For our 
conversation" he writes "is in heaven; from whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ; who 
shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body. "(5) By these words he 
teaches us distinctly that the body of the Lord is a body, but a divine body, and glorified with the divine 
glory. 

Let us, then, not shun the name whereby we enjoy salvation, and whereby all things are made new, as says 
our teacher himself in his Epistle to the Ephesians,-"According to His good pleasure which He hath 
purposed in Himself; that in the dispensation of the fulness of time He might gather together in one all things 
in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth, even in Him. "(6) Let us rather learn from this 
blessed language how we are bound to glorify our benefactor, by connecting the name of Christ with our 
God and Father. In his Epistle to the Romans the Apostle says "my gospel, and the preaching of Jesus 
Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery, which was kept secret since the world began, but now is 
made manifest, and by the scriptures of the prophets, according to the commandment of the everlasting 
God, made known to all nations for the obedience of faith; to God only will be glory through Jesus Christ 
forever. Amen."(1) Writing to the Ephesians he thus gives praise-"Now unto Him that is able to do 
exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the power that worketh in us, unto Him be 
glory in the Church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages, world without end. Amen.And a little before he says, 
"For this cause I bow my knee unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ of whom the whole family in heaven 
and earth is named. "(3) And considerably farther on he says "Giving thanks always for all things unto God 
and the Father in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ."(4) And when he requites with benediction the liberality 
of the Philippians he says "But my God shall supply all your need according to His riches m glory by Christ 
Jesus. "(5) And for the Hebrews he prayed, "Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our 
Lord Jesus Christ, that great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make 
you perfect in every good work, to do His will, working in you that which is well pleasing in His sight, through 
Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. "(6) And not only when glorifying, but also when 
exhorting and protesting, the Apostle conjoins the Christ with God the Father. To the blessed Timothy he 
exclaims "I charge thee therefore before God and the Lord Jesus Christ."(7) And again "I give thee charge in 
the sight of God who quickeneth all things, and before Jesus Christ, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a 
good confession; that thou keep this commandment without spot, unrebukable, until the appearing of our 
Lord Jesus Christ; which in His times He shall shew, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings 
and Lord of lords; who only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto; whom no 
man hath seen, nor can see; to whom be honour and power everlasting. Amen. "(8) 
These are the lessons we have learnt from the divine Apostles; this is the teaching given us by John and 
Matthew, those mighty rivers of the gospel message. The latter says "The book of the generation of Jesus 
Christ the son of David, the son of Abraham;"(9) and the former when he shewed the things which were 
before the ages wrote, "In the beginning was the Word and the Word was with God and the Word was God. 
The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by Him." 

CXLVII.(2) To John, Bishop of Germanicia. 

Immediately on receipt of your holiness's former letter I replied. About the present state of affairs, it is 
impossible to entertain any good hope. I apprehend that this is the beginning of the general apostasy. For 
when we see that those who lament what was done as they say, by violence, at Ephesus, show no signs of 
repentance, but abide by their unlawful deeds and are building up a superstructure at once of injustice and 
of impiety; when we see that the rest take no concerted action to deny their deeds and do not refuse to hold 
communion with men who abide by their unlawful action, what hope of good is it possible for us to entertain? 
Had they been expressing their admiration of what has happened as though all had been well and rightly 
done, it would only have been proper for them to abide by what they themselves commend. But if, as they 
say, they are lamenting what has been done and stating it to have been done by force and violence, why in 
the world do they not repudiate what has been unlawfully done? Why is the present, which lasts for such a 
little time, preferred before what is sure to come to pass? Why in the world do they openly lie and deny that 
any innovation has been introduced into doctrine? On account of what murders and witchcrafts have I been 
expelled? What adulteries did the man commit? What tombs did the man violate? It is perfectly clear even 
to outsiders that it was for doctrine that I and the rest were expelled. Why the Lord Domnus too, because he 
would not accept "the Chapters"(3) was deposed by these excellent persons who called them admirable 
and confessed that they abided by them. I had read their propositions, and they rejected me as the head 
and front of the heresy and expelled others for the same reason. (4) 

What has happened proves plainly enough that they supposed the Saviour to have laid down the law of 
practical virtue rather for Hamaxobians(l) than for them. When some men had given in charges against 
Candidianus, the Pisidian,(2) accusing him of several acts of adultery and other iniquities, it is said that the 

president of the council remarked, "If you are bringing accusation on points of doctrine, we receive your 
charges; we have not come here to decide about adulteries." Accordingly Athenius and Athanasius(3) who 
had been expelled by the Eastern Synod were bidden to return to their own churches; just as though our 
Saviour had laid down no laws about conduct, and had only ordered us to observe doctrines-which those 
most sapient persons have been foremost in corrupting. Let them then cease to mock; let them no longer 
attempt to conceal the impiety which they have confirmed by blows as well as by words. If this is not the 
case, let them tell us the reasons of the massacres; let them own in writing the distinction between the 
natures of our Saviour, and that the union is without confusion; let them declare that after the union both 
Godhead and manhood remained unimpaired. "God is not mocked. "(4) Let the chapters be denied which 
they have often repudiated, and now at Ephesus have sanctioned. Do not let them trick your holiness by 
their lies. They used to praise my utterances at Antioch, being brethren, and when made readers, and 
ordained deacons, presbyters and bishops; and at the end of my discourse they used to embrace me and 
kiss me, on head, on breast, on hands; and some of them would cling to my knees, calling my doctrine 
apostolic, -the very doctrine that they have now condemned, and anathematized. They used to call me 
luminary, not only of the East, but of the whole world, and now I forsooth have been proscribed and, so far as 
lies in their power, I have not even bread to eat. They have anathematized even all who converse with me. 
But the man whom but a little while ago they deposed and called Valentinian and Apollinarian they have 
honoured as a martyr of the faith, rolling at his feet, asking his pardon and calling him spiritual father. Do 
even woodlice change their colour to match the stones or chameleons their skin to suit the leaves, as these 
men do their mind to match the times? I give up to them see, dignity, rank, and all the luxury of this life. On the 
side of the apostolic doctrines I await the evils which they deem terrible, finding sufficient consolation in the 
thought of the judgment of the Lord. For I hope that for the sake of this injustice the Lord will remit me many of 
my sins. 

Now I implore your holiness to beware of the fellowship of iniquity and to insist on their repudiation of what 
has been done. If they refuse shun them as traitors to the faith. That your reverence should wait awhile to 
see if the tempest will pass, we have not thought subject for blame. But after the ordination of the primate of 
the East(1) every man's mind will be made manifest. Deign, Sir, to pray for me. At this time I am sorely in 
want of that help that I may hold out against all that is being devised against me. 

CXLVIII in the Edition of Garnerius is "the minute of the most holy bishop Cyril, delivered to 
Posidonius, when sent by him to Rome, in the matter of Nestorius." (Cyrill. Ep. XI. torn. Ixxvii. 
85.) 

CXLIX is "Copy of the Letter written by John, bishop of Antioch, to Nestorius." 

This letter has sometimes been supposed to have been really composed by Theodoret.(2) 

CL. Letter of Theodoretus, bishop of Cyrus, to Joannes, bishop of Antioch. (3) 

I have been much distressed at reading the anathematisms which you have sent to request me to refute in 
writing, and to make plain to all their heretical sense. I have been distressed at the thought that one 
appointed to the shepherd's office, entrusted with the charge of so great a flock and appointed to heal the 
sick among his sheep, is both himself unsound, and that to a terrible degree, and is endeavouring to infect 
his lambs with his disease and treats the sheep of his folds with greater cruelty than that of wild beasts. 
They, indeed, tear and rend the sheep that are dispersed and separated from the flock; but be in its very 
midst, and while thought to be its saviour and its guardian introduces secret error among the victims of their 
confidence in him. Against an open assault it is possible to take precautions, but when an attack is made in 
the guise of friendship, its victim is found off his guard and hurt is easily done him. Hence foes who make 
war from within are far more dangerous than those who attack from without. 

I am yet more grieved that it should be in the name of true religion and with the dignity of a shepherd that he 
should give utterance to his heretical and blasphemous words, and renew that vain and impious teaching of 
Apollinarius which was long ago stamped out. Besides all this there is the fact that he not only supports 
these views but even dares to anathematize those who decline to participate in his blasphemies;-if he is 
really the author of these productions and they have not proceeded from some enemy of the truth who has 
composed them in his name and, as the old story has it, flung the apple of discord(2) in the midst, and so 
fanned the flame on high. 

But whether this composition comes from himself or from some other in his name, I, for my part, by the aid of 
the light of the Holy Ghost, in the investigation of this heretical and corrupt opinion, according to the measure 
of the power given me, have refuted them as best I could. I have confronted them with the teaching of 
evangelists and apostles. I have exposed the monstrosity of the doctrine, and proved how vast is its 

divergence from divine truth. This I have done by comparing it with the words of the Holy Spirit, and pointing 
out what strange and jarring discord there is between it and the divine. 

Against the hardihood of this anathematizing, thus much I will say, that Paul, the clear-voiced herald of truth, 
anathematized those who had corrupted the evangelic and apostolic teaching and boldly did so against 
the angels, not against those who abided by the laws laid down by theologians; these he strengthened with 
blessings, saying, "And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them and mercy and on the 
Israel of God. "(1) Let then the author of these writings reap from the Apostle's curse the due rewards of his 
labours and the harvest of his seeds of heresy. We will abide in the teaching of the holy Fathers. 
To this letter I bare appended my counter arguments, that on reading them you may judge whether I have 
effectively destroyed the heretical propositions. Setting down each of the anathematisms by itself, I have 
annexed the counter statement that readers may easily understand, and that the refutation of the dogmas 
may he clear.(2) 

LETTERS OF THE BLESSED THEODORET, BISHOP OF 
CYRUS, LETTERS CLI TO CLXXXI 

CLI. Letter or address of Theodoret to the monks of the Euphratensian, the Osrhoene, Syria, 
Phoenicia, and Cilicia .(3) 

When I contemplate the condition of the Church at the present crisis of affairs,-the tempest which has 
recently beset the holy ship, the furious blasts, the beating of the waves, the deep darkness of the night, and, 
besides all this, the strife of the mariners, the struggle going on between oarsmen the drunkenness of the 
pilots, and, lastly, the untimely action of the bad.-l bethink me of the laments of Jeremiah anti cry with him, 
"my bowels, my bowels! I am pained at my very heart, my heart maketh a noise in me, "(4) and to put away 
despondency's great cloud by the drops from my eyes, I have recourse to founts of tears. Amid a storm so 
wild it is fitting that the pilots be awake, to battle wills the tempest, and take heed for the safety of the ship: the 
sailors ought to cease from their strife, and strive to undo the danger alike by prayer and skill: the mariners 
ought to keep the peace, and quarrel neither with one another nor with the pilots, but implore the Lord of the 
sea to banish the darkness by His rod. No one now is willing to do anything of the kind; and, just as happens 
in a night-engagement, we cannot recognise one another, we leave our enemies alone, and waste our 
weapons against our own side; we wound our comrades for foes, while all the while the bystanders laugh at 
our drunken folly, enjoy our disasters, and are delighted to see us engaged in mutual destruction. The 
responsibility for all this lies with those who have striven to corrupt the apostolic faith, and have dared to add 
a monstrous doctrine to the teaching of the Gospels; with them that have accepted the impious "Chapters" 
which they have sent forth with anathematisms to the imperial city, and have confirmed them, as they have 
imagined, by their own signatures. But these "Chapters" have sprouted without doubt from the sour root of 
Apollinarius; they are tainted with Arian and Eunomian error; look into them carefully, and you will find that 
they are not clear of the impiety of Manes and Valentinus.(l) 

In his very first chapter he rejects the dispensation^) which has been made on our behalf, teaching that God 
the Word did not assume human nature, but was Himself changed into flesh, thus laying down that the 
incarnation took place not in reality but in semblance and seeming. This is the outcome of the impiety of 
Marcion, Manes, and Valentinus. 

In his second and third chapters, as though quite oblivious of what he had stated in his preface, he brings in 
the hypostatic union, and a meeting by natural union, and by these terms he represents that a kind of mixture 
and confusion was effected of the divine nature and of the form of the servant. This comes of the innovation 
of the Apollinarian heresy. 

In his fourth chapter he denies the distinction of the terms of evangelists and apostles, and refuses to allow, 
as the teaching of the orthodox Father's has allowed, the terms of divine dignity to be understood of the 
divine nature, while the terms of humility, spoken in human sense, are applied to the nature assumed; 
whence the rightminded can easily detect the kinship with impiety. For Arius and Eunomius, asserting the 
only begotten Son of God to be a creature, and made out of the non-existent, and a servant, have ventured 
to apply to His godhead what is said in lowly and human sense; establishing by such means the difference 
of substance and the unlikeness. Besides this, to be brief, he argues that the very impassible and 
immutable Godhead of the Christ suffered, and was crucified, dead, and buried. This goes beyond even the 
madness of Arius and Eunomius, for this pitch of impiety has not been reached even by them that dare to 
call the maker and creator of the universe a creature. Furthermore he blasphemes against the Holy Ghost, 
denying that It proceeds from the Father, in accordance with the word of the Lord, but maintaining that It has 
Its origin of the Son. Here we have the fruit of the Apollinarian seed; here we come near the evil husbandry 
of Macedonius. Such are the offspring of the Egyptian, viler children of a vile father. This growth, which men, 
entrusted with the healing of souls, ought to make abortive while yet in the womb, or destroy as soon as it is 
born, as dangerous and deadly to mankind, is cherished by these excellent persons, and promoted with 
great energy, alike to their own ruin and to that of all who will listen to them. We, on the contrary, earnestly 
desire to keep our heritage untouched; and the faith which we have received, and in which we have been 
ourselves baptized, and baptize others, we strive to preserve uninjured and undefiled. We confess that our 
Lord Jesus Christ, perfect God and perfect man, of a reasonable soul and body, was begotten of the Father 
before the ages, as touching the Godhead; and in the last days for us men and our salvation (was born) of 
the Virgin Mary; that the same Lord is of one substance with the Father as touching the Godhead, and of one 
substance with us as touching the manhood. For there was an union of two natures. Wherefore we 

acknowledge one Christ, one Son, one Lord; but we do not destroy the union; we believe it to have been 
made without confusion, in obedience to the word of the Lord to the Jews, "Destroy this temple and in three 
days I will raise it up."(1) If on the contrary there had been mixture and confusion, and one nature was made 
out of both, He ought to have said "Destroy me and in three days I shall be raised." But now, to show that 
there is a distinction between God according to His nature, and the temple, and that both are one Christ, His 
words are "Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up," clearly teaching that it was not God who 
was undergoing destruction, but the temple. The nature of this latter was susceptible of destructions while 
the power of the former raised what was being destroyed. Furthermore it is in obedience to the divine 
Scriptures that we acknowledge the Christ to be God and man. That our Lord Jesus Christ is God is 
asserted by the blessed evangelist John "In the beginning was the Word and the Word was with God and 
the Word was. God. He was in the beginning with God. All things were made by Him and without Him was 
not anything made that was made."(1) And again, "That was the true light which lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world. "(2) And the Lord Himself distinctly teaches us, "He that hath seen me hath seen the 
Father."(3) And "I and my Father are one"(4) and "I am in the Father and the Father in me, "(5) and the 
blessed Paul in his epistle to the Hebrews says "Who being the brightness of His glory and the express 
image of His person, and upholding all things by the word of His power"(6) and in the epistle to the 
Philippians "Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus; who being in the form of God thought it 
not robbery to be equal with God but made Himself of no reputation and took upon Him the form of a 
servant."(7) And in the Epistle to the Romans, "Whose are the fathers and of whom as concerning the flesh 
Christ came who is over all God blessed for ever. Amen. "(8) And in the epistle to Titus "Looking for that 
blessed hope and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ. "(9) And Isaiah 
exclaims "Unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon His shoulder; 
and His name shall be called, Angel of great counsel, Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, powerful, the 
Prince of Peace, the Father of the Age to come."(1 0) And again "In chains they shall come over and they 
shall fall unto thee. They shall make supplication unto thee shying, surely God is in thee anti there is none 
else, there is no God. Verily thou art a God that hidest thyself, O God of Israel, the Saviour."(1 1) The name 
Emmanuel, however, indicates both God and man, for it is interpreted in the Gospel to mean "God with 
us, "(12) that is to say "God in man," God in our nature. And the divine Jeremiah too utters the prediction "This 
is our God and there shall none other be accounted of in comparison with him. He hath found out all the way 
of knowledge and hath given it unto Jacob His servant and to Israel His beloved and afterward did He show 
Himself upon earth and conversed with men."(1) And countless other passages might be found as well in 
the holy gospels and in the writings of the apostles as in the predictions of the prophets, setting forth that our 
Lord Jesus Christ is very God. 

That after the Incarnation He is spoken of as Man our Lord Himself teaches in His words to the Jews "Why 
go ye about to kill me?" "A man that hath told you the truth. "(2) And in the first Epistle to the Corinthians the 
blessed Paul writes "For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead, "(3) and 
to show of whom he is speaking he explains his words and says, "For as in Adam all die even so in Christ 
shall all be made alive. "(4) And writing to Timothy he says, "For there is I one God and one mediator 
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus. "(5) In the Acts in his speech at Athens "The times of this 
ignorance God winked at; but now commandeth all men everywhere to repent; because He hath appointed 
a day in the which He will judge the world in righteousness by that than whom He hath ordained, whereof He 
hath given assurance unto all men, in that He hath raised him from the dead. "(6) And the blessed Peter 
preaching to the Jews says, "Ye men of Israel, hear these words Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of 
God among you by miracles and wonders and signs which God did by Him in the midst of you, "(7) and the 
prophet Isaiah when predicting the sufferings of the Lord Christ, whom but just before he had called God, 
calls man in the passage "A man of sorrows and acquainted with grief." "Surely he hath borne our griefs and 
carried our sorrows. "(8) I might have collected other consentient passages of holy Scripture and inserted 
them in my letter had I not known yon to be practised in the divine oracles as befits the man called blessed 
in the Psalms. (9) I now leave the collection of evidence to your own diligence and proceed with my subject. 
We confess then that our Lord Jesus Christ is very God and very man. We do not divide the one Christ into 
two persons, but we believe two natures to be united without confusion. We shall thus be able without 
difficulty to refute even the manifold blasphemy of the heretics: for many and various are the errors of those 
who have rebelled against the truth, as we shall proceed to point out. Marcion and Manes deny that God the 
Word assumed human nature and do not believe that our Lord Jesus Christ was born of a Virgin. They say 
that God the Word Himself was fashioned in human form and appeared as man rather in semblance than in 
reality. 

Valentinus and Bardesanes admit the birth, but they deny the assumption of our nature and affirm that the 
Son of God employed the Virgin as it were as a mere conduit. 

Sabellius the Libyan, Photinus, Marcellus the Galatian, and Paul of Samosata say that a mere man was 
born of the Virgin, but openly deny that the eternal Christ was God. 

Arius and Eunomius maintain that God the Word assumed only a body of the Virgin. 
Apollinarius adds to the body an unreasonable soul, as though the incarnation of God the Word had taken 
place not for the sake of reasonable beings but of unreasonable, while the teaching of the Apostles is that 
perfect man was assumed by perfect God, as is proved by the words "Who being in the form of God took 
the form of a servant;"(1) for "form" is put instead of "nature" and "substance" and indicates that having the 
nature of God He took the nature of a servant. 

When therefore we are disputing with Marcion, Manes and Valentinus, the earliest inventors of impiety, we 
endeavour to prove from the divine Scriptures that the Lord Christ is not only God but also man. 
When, however, we are proving to the ignorant that the doctrine of Arius, Eunomius and Apollinarius about 
the oeconomy is incomplete, we show from the divine oracles of the Spirit that the assumed nature was 
perfect. 

The impiety of Sabellius, Photinus, Marcellus, and Paulus, we refute by proving by the evidence of divine 
Scripture that the Lord Christ was not only man but also eternal God, of one substance with the Father. That 
He assumed a reasonable soul is stated by our Lord Himself in the words "Now is my soul troubled; and 
what shall I say? Father save me from this hour; but for this cause came I unto this hour."(2) And again "My 
soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto death. "(3) And in another place "I have power to lay down my soul 
(life A. V.) and I have power to take it again. No man taketh it from me."(1) And the angel said to Joseph, 
"Take the young child and His mother and go into the land of Israel; for they are dead which sought the 
young child's soul (life A. V.)"(2) And the Evangelist says "Jesus increased in wisdom and stature and in 
favour with God and man." Now what increases in stature and wisdom is not the Godhead which is ever 
perfect, but the human nature which comes into being in time, grows, and is made perfect. 
Wherefore all the human qualities of the Lord Christ, hunger, I mean, and thirst and weariness, sleep, fear, 
sweat, prayer, and ignorance, and the like, we affirm to belong to our nature which God the Word assumed 
and united to Himself in effecting our salvation. But the restitution of motion to the maimed, the resurrection of 
the dead, the supply of loaves, and all the other miracles we believe to be works of the divine power. In this 
sense I say that the same Lord Christ both suffers and destroys suffering; suffers, that is, as touching the 
visible, and destroys suffering as touching the ineffably indwelling Godhead. This is proved beyond 
question by the narrative of the holy evangelists, from whom we learn that when lying in a manger and 
wrapped in swaddling clothes, He was announced by a star, worshipped by magi and hymned by angels. 
Thus we reverent discern that the swaddling bands and the want of a bed and all the poverty belonged to 
the manhood; while the journey of the magi and the guiding of the star and the company of the angels 
proclaim the Godhead of the unseen. In like manner He makes His escape into Egypt and avoids the fury of 
Herod by flight, (3) for He was man; but as the Prophet says "He shakes the idols of Egypt,"(4) for He was by 
nature God. He is circumcised; He keeps the law; and offers offerings of purification, because He sprang 
from the root of Jesse. And, as man, He was under the law; and afterwards did away with the law and gave 
the new covenant, because He was a lawgiver and had promised by the prophets that He Himself would 
give it. He was baptized by John; and this shews His sharing what is ours. He is testified to by the Father 
from on high and is pointed out by the Spirit; this proclaims Him eternal. He hungered; but He fed many 
thousands with five loaves; the latter is divine, the former human. He thirsted and He asked for water; but He 
was the well of life; the former of His human weakness, the latter of His divine power. He fell asleep in the 
boat, but he put the tempest of the sea to sleep; the former of His human nature, the latter of His efficient and 
creative power which has gifted all things with their being. He was weary as he walked; but He healed the 
halt and raised dead men from their tombs; the former of human weakness, the latter of a power passing that 
of this world. He feared death and He destroyed death; the former shows that He was mortal, the latter that 
He was immortal or rather giver of life. "He was crucified," as the blessed Paul says "through weakness. "(1) 
But as the same Paul says "Yet He liveth by the power of God. "(2) Let that word "weakness" teach us that 
He was not nailed to the tree as the Almighty, the Uncircumscribed, the Immutable and Invariable, but that 
the nature quickened by the power of God, was according to the Apostle's teaching dead and buried, both 
death and burial being proper to the form of the servant. "He broke the gates of brass and cut the bars of 
iron in sunder"(3) and destroyed the power of death and in three days raised His own temple. These are 
proofs of the form of God in accordance with the Lord's words "Destroy this temple and in three days I will 
raise it up. "(4) Thus in the one Christ through the sufferings we contemplate the manhood and through the 
miracles we apprehend the Godhead. We do not divide the two natures into two Christs, and we know that of 
the Father God the Word was begotten and that of the seed of Abraham and David our nature was 
assumed. Wherefore also the blessed Paul says when discoursing of Abraham "He saith not and to seeds 
as of many; but as of one, and to thy seed which is Christ,"(5) and writing to Timothy he says " Remember 
that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from the dead according to my gospel. "(6) And to the 
Romans he writes "Concerning His son Jesus Christ ... which was made of the seed of David according to 
the flesh. "(7) And again "Whose are the fathers and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came." s And the 
Evangelist writes "The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the Son of David, the Son of Abraham, "(9) 

and the blessed Peter in the Acts says David " being a prophet and knowing that God had sworn with an 
oath to him that of the fruit of his loins, He would raise up Christ to sit on his throne, he seeing this before 
spake of his resurrection, "(1) and God says to Abraham "In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be 
blessed, "(2) and Isaiah " There shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse and a branch shall grow out 
of His roots; and there shall rest upon Him a the spirit of wisdom and understanding the spirit of counsel and 
might, the spirit of knowledge and of piety and the spirit of the fear of the Lord shall fill Him. "(4) And a little 
further on " And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse which shall stand for an ensign of the people; to it 
shall the Gentiles seek; and His rest shall be glorious. "(5) 

From these quotations it is made plain that according to the flesh, the Christ was descended from Abraham 
and David and was of the same nature as theirs; while according to the Godhead He is Everlasting Son and 
Word of God, ineffably and in superhuman manner begotten of the Father, and co-eternal with Him as 
brightness and express image and Word. For as the word in relation to intelligence and brightness in 
relation to light are inseparably connected, so is the only begotten Son in relation to His own Father. We 
assert therefore that our Lord Jesus Christ is only begotten, and first born Son of God; only begotten both 
before the incarnation arid after the incarnation, but firstborn after being born of the Virgin. For the name 
first-born seems to be in a sense contrary to that of only begotten, because the only Son begotten of any 
one is called only begotten, while the eldest of several brothers is called first-born. The divine Scriptures 
state God the Word alone to have been begotten of tile Father; but the only begotten becomes also 
first-born, by taking our nature of the Virgin, and deigning to call brothers those who have trusted in Him; so 
that the same is only begotten in that He is God, first born in that He is Man. Thus acknowledging the two 
natures we adore the one Christ and offer Him one adoration, for we believe that the union took place from 
the moment of the conception in the Virgin's holy womb. Wherefore also we call tile holy Virgin both Mother 
of God(6) and Mother of man, since the Lord Christ Himself is called God and man in the divine Scripture. 
The name Emmanuel proclaims the union of the two natures. If we acknowledge the Christ to be both God 
and Man and so call Him, who is so insensate as to shrink from using the term "Mother of man" with that of " 
Mother of God"? For we use both terms of the Lord Christ. For this reason the Virgin is honoured and called 
"full of grace. "(1) What sensible man then would object to name the Virgin in accordance with the titles of the 
Saviour, when on His account she is honoured by the faithful? For He who was born of her is not worshipped 
on her account, but she is honoured with the highest titles on account of Him Who was born from her. 
Suppose the Christ to be God only, and to have taken the origin of His existence froth the Virgin, then let the 
Virgin be styled and named only "Mother of God" as having given birth to a being divine by nature. Bat if the 
Christ is both God and man and was God from everlasting (inasmuch as He did not begin to exist, being 
co-eternal with the Father that begat Him) and in these last days was born man of His human nature, then let 
him who wishes to define doctrine in both directions devise appellations for the Virgin with the explanation 
which of them befits the nature and which the union. But if any one should wish to deliver a panegyric and to 
compose hymns, and to repeat praises, and is naturally anxious to use the most august names; then, not 
laying down doctrine as in the former case, but with rhetorical laudation, and expressing all possible 
admiration at the mightiness of the mystery, let him gratify his heart's desire, let him employ high names, let 
him praise and let him wonder. Many instances of this kind are found in the writings of orthodox teachers. But 
on all occasions let moderation be respected. All praise to him who said that "moderation is best," although 
he is not of our herd. (2) 

This is the confession of the faith of the Church; this is the doctrine taught by evangelists and apostles. For 
this faith, by God's grace I will not refuse to undergo many deaths. This faith we have striven to convey to 
them that now err and stray, again and again challenging them to discussion, and eager to show them the 
truth, but without success. Wth a suspicion of their probably plain confutation, they have shirked the 
encounter; for verily falsehood is rotten and yokefellow of obscurity. "Every one," it is written "that doeth evil 
cometh not to the light lest his deeds should be reproved"(1) by the light. 

Since, therefore, after many efforts, I have failed in persuading them to recognise the truth, I have returned to 
my own churches, filled at once with sorrow and with joy; with joy on account of my own freedom from error; 
and with sorrow at the unsoundness of my members. I therefore implore you to pray with all your might to our 
loving Lord, and to cry unto Him, " 'Spare Thy people, Lord and give not Thy heritage to reproach. '(2) 
Feed us O Lord that we become not as we were in the beginning when Thou didst not rule over us nor was 
Thy name invoked to help us. ' We are become a reproach to our neighhours, a scorn and derision to them 
that are round about us, '(3) because wicked doctrines have come into Thy inheritance. They have polluted 
Thy holy temple in that the daughters of stranger's have rejoiced over our troubles. A little while ago we 
were of one mind and one tongue and now are divided into many tongues. But, Lord our God, give us Thy 
peace which we have lost by setting Thy commandments at naught. O Lord we know none other than Thee. 
We call Thee by Thy name. ' Make both one and break down tile middle wall of the partition, '(4) namely the 
iniquity that has sprung up. Gather us one by one, Thy new Israel, building up Jerusalem and gathering 
together the outcasts of Israel. (5) Let us be made once more one flock(6) and all be fed by Thee; for Thou 

art the good Shepherd ' Who giveth His life for the shoe .'(7) 'Awake, why sleepest Thou O Lord, arise cast 
us not off forever.'(8) Rebuke the winds and the sea; give Thy Church calm and safety from the waves." 
These words and words like these I implore yon to utter to the God of all; for He is good anti full of 
loving-kindness anti ever fulfils the will of them that fear Him. He will therefore listen to your prayer, and will 
scatter this darkness deeper than the plague of Egypt. He will give you His own calm of love, and will gather 
them that are scattered abroad and welcome them that have been cast out. Then shall be heard " the voice 
of rejoicing and salvation in the tabernacles of the righteous. "(1) Then shall we cry unto Him we have been 
"glad according to the days wherein Thou hast afflicted us and the years wherein we have seen evil, "(2) 
and you when you have been granted your prayer shall praise Him in the words "Blessed be God which not 
turned away my prayer nor His mercy from me. "(3) 

Proof that after the Incarnation our Lord Jesus Christ, was one Son. 

The authors of slanders against me allege that I divide the one Lord Jesus Christ into two sons. But so far 
am I from holding this opinion that I charge with impiety all who dare to say so. For I have been taught, by the 
divine Scripture to worship one Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, God the Word 
incarnate. For we confess the same to be both God eternal, and made man in the last days for the sake of 
man's salvation; but made man not by the change of the Godhead but by the assumption of the manhood. 
For the nature of this godhead is immutable and invariable, as is that of the Father who begat Him before the 
ages. And whatever would be understood of the substance of the Father will also be wholly found in the 
substance of the only begotten; for of that substance He is begotten. This our Lord taught when the said to 
Philip "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father "(4) and again in another place "All things that the Father 
hath are mine, "(5) and elsewhere " I and the Father are one, "(6) and very many other passages may be 
quoted setting forth the identity of substance. 

It follows that He did not become God: He was God. "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with 
God; and the Word was God. "(7) He was not man: He became man, and the so became by taking on Him 
our nature: So says the blessed Paid:-"Who being in the form of God thought it not robbery to be equal with 
God, hut made Himself of no reputation, and took upon Him the form of a servant."(8) And again: "For verily 
He took not on Him the nature of angel's; but He took on Him the seed of Abraham. "(9) And again; 
Forasmuch then as the children are partaker's of flesh and blood, He also Himself likewise took part of the 
same. "(10) Thus He was both passible and impassible; mortal and immortal; passible, on the one hand, 
and mortal, as man; impassible, on the other, and immortal, as God. As God He raised His own flesh, which 
was dead;-as His own words declare: "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up."(1) And as 
man, He was passible and mortal up to the time of the passion. For, after the resurrection, even as man He 
is impassible, immortal, and incorruptible; and He discharges divine lightnings; not that according to the 
flesh tie has been changed into the nature of Godhead, but still preserving the distinctive marks of humanity. 
Nor yet is His body uncircumscribed, for this is peculiar to the divine nature alone, but it abides in its former 
circumscription. This He teaches in the words He spake to the disciples even after His resurrection "Behold 
my hands and feet that it is I myself; handle me and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me 
have. "(2) While He was thus beheld He went up into heaven; thus has He promised to come again, thus 
shall He be seen both by them that have believed and them that have crucified, for it is written "They shall 
look on Him whom they pierced. "(3) We therefore worship the Son, but we contemplate in Him either nature 
in its perfection, both that which took, and that which was taken; the one of God and the other of David. For 
this reason also He is styled both Son of the living God and Son of David; either nature receiving its proper 
title. Accordingly the divine scripture calls him both God and man, and the blessed Paul exclaims "There is 
one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; who gave Himself a ransom for 
all. "(4) But Him whom here he calls man in another place he describes as God for he says "Looking for that 
blessed hope and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ."(5) And yet in 
another place he uses both names at once saying "Of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came who is 
over all God blessed for ever. Amen. "(6) 

Thus he has stated the same Christ to be of the Jews according to the flesh, and God over all as God. 
Similarly the prophet Isaiah writes "A man of sorrows and acquainted with grief. ... Surely He hath borne our 
griefs and carried our sorrows, "(1) and shortly afterwards he says "Who shall declare His generation?"(2) 
This is spoken not of man but of God. Thus through Micah God says "Thou Bethlehem in the land of Judah 
art not the least among the princes of Judah, for out of thee shall come a governor that shall rule my people 
Israel, whose goings forth have been as of old from everlasting. "(3) Now by saying "From thee shall come 
forth a ruler" he exhibits the oeconomy of the incarnation; and by adding "whose goings forth have been as 
of old from everlasting" he declares the Godhead begotten of the Father before the ages. 
Since we have been thus taught by the divine scripture, and have further found that the teachers who have 
been at different periods illustrious in the Church, are of the same opinion, we do our best to keep our 

heritage inviolate; worshipping one Son of God, one God the Father, and one Holy Ghost; but at the same 
time recognising the distinction between flesh and Godhead. And as we assert them that divide our one 
Lord Jesus Christ into two sons to trangress flora the road trodden by the holy apostles, so do we declare 
the maintainers of the doctrine that the Godhead of the only begotten and the manhood have been made 
one nature to fall headlong into the opposite ravine. These doctrines we hold; these we preach; for these we 
do battle. 

The slander of the libellers that represent me as worshipping two sons is refuted by the plain facts of the 
case. I teach all persons who come to holy Baptism the faith put forth at Nicaea; and, when I celebrate the 
sacrament of regeneration I baptize them that make profession of their faith in the name of the Father, and of 
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, pronouncing each name by itself. And when I am performing divine service 
in the churches it is my wont to give glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Ghost; not sons, but 
Son. If then I uphold two sons, whether of the two is glorified by me, and whether remains unhonoured? For I 
have not quite come to such a pitch of stupidity as to acknowledge two sons and leave one of them without 
any tribute of respect. It follows then even from this fact that the slander is proved slander,-for I worship one 
only begotten Son, God the Word incarnate. And I call the holy Virgin "Mother of God"(4) because she has 
given birth to the Emmanuel, which means "God with us."(1) But the prophet who predicted the Emmanuel a 
little further on has written of him that "Unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given; and the government 
shall be upon his shoulders; and his name is called Angel of great counsel, wonderful, counsellor, mighty 
God, powerful, Prince of peace, Father of the age to come. "(2) Now if the babe born of the Virgin is styled 
"Mighty God," then it is only with reason that the mother is called "Mother of God." For the mother shares the 
honour of her offspring, and the Virgin is both mother of the Lord Christ as man, and again is His servant as 
Lord and Creator and God. 

On account of this difference of term He is said by the divine Paul to be "without father, without mother, 
without descent, having neither beginning of days nor end of life. "(3) He is without father as touching His 
humanity; for as man He was born of a mother alone. And He is without mother as God, for He was begotten 
from everlasting of the Father alone. And again He is without descent as God while as man He has descent. 
For it is written "The book of the generation of Jesus Christ the son of David, the son of Abraham. "(4) His 
descent is also given by the divine Luke. (5) So again, as God, He has no beginning of days for He was 
begotten before the ages; neither has He an end of life, for His nature is immortal and impassible. But as 
man He had both a beginning of days, for He was born in the reign of Augustus Caesar, and an end of life, 
for He was crucified in the reign of Tiberius Caesar. But now, as I have already said, even His human nature 
is immortal; and, as He ascended, so again shall He come according to the words of the Angel— "This 
same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven shall so come in like manner as ye have seen Him go 
into Heaven."(6) 

This is the doctrine delivered to us by the divine prophets; this is the doctrine of the company of the holy 
apostles; this is the doctrine of the great saints of the East and of the West; of the far-famed Ignatius, who 
received his archpriesthood by the right hand of the great Peter, and for the sake of his confession of Christ 
was devoured by savage beasts;(7) and of the great Eustathius, who presided over the assembled council, 
and on account of his fiery zeal for true religion was driven into exile. (1) 

This doctrine was preached by the illustrious Meletius, at the cost of no less pains, for thrice was he driven 
from his flock in the cause of the apostles' doctrines;(2) by Flavianus,(3) glory of the imperial see; and by the 
admirable Ephraim, instrument of divine grace, who has left us in the Syriac tongue a written heritage of 
good things;(4) by Cyprian, the illustrious ruler of Carthage and of all Libya, who for Christ's sake found a 
death in the fi re ; (5) by Damasus, bishop of great Rome, (6) and by Ambrose, glory of Milan, who preached 
and wrote it in the language of Rome. (7) 

The same was taught by the great luminaries of Alexandria, Alexander and Athanasius, men of one mind, 
who underwent sufferings celebrated throughout the world. This was the pasture given to their flocks by the 
great teachers of the imperial city, by Gregory, shining friend and supporter of the truth; by John, teacher of 
the world, by Atticus, their successor alike in see and in sentiment.(8) By these doctrines Basil, great light of 
the truth, and Gregory sprung from the same parents, (9) and Amphilochius,(10) who from him received the 
gift of the high-priesthood, taught their contemporaries, and have left the same to us in their writings for a 
goodly heritage. Time would fail me to tell of Polycarp,(11) and lrenaeus,(12) of Methodius(13) and 
Hippolytus,(14) and the rest of the teachers of the Church. In a word I assert that I follow the divine oracles 
and at the same time all these saints. By the grace of the spirit they dived into the depths of God-inspired 
scripture and both themselves perceived its mind, and made it plain to all that are willing to learn. Difference 
in tongue has wrought no difference in doctrine, for they were channels of the grace of the divine spirit, using 
the stream from one and the same fount. 

CLII. Report of the (bishops) of the East to the Emperor, giving information of their 
proceedings, and explaining the cause of the delay in the arrival of the bishop of 

Antioch.(1) 

In obedience to the order of your pious letter we have journeyed to the Ephesian metropolis. There we have 
found the affairs of the Church in confusion, and disturbed by internecine war. The cause of this is that Cyril of 
Alexandria and Memnon of Ephesus have handed together and mustered a great mob of rustics, and have 
forbidden both the celebration of the great feast of Pentecost, and the evening and morning offices. (2) 
They have shut the sacred churches and martyrs' shrines; they have assembled apart with the victims of 
their deceit; they have wrought innumerable iniquities, trampling under foot alike the canons of the holy 
Fathers, and your own decrees. And the action has been taken in face of the order given both in writing and 
by word of mouth by the most excellent count Candidianus,(3) envoy of your Christ-loving majesty, that the 
council must await the arrival of the very holy bishops, coming from all quarters of the Empire, and then and 
not till then formally assemble in obedience to your piety's commands. Moreover Cyril of Alexandria had 
written to me, the bishop of Antioch, two days before the meeting of their synod, that the whole council was 
awaiting my arrival. We have therefore deposed both the aforenamed, Cyril and Memnon, and have 
excluded them from all the services of the church. The rest, who have participated in their iniquity, we have 
excommunicated, until they shall reject and anathematize the Chapters(4) issued by Cyril, which are full of 
the Eunomian and Arian heresies, and shall, in obedience to your piety's command, assemble together with 
us, and shall in an orderly manner and with all exactitude, together with ourselves, examine into the 
questions at issue, and confirm the pious doctrine of the holy Fathers. 

As to the delay in my own arrival be it known to your piety that, in consideration of the distance of the way by 
land, -and this was our route, -I have come very quickly, I have travelled forty stages without pausing to rest 
on the way; so your Christian majesty may learn from the inhabitants of the towns on the route. Besides this I 
was detained many days in Antioch by the famine there; by the daily tumults of the people; and by the 
unusual severity of the rainy season, which caused the torrents to swell, and threatened danger to the town. 

CLIN. Report of the same to the empresses Pulcheria and Eudoxia. 

We had expected to be able to report to your pious majesties in different terms, but we are now compelled 
to make known to you the following facts, forced as we are by the irregular exercise of despotic power by 
Cyril of Alexandria and Memnon of Ephesus. The proper course to have been pursued, in accordance with 
the laws of the Church, and the command of your pious majesties, would have been to wait for the arrival of 
the godly bishops on the road, and in common with them to examine into the questions at issue concerning 
the true faith, and investigate the point offered for discussion, and, after exact enquiry, to confirm the 
doctrines of the apostles. They had written to me that they would wait for our arrival. They heard that we were 
only three stages off. Then they assembled an unconstitutional council by themselves, and have ventured 
on proceedings iniquitous, irregular, and bristling with absurdities. And this they have done though the most 
honourable count Candidianus, sent by your pious and Christian majesties for good order's sake, expressly 
charged them, alike in writing and by word of mouth, to wait for the arrival of the godly bishops who had been 
convened, and to attempt no innovation on the true faith, but to take their stand on the directions of our 
godly-minded sovereigns. Now in spite of their having heard the imperial letter and the advice of the most 
honourable count Candidianus, they have nevertheless made naught of due order. As the prophet says 
"They hatch cockatrice' eggs, and weave the spider's web; and he that would eat of their eggs when he 
breaks them findeth rottenness, and therein is a viper,"(1) Wherefore we confidently cry "Their webs shall 
not become garments, neither shall they cover themselves with their works. "(2) 

They have shut the churches and the martyrs' shrines; they have forbidden the celebration of the holy feast 
of Pentecost; besides this they have sent the minions of their disorderly despotism into bishops' private 
houses, uttering shocking threats, and forcing them to affix their signatures to illegal acts. We therefore 
considering all their preposterous conduct, have deposed the aforenamed Cyril and Memnon, and 
deprived them of their episcopate. Their associates in irregularity, whether influenced by sycophancy or by 
fear, we have excommunicated, until, coming to a knowledge of their own wounds, they shall heartily repent, 
shall anathematize the heretical Chapters of Cyril, which are tainted with the heresy of Apollinarius, Arius, 
and Eunomius, shall recover the faith of the Fathers in Council at Nicaea, and, in obedience to the pious 
commands of our Christian sovereigns, shall, peacefully and without any tumult, assemble in synod, be 
willing to examine with care the questions submitted to them, and honestly protect the purity of the faith of the 
Gospel. 

CLIV. Report of the same to the Senate of Constantinople. (1) 

CLV. Letter of John, bishop of Antioch and his supporters, to the clergy of Constantinople. (2) 

CLVI. Letterof the same to the people of Constantinople. (3) 

CLVII. Report of the Council of (the bishops of) the East to the victorious Emperor, 
announcing a second time the deposition of Cyril and of Memnon.(4) 

Your piety, which shines forth for the good of the empire and of the churches of God, has commanded us to 
assemble at Ephesus, in order to bring about peace and gain for the Church, rather than to confuse and 
disturb it. And the commands of your majesty plainly and distinctly indicate your pious and peaceful 
intentions for the churches of Christ. But Cyril of Alexandria, a man, it would seem, born and bred for the bane 
of the churches, after taking into partnership the audacity of Memnon of Ephesus, has first of all 
transgressed against your quieting and pious decree, and has so shewed his general depravity. Your 
majesty had ordered an investigation and careful testing to be made concerning the faith, and that with the 
consent and concord of all. Cyril, challenged, or rather himself convicting himself, on the count of the 
Apollinarian doctrines, by means of the letter which he lately sent to the imperial city, with anathematisms, 
whereby he is convicted of sharing the views of the impious and heretic Apollinarius, pays no heed to this 
condition of things, and, as though we were living with no emperor to govern us, is proceeding to every kind 
of lawlessness. He ought himself to be called to account for his unsound opinion about our Lord Jesus 
Christ; but, usurping an authority given him neither by the canons, nor by your edicts, he is hurrying headlong 
into every kind of disorder and illegality. 

Moved by these things the holy Synod, which has refused to accept his devices for the damage of the faith, 
for the aforesaid reasons deposes him. It deposes Memnon also, who has been his counsellor and abettor 
through all, who has kept up constant agitation against the very holy bishops for refusing to assent to his 
pernicious heterodoxy; who has shut the churches and every place of prayer, as if we were living among the 
heathen and the enemies of God; who has brought in the Ephesian mob, so that every day we are in 
supreme danger, while we look not to defence, but heed the right doctrines of true religion. For the 
destruction of these men is identical with the establishment of orthodoxy. 

From his own Chapters your majesty can have no difficulty in perceiving his impious mind. He is convicted 
of trying, so to say, to raise from Hades the impious Apollinarius, who died in his heresy, and of attacking the 
churches and the orthodox faith. He is shewn in his publications to anathematize at once evangelists and 
apostles and them that succeeded them as forefathers of the Church, who, moved not by their own 
imaginations, but by the holy Spirit, have preached the true faith, and proclaimed the gospel; a faith and 
gospel indeed opposed to what this man holds and teaches and by inculcating which he wishes to give his 
own private iniquity the mastery of the world. Since this is intolerable to us we have followed the proper 
course, relying at once on the divine grace and on your majesty's good will. 

We know that you give to nothing higher honour than to the sacred faith in which both you and your thrice 
blessed forefathers have been brought up. From them you have received the perpetual sceptre of empire, 
ever putting down the opponents of the apostolic doctrines. Such an opponent is the aforesaid Cyril, who, 
with the aid of Memnon, has captured Ephesus as he might some fortress, and justly shares with his ally the 
sentence of deposition. Justly: for, besides all that has been said, they have boldly tried every means of 
assault and every violence against us, who, to come together in council in ratification of your edict, have 
disregarded every claim of home and country and self. 

We are now the prey of tyranny, unless your piety intervene and order us to assemble in some other place, 
near at hand, where we shall be able, from the scriptures, and from the writings of the Fathers, to refute 
beyond contradiction both Cyril and the victims of his ingenuity. We have mercifully expelled these men 
from communion with the suggested hope of salvation in case they should repent; although, as if on some 
campaign of uncivilized soldiery, they have up to this moment furnished him with the means of his illegality. 
Some were deposed long ago, and have been restored by Cyril. Some have been excommunicated by 
their own metropolitans, and admitted by him again into communion. Others have been impaled on various 
accusations, and have been promoted by him to honour. All through, the main motive of his action has been 
the endeavour to achieve his heretical purpose by the force of numbers, for he does not reckon as he ought 
that in what relates to true religion, it is not numbers that are required, but rather correctness of doctrine and 
the truth of the doctrine of the apostles. Men are needed who are competent to establish these points not by 
audacity and masterful self-assertion but by pious use of apostolic testimony and example. 
For all these reasons we beseech and implore your majesty to bear prompt aid to assaulted truth, and to 
remedy without delay these men's masterful readiness; for, like a hurricane, it is sweeping the less 
moderate among us into pernicious heresy. Your piety has had care for the churches in Persia and among 
the barbarians; it is only right that you should not neglect those which are tossed by the storm within the 
boundaries of the Roman empire. 

CLVIII. Report of (the bishops of) the East to the very pious emperor, which delivered with 

the preceding. Report to the right honourable count Irenoeus. 

On receiving the letter of your piety we entertained hopes that the Egyptian storm which has lately struck the 
churches of God would be driven away. But we have been disappointed. Those men have been made 
even yet more daring by their madness; they have given no heed to the sentence of deposition justly and in 
due forth passed upon them, nor have become any more moderate in consequence of the rebuke of your 
majesty. They have trampled down alike the laws of your piety, and the canons of the holy Fathers, and, 
some of them being deposed and some excommunicated, keep festivals, and celebrate communion, in 
Houses of Prayer. And we, as we have already informed your Christ-loving majesty, on the receipt of your 
clemency's kindly letter, though our only desire was to pray in the church of the Apostles, have not only 
been prevented, but actually stoned, and chased for a considerable distance, so that we were compelled 
to effect our safety by flight at full speed. Our opponents on the contrary think that they may act just as they 
please. They have declined to make investigation of the questions at issue, and to undertake the defence 
of Cyril's heretical Chapters, rejecting the plain proofs of the impiety which they contain. They are impudent 
from mere impudence, while the examination of the questions before us requires not impudence, but 
calmness, knowledge, and skill in matters of doctrine. 

Under these circumstances we have been under the necessity of sending forward the most honourable 
Count Irenaeus, to approach your piety, and to explain the position of affairs. He has accurate information 
concerning all that has occurred, and has learned from us many modes of cure, whereby it may be possible 
to bring about the restoration of tranquillity to the holy churches of God. We beseech your clemency to grant 
him patient audience, and to give orders for the prompt carrying out of whatever measures may seem good 
to your piety, that we be not here crushed beyond all endurance. 

CLIX. Letter of the same to the Proefect and to the Master.(1) 

CLX. Letter of the same to the Governor and Scholasticus. (2) 

CLXI. Report presented to the Emperor by John, archbishop of Antioch and his supporters 
through Palladius Magistrianus.(3) 

CLXII. Letter of Theodore tus to Andreas, bishop of Samosata, written from Ephesus.(1) 

Writing from Ephesus I salute your holiness, I congratulate you on your infirmity, and deem you dear to God, 
in that you have known what evil deeds have been going on here by report, and not by personal 
experience. Evil indeed! They transcend all imagination and all incidents of history; they compel a continual 
downpour of tears. The body of the Church is in peril of dismemberment;-nay, rather I may say it has 
received the first incision;-unless the wise Healer restore and re-connect the unsound and severed limbs. 
Once again the Egyptian is raging against God, and warring with Moses and Aaron His servants, and the 
more part of Israel are on the side of the foe; for all too few are the sound who willingly suffer for true 
religion's sake. Ancient principles are trodden underfoot. Deposed men perform priestly functions, and they 
who have deposed them sit sighing at home. Men excommunicated by the same sentence as the deposed 
have relieved the deposed of their deposition of their own free will. Such is the mockery of a synod held by 
Egyptians, by Palestinians, by men from the Pontic and Asian dioceses, and by the West in their 
company. (2) 

What players in a pantomime, in the days of paganism, even in any farce so held up religion to ridicule? 
Indeed what farce-writer ever performed such a play? What dramatist ever wrote so sad a tragedy? Such 
and so great are the troubles that have beset God's Church, whereof I have narrated but a very small part. 

CLXIII. First Letter of the Commissioners of the East, sent to Chalcedon, among whom was 
Theodore tus. (3) 

On our arrival at Chalcedon, for neither we ourselves nor our opponents were permitted to enter 
Constantinople, on account of the seditions of the excellent monks, we heard that eight days before we had 
appeared (behold the glory of the most pious prince) the lord Nestorius was dismissed from Ephesus, free 
to go where he would; whereat we are much distressed, since verily deeds done illegally and informally 
now seem to have some force. Let your holiness however be assured that we shall eagerly join the battle 
for the Faith, and are willing to fight even unto death. To-day, the 11th of the month Gorpiaeum,(1) we are 
expecting our very pious Emperor to cross over to the Rufinianum,(2) and there to hear the trial. 
We therefore beg your holiness to pray the Lord Christ to help us to be able to con firm the faith of the holy 
Fathers, and to pluck up by the roots these Chapters which have sprouted to the damage of the Church. We 

implore your holiness to think and act with us, and to abide in your ready devotion to the orthodox faith. 
When this letter was written the lord Himerius(3) had not yet met us, being peradventure hindered on the 
road. But do not let this trouble you. Only let your piety strenuously support us, and we trust that gloom will 
disappear, and the truth shine forth. 

CLXIV. Second Epistle of the same to the same, expressing premature triumph in victory. (4) 

Through the prayers of your holiness our most pious prince has granted us an audience, anti by God's 
grace we have got the better of our opponents, as all our views have been accepted by the most 
Christ-loving emperor. The reports of others were read, and what seemed unfit to be received, and had no 
further importance, he rejected. They were full of Cyril, and petitioned that he might be summoned to give an 
account of himself. So far they have not prevailed, but have heard discourses on true religion, that is on the 
system of the Faith, and that the faith of the blessed Fathers was confirmed. We further refuted Acacius(5) 
who had laid down in his Commentaries that the Godhead is possible. At this our pious emperor was so 
shocked at the enormity of the blasphemy that he flung off his mantle, and stepped back. We know that the 
whole assembly welcomed us as champions of true religion. 

It has seemed good to our most pious emperor that anyone should explain his own views, and report them 
to his piety. We have replied that it is impossible for us to make any other exposition than that made by the 
blessed Fathers at Nicaea, and so it has pleased his majesty. We therefore offered the form subscribed by 
your holiness. Moreover, the whole population of Constantinople is continually coming out to us to implore 
us to fight manfully for the Faith. We do our best to restrain them, to avoid giving offence to our opponents. 
We have sent a copy of the expositing, that two copies may be made, and you may subscribe them both. 

CLXV. Letter of the same to the same.(1) 

To the very pious bishops now in Ephesus: Johannes, Himerius, Paulus, Apringius, Theodoretus, greeting. 
For the fifth time an audience has been granted us. We entered largely into the question of the heretical 
Chapters, and swore again and again to the very pious emperor that it was, impossible for us to hold 
communion with our opponents unless they rejected the Chapters. We pointed out moreover that even if 
Cyril did abjure his Chapters he could not be received by us, because he had become the heresiarch of so 
impious a heresy. Nevertheless we gained no ground, because our adversaries were urgent, and their 
hearers could neither restrain them in their insolent endeavour, nor compel them to come to enquiry and 
argument. They thus evade the investigation of the Chapters, and allow no discussion concerning them. 
We, however, as you entreat, are ready to insist to the death. We refuse to receive Cyril and his Chapters; 
we will not admit these men to Communion till the improper additions to the Faith be rejected. We therefore 
implore your holiness to continue to show at once our mind and our efforts. The battle is for true religion; for 
the only hope we have,-on account of which we look forward to enjoying, in the world to come, the 
loving-kindness of our Saviour. As to the very pious and holy bishop Nestorius, be it known to your piety that 
we have tried to introduce a word about him, but have hitherto failed, because all are ill-affected toward him. 
We will notwithstanding do our best, though this is so, to take advantage of any opportunity that may offer, 
and of the goodwill of the audience, to carry out this purpose, God helping us. But that your holiness may not 
be ignorant of this too, know that we, seeing that the partisans of Cyril have deceived everyone by 
domineering, cheating, flattering, and bribing, have more than once besought the very pious emperor and 
most noble princes both to send us back to the East, and let your holiness go home. For we are beginning 
to learn that we are wasting time in vain, without nearing our end, because Cyril everywhere shirks 
discussion, in his conviction that the blasphemies published in his Twelve Chapters can be openly refuted. 
The very pious emperor has determined, after many exhortations, that we all go every one to his own home, 
and that, further, both the Egyptian and Memnon of Ephesus are to remain in their own places. So the 
Egyptian will be able to go on blindfolding by bribery. The one, after crimes too many to tell, is to return to 
his diocese. The other, an innocent man, is barely permitted to go home. We and all here salute you and all 
the brotherhood with you. 

CLXVI. First petition of the commissioners, addressed from Chalcedon, to the Emperor. 

It had been much to be desired that the word of true religion should not be adulterated by ridiculous 
explanations, and least of all by men who have obtained the priesthood and high office in the churches, and 
who have been induced, we know not how, by ambition, by lust of authority, and by certain poor promises, to 
despise all the commandments of Christ. Their only motive has been the desire to pay court to a man who 
has the presumption to hope that he and his abettors will be able to manage the whole business with 
success; I mean Cyril of Alexandria. Of his own frivolity he has intruded into the holy churches of God 

heretical doctrines which he believes himself able to support by argument. He expects to escape the 
chastisement of sinners by the sole help of Memnon and the bishops of the aforesaid conspiracy. 
We are lovers of silence; in general we advise a philosophic course of action. Now, however, sensible that 
to be silent and to cultivate philosophy would be to throw away the Faith, we turn in supplication to you who, 
next to the Goodness on high, are the sole preserver of the world. We know that it specially belongs to you 
to be anxious for true religion, as having, up to this present day, continually protected it, and being in turn 
protected by it. 

We beg you therefore to receive this treatise, as though our defence were to be pleaded in the presence of 
the most holy God; not because we are less active in the sacred cause, but because we are devoted to true 
religion, and are speaking in its behalf. For in Christian times the clergy have no more bounden duty than to 
bear testimony before so faithful a prince, however ready we might have been to yield our bodies and to lay 
down our lives a thousand times in the battle for the faith. We therefore beseech you by God who seeth all 
things, by our Lord Jesus Christ who will judge all men in righteousness, by the Holy Ghost by whose grace 
you hold your empire, and by the elect angels who are your guardians and whom one day you shall see 
standing by the awful throne, and ceaselessly offering unto God that dread doxology which it is now sought 
to corrupt; we beseech your piety, besieged as you now are by the craftiness of certain men who are 
forbidding access to you, and are supporting the introduction into the faith of heretical Chapters, utterly at 
variance with sound doctrine, and tainted with heresy, to order all who subscribe them, or assent to them, 
and wish, after your promised pardon, to dispute further, to come forth and submit to the discipline of the 
Church. Nothing, sir, is more worthy of an emperor than to fight for the truth, for which you hurried to join battle 
with Persians and other barbarians, when Christ granted you to win fair victories in acknowledgment of your 
zeal towards Him. We beseech you that the questions at issue may be put before your piety in writing, for 
thus their purport will be more easily perceived, and the transgressors will be convicted for all future time. If 
however anyone, heedless of the utterances for which he shall be at fault, shall wish by his teaching to 
prevail over the right faith, it will be the part of your justice and judgment to consider whether the very name 
of teachers has not been thrown away by men who are reluctant to run any risks concerning the doctrines 
which they introduce, refusing to be obedient to your orders, that they may escape conviction for having 
done wrong; nor reckoning them worth refutation, that their mutual conspiracy be not proved fruitless. For 
now it is clear, from those that have been ordained by them that some of them, in return for this impiety, have 
bethought them of obliging certain persons by the concession of dignities and have devised certain other 
means. This will become still more clear; and your piety will soon see that they will distribute the rewards of 
their treachery, as though they were the spoils of the faith of Christ. 

But we, of whom some were long ago ordained by the very pious Juvenal, bishop of Jerusalem, have kept 
silence, although it was our duty to contend for the canon, that we might not seem to be troubled for our own 
reputation's sake. We are now perfectly well aware of his active trickery through Phoenicia Secunda and 
Arabia. We really have not time to attend to such things. We are men who have preferred rather to be 
deprived of the very places of which the ministry has been entrusted to us, and so of our life, than of our 
ready zeal for the faith. To the attempts of those men we will oppose the sentence of God and of your piety. 
Now also we beg that true religion may be your one and primary care, and that the brightness of orthodoxy, 
which at length with difficulty blazed forth in the days of Constantine of holy name, was maintained by your 
blessed grandfather and father, and was extended by your majesty among the Persians and other 
barbarians, be not allowed to grow dim in the very innermost courts of your imperial palace, or, in your 
serenity's days, to be dispersed. 

You will not send, sir, a divided Christianity into Persia; nor here at home will there be anything great, while 
we are distressed by disputes, and while there is no one existing on their side to settle them; no one will take 
part in a divided Word and Sacraments; no one without loss of faith will cut himself off from such famous 
fathers and saints who have never been condemned. No imperial successes will be permitted to a people 
at variance among themselves; a burst of derision will be roused from the enemies of true religion; and all 
the other noxious consequences of their malignant controversy are too numerous to reckon. 
If there is anyone who thinks little of the science of theology, let that one be any one in the world rather than 
he to whom the Lord has given the supreme government of the world. Our petition is that your piety will give 
judgment, for God will guide your intelligence into exact comprehension. Finally, should this be 
impracticable (and all the engagements of your piety we cannot know) we beseech your serenity to give us 
leave to travel safely home. We are aware that to the dioceses entrusted to us cause of offence is given by 
so protracted a delay, on account of those men who even in sacred matters look out for opportunities of 
dissension whence no advantage can be derived. 

CLXVII. Second petition of the same, sent from Chalcedon to Theodosius Augustus. 

Your piety has been informed on several occasions, both by ourselves in person and by our emissaries, 

that the doctrine of the true faith seems to stand in danger of being corrupted, and that the body of the Church 
is apparently being rent asunder by men who are turning everything upside down, trampling upon all church 
order, and all imperial law, and throwing everything into confusion that they may confirm the heresy 
propounded by Cyril of Alexandria. For when we were first summoned by your piety to Ephesus, to enquire 
into the question which had arisen and to confirm the evangelic and apostolic faith laid down by the holy 
Fathers, before the arrival of all the bishops who had been convened, the holders of their own private 
Council confirmed in writing the heretical Chapters, which are at one with the impiety of Arius, Eunomius and 
Apollinarius. Some they deceived; some they terrified; others already charged with heresy, they received 
into communion; and others who had not communicated with them were bribed into so doing; others again 
were fired with the hope of dignities for which they were unfit; so these men gathered round them a great 
crowd of adherents, as though they had no idea that true religion is shewn not by numbers, but by truth. 
The dispatch of your piety was read a second time by the most honourable Count Candidianus, ordering 
that the questions recently raised be examined in a quiet and brotherly manner. When however all the pious 
bishops were assembling, the reading had no effect. 

Then came the noble Palladius Magistrianus, bringing another dispatch froth your majesty, to the effect that 
all enactments passed privately and apart must be rescinded that the Council must be assembled afresh 
and the true doctrine ratified; but, as usual this your pious mandate was treated with contempt by these 
unscrupulous persons. 

Then again arrived the right honourable Master John, at that time "Comes Largitionum," bringing another 
pious letter to the effect that the depositions of the three had been decreed, that the offences which had 
sprung up were to be removed, and the faith laid down at Nicaea by the holy and blessed Fathers was to 
be ratified by all. As usual these universal mockers transgressed this law too. 

For after hearing the letter they did not change their mode of action; they held communion with the deposed; 
spoke of them as bishops, and refused to allow the Chapters, which had been propounded to the loss and 
corruption of the pious faith to be rejected; notwithstanding their having been frequently summoned by us to 
discussion. For we had ready to hand a plain refutation of the heretical Chapters. 
In evidence of these statements we have the right honourable Master, who when both sides had been 
summoned a third and a fourth time, not venturing to make this conduct an excuse on account of their 
disobedience, thought it worth while to summon us hither. 

We came at once; on our arrival we allowed ourselves no rest making our petition, both before your piety 
and before the illustrious assembly, that they would take up the quarrel for the Chapters and enter into 
discussion concerning them, or on the other hand reject them as contrary to the right faith, abiding by the 
faith as laid clown by the blessed fathers in council at Nicaea. 

They refused to do anything of the kind; they persisted in their heretical procedure; yet they were allowed to 
attend the churches, and to perform their priestly functions. We, however, alike at Ephesus and here, have 
been for a long time deprived of communion; alike there and here we have undergone innumerable perils; 
and while we were being stoned and all but slain by slaves dressed up as monks, we took it all for the best, 
as willingly enduring such treatment in the cause of the truth. 

Afterwards it seemed good to your majesty that we and the opposite party should assemble once again, 
that the recalcitrant might be compelled to examine the doctrines. While we were waiting for this to come to 
pass your piety set out for the city, and ordered the very men who were being accused of heresy and had 
been therefore some of them deposed by us, and others excommunicated and thereafter to be subjected to 
the discipline of the Church, to come to the city and perform priestly functions, and ordain. (1) We however 
who in the cause of true religion have undertaken a struggle so tremendous; we who have shrunk from no 
peril in our battle for right doctrine, have neither been bidden to enter the city to serve the cause of the 
imperilled Faith and strive for orthodoxy; nor have we been permitted to return home;(2) but here we are in 
Chalcedon distressed and groaning for the Church oppressed by schism. 

Wherefore since we are in receipt of no reply we have thought it necessary to inform your piety by this 
present letter, before God and Christ and the Holy Ghost, that if any one shall have been ordained (before 
the settlement of right doctrines) by these men of heretical opinions, he must necessarily be cut off from the 
whole church, as well from the clergy as the dissentient laity. For none of the pious will endure that 
communion be granted to heretics, and their own salvation be nullified. 

And when this shall have come to pass, then your piety shall be compelled to act against your will. For the 
schism will grow beyond all expectation, and thereby the champions of true religion will be saddened, 
unable to endure the loss of their own souls, and the establishment of those impious doctrines of Cyril which 
the contentious are desirous of defending. 

Many indeed of the supporters of true religion will never allow the acceptance of Cyril's doctrines; we shall 
never allow it, who all are of the diocese of the East of your province, of the diocese of Pontus, of Asia, of 
Thrace, of lllyricum and of the Italies, and who also sent to your piety the treatise of the most blessed 
Ambrose, written against this nascent superstition. 

To avoid all this, and the further troubling of your piety, we beg, beseech, and implore you to issue an edict 
that no ordination take place before the settlement of the orthodox faith, on account of which we have been 
convened by your Christ-loving highness. 

CLXVIII. Third demand of the same, addressed from Chalcedon to the sovereigns. 

We never expected the summons of your piety to meet with this result. We were honourably convoked, as 

priests by prince; we were convoked to ratify the faith of the holy Fathers; and therefore, in due obedience to 

a pious prince, we came. On our arrival we were no less faithful to the Church, not less respectful to your 

edict. From the day of our arrival at Ephesus till the present moment we have without intermission followed 

your behests. 

As it seems, however, our moderation, in these times, has not been of the slightest use to us; nay, rather, so 

far as we can see, it has stood very much in our way. We indeed who have thus behaved have been up to 

the present time detained in Chalcedon; and now we are told that we may go home. They however who 

have thrown everything into confusion, who have filled the world with tumult, who are striving to rend churches 

in twain, and who are the open assailants of true religion, perform priestly functions, crowd the churches, and 

as they imagine have authority to ordain, though in truth it is illegally claimed by them, stir up seditions in the 

church, and what ought to be spent upon the poor they throw away upon their bullies. 

But you are not only their emperor; you are ours too. For no small portion of your empire is the East, wherein 

the right faith has ever shone, and, besides, the other provinces and dioceses from which we have been 

convened. 

Let not your majesty despise the faith which is being corrupted, in which you and your forefathers have been 

baptized; on which the Church's foundations are laid; for which most holy martyrs have rejoiced to suffer 

countless kinds of death; by aid of which you have vanquished barbarians and destroyed tyrants; which you 

are needing now in your war for the subjugation of Africa. For on your side will fight the God of all if you 

struggle on behalf of His holy doctrines and forbid the dismemberment of the body of the church: for 

dismembered it will be if the opinion prevail which Cyril has introduced into the Church and other heretics 

have confirmed. 

To these truths we have often already borne testimony before God both in Ephesus and in this place. I have 

furnished information to your holiness, giving an account as before the God of all. For this is required of us, 

as is taught in the divine Scripture both by prophets and apostles; as says the blessed Paul "I give thee 

charge in the sight of God, who quickeneth the dead, and of Lord Jesus Christ, who before Pontius Pilate 

witnessed a good confession ;"(1) and as God charged Ezekiel to announce to the people, adding threats 

and saying, "when thou givest him not warning, his blood will I require at thine hand. "(2) 

In awe of this sentence, once again we inform your majesty that they who have been permitted to hold 

churches, and who teach the doctrines of Apollinarius, Arius, and Eunomius, perform all sacred functions 

irregularly and in violation of the canons, and destroy the souls of all who approach them; if, indeed, any 

shall be found willing to listen to them. For by the grace of God whose Providence is over all, and who 

wishes all men to be saved, the more part of the people is sound, and warmly attached to pious doctrines. It 

is on their account that we grieve. 

And in our anguish and alarm lest the plague creeping on by little and little should attack more, and the evil 

become general, we thus instruct your serenity, and continue to give you exhortation; we implore your 

majesty to yield to our prayers and to prohibit any addition to be made to the Faith of the holy Fathers 

assembled in council at Nicaea. 

And if after this our entreaty your piety reject this doctrine, which was given in the presence of God, we will 

shake off the dust of our feet against you, and cry with the blessed Paul, "We are pure from your blood. "(1) 

For we cease not night and day from the moment of our arrival at this distinguished council to bear witness 

to prince, nobles, soldiers, priests and people, that we hold fast the Faith delivered to us by the Fathers. 

CLXIX. Letter written by Theodoretus, bishop of Cyrus, from Chalcedon to Alexander of 
Hierapolis.(2) 

We have left no means untried, of courtesy, of sternness, of entreaty, of eloquence before the most pious 
emperor, and the illustrious assembly, testifying before God who sees all things and our Lord Jesus Christ 
who shall judge the world in justice, (3) and the Holy Spirit and his elect angels, lest the Faith be despised 
which is now being cor-rupted by the maintainers and bold subscribers of heretical doctrines: and that 
charge be given for it to be laid down in the same terms as at Nicaea and for the "ejection of the heresy 
introduced to the loss and ruin of true religion. Up to this time however we have produced not the slightest 
effect, our hearers being carried now in one direction and now in another. 
Nevertheless all these difficulties have not been able to deter me from urging my point, but by God's grace I 

have pressed on. I have even stated to our pious emperor with an oath that it is perfectly impossible for Cyril 
and Memnon to be reconciled with me, find that we can never communicate with any one who has not 
previously repudiated the heretical Chapters. This then is our mind. The object of men who "seek their own 
not the things which are Jesus Christ's"(1) is to be reconciled with them against our will. But this is no 
business of mine, for God weighs our motives and tries our character, nor does He inflict chastisement for 
what is done against our will. Be it known to your holiness that if ever I said a word about our friend(2) either 
before the very pious emperor or the illustrious assembly, I was at once branded as a rebel. So intensely is 
he hated by the court party. This is most annoying. The most pious emperor, especially, cannot bear to 
hear his name mentioned and says publicly "Let no one speak to me of this man." On one occasion he 
gave an instance of this to me. Nevertheless as long as I am here I shall not cease to serve the interests of 
this our father, knowing that the impious have done him wrong. 

My desire is that both your piety and I myself get quit of this. No good is to be hoped from it, in as much as 
all the judges trust in gold, and contend that the nature of the Godhead and manhood is one. 
All the people however by God's grace are in good case, and constantly come out to us. I have begun to 
discourse to them and have celebrated very large communions. 

On the fourth occasion I spoke at length about the faith and they listened with such delight that they did not 
go away till the seventh hour but held out even till the midday heat. An enormous crowd was gathered in a 
great court, with four verandahs, and I preached from above from a platform near the roof. 
All the clergy with the excellent monks are on the contrary utterly opposed to me, so that when we came 
back from the Rufinianum, after the visit of the very pious emperor, stone throwing began and many of my 
companions were wounded, by the people and false monks. 

The very pious emperor knew that the mob was gathered against me and coining up to me alone he said, "I 
know that you are assembling improperly." Then, said I, "As you have allowed me to speak hear me with 
favour. Is it fair for excommunicated heretics to be doing duty in churches, while I. who am fighting for the 
Faith and am therefore excluded by others from communion, am not allowed to enter a church?" He replied 
"What am I to do?" I said, "What your comes largitionum did at Ephesus. When he found that some were 
assembling, but that we were not assembling, he stopped them saying, 'If you are not peaceful I will allow 
neither party to assemble.' It would have become your piety also to have given directions to the bishop 
here to forbid both the opposite party and ourselves to assemble before our meeting together to make 
known your righteous sentence to all." To this he replied "It is not for me to order the bishop;" and I 
answered "Neither shall you command us, and we will take a church, and assemble. Your piety will find that 
there are many more on our side than on theirs." In addition to this I pointed out that we had neither reading 
of the holy Scripture, nor oblation; but only "prayer for the Faith and for your majesty, and pious 
conversation." So he approved, and made no further prohibition. The result is that increased crowds flock to 
us, and gladly listen to our teaching. I therefore beg your piety to pray that our case may have an issue 
pleasing to God. I am in daily danger, suspecting the wiles of both monks and clergy, as I witness alike their 
influence and their negligence. 

CLXX. Letter of certain Easterns, who had been sent to Constantinople, to Bishop Rufus. 

To our most godly and holy fellow-minister Rufus, Joannes, Himerius, Theodoretus, and the rest, send 
greeting in the Lord.(1) 

True religion and the peace of the Church suffer, we think, in no small degree, from the absence of your 
holiness. Had you been on the spot you might have put a stop to the disturbances which have arisen, and 
the violence that has been ventured on, and might have fought on our side for the subjection of the heresies 
introduced into the orthodox Faith, and that doctrine of apostles and evangelists which, handed down from 
time to time from father to son, has at length been transmitted to ourselves. 

And we do not assert this without ground, for we have learnt the mind of your holiness from the letter written to 
the very godly and holy Julianus, bishop of Sardica, for that letter as is right charged the above named very 
godly bishop to fight for the Faith laid down by the blessed fathers assembled in council at Nicaea, and not 
to allow any corruption to be introduced into those invincible definitions which are sufficient at once to exhibit 
the truth and to refute falsehood. So your holiness rightly, justly, and piously advised, and the recipient of the 
letter followed your counsel. But many of the members of the council, to use the word of the prophet, "have 
gone aside," and have "altogether become filthy, "(1) for they have abandoned the Faith which they 
received from the holy Fathers, and have subscribed the twelve Chapters of Cyril of Alexandria, which teem 
with Apollinarian error, are in agreement with the impiety of Arius and Eunomius, and anathematize all who 
do not accept their unconcealed unorthodoxy. To this plague smiting the Church vigorous resistance has 
been offered by us who have assembled from the East, and others from different dioceses, with the object 
of securing the ratification of the Faith delivered by the blessed Fathers at Nicaea. For in it, as your holiness 
knows, there is nothing lacking whether for the teaching of evangelic doctrines, or for the refutation of every 

heresy. 

For the sake of this Faith we continue to struggle, despising alike all the joys and sorrows of mortal life, if 
only we may preserve untouched this heritage of our fathers. For this reason we have deposed Cyril and 
Memnon; the former as prime mover in the heresy, and the latter as his aider and abettor in all that has been 
done to ratify and uphold the Chapters published to the destruction of the Church. We have also 
excommunicated all that have dared to subscribe and support these impious doctrines till they shall have 
anathematized them, and returned to the Faith of the Fathers at Nicaea. 

But our long-suffering has done them no good. To this day they continue to do battle for those pernicious 
doctrines and have impaled themselves on the law of the canon which distinctly enacts "If any bishop 
deposed by a synod, or presbyter or deacon deposed by his own bishop, shall perform his sacred office, 
without waiting for the judgment of a synod, he is to have no opportunity for defending himself, not even in 
another synod: but also all who communicate with him are to be expelled from the church." Now this law has 
been broken both by the deposed and the excommunicate. For immediately after the deposition and the 
excommunication becoming known to them, they performed sacred functions, and they continue to do so, in 
plain disbelief of Him who said" Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven. "(1) 
With this we have thought well to acquaint your holiness at once, but in expectation of some favourable 
change, we have waited up to the present time. But we have been disappointed. They have continued to 
fight for this impious heresy, and pay no attention to the counsels of the very pious emperor. On five 
separate occasions he has met us, and ordered them either to reject the Chapters of Cyril as contrary to the 
Faith, or to be willing to do battle in their behalf, and to shew in what way they are in agreement with the 
confession of the Fathers. We have our proofs at hand, whereby we should have shewn that they are totally 
opposed to the teaching of orthodoxy, and for the most part in agreement with heresy. 
For in these very Chapters the author of the noxious productions teaches that the Godhead of the only 
begotten Son suffered, instead of the manhood which He assumed for the sake of our salvation, the 
indwelling Godhead manifestly appropriating the sufferings as of Its own body, though suffering nothing in Its 
own nature; and further that there is made one nature of both Godhead and manhood,-for so he explains 
"The Word was made flesh, "(2) as though the Godhead bad undergone some change, and been turned 
into flesh. 

And, further, he anathematizes those who make a distinction between the terms used by apostles and 
evangelists about the Lord Christ, referring those of humiliation to the manhood, and those of divine glory to 
the Godhead, of the Lord Christ. It is with these views that Arians and Eunomians, attributing the terms of 
humiliation to the Godhead, have not shrunk from declaring God the Word to be made and created, of 
another substance, and unlike the Father. 

What blasphemy follows on these statements it is not difficult to perceive. There is introduced a confusion of 
the natures, and to God the Word are applied the words "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me;"(3) 
and "Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me, "(4) the hunger, the thirst, and the strengthening by an 
angel; His saying "Now is my soul troubled, "(5) and "my soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death, "(1) 
and all similar passages belonging to the manhood of the Christ. Any one may perceive how these 
statements correspond with the impiety of Arius and Eunomius; for they, finding themselves unable to 
establish the difference of substance, connect, as has been said, the sufferings, and the terms of humiliation, 
with the Godhead of the Christ. 

And be your reverence well assured that now in their churches the Arian teachers preach no other doctrine 
than that the supporters of the "homousion" at present hold the same views as Arius, and that, after long 
time, the truth has now at last been brought to light. 

We on the contrary abide in the teaching, and follow in the pious footprints, of the blessed Fathers 
assembled at Nicaea, and of their illustrious successors, Eustathius of Antioch, Basil of Caesarea, Gregory, 
John, Athanasius, Theophilus, Damasus of Rome, and Ambrose of Milan. For all these, following the words 
of the apostles, have left us an exact rule of orthodoxy, which all we of the East earnestly desire to preserve 
unmoved. The same is the wish of the Bithynians, the Paphlagonians, of Cappadocia Secunda, Pisidia, 
Mysia, Thessaly, and Rhodope, and very many more of the different provinces. The Italians too, it is 
evident, will not endure this new-fangled doctrine; for the very godly and holy Martinus,(2) bishop of Milan, 
has written a letter to us, and has sent to the very pious emperor a work by the blessed Ambrose on the 
incarnation of the Lord, of which the teaching is opposed to these heretical Chapters. 
And be it known to your holiness that Cyril and Memnon have not been satisfied with corrupting the orthodox 
Faith, but have trampled all the canons underfoot. For they have received into communion men 
excommunicated in various provinces and dioceses. Others lying under charges of heresy, and of the 
same mind as Celestius and Pelagius, (for they are Euchitae, or Enthusiasts(3)) and therefore 
excommunicated by their diocesans and metropolitans, they have, in defiance of all ecclesiastical 
discipline received into communion, so swelling their following from all possible quarters, and shewing their 
eagerness to enforce their teaching less by piety than by violence. For when they had been stripped bare 

of piety they devised, in their extremity, another sort of force-walls of flesh, with the idea that by their 
showers of bribery they might vanquish the faith of the Fathers. But so long as your holiness puts forth your 
strength, and you continue to fight, as you are wont, in defence of true religion, none of these devices will be 
of the least avail. We exhort you therefore, most holy sir, to beware of the communion of the unscrupulous 
introducers of this heresy; and to make known to all, both far and near, that these are the points for which the 
thrice blessed Damasus deposed the heretics Apol-linarius, Vitalius, and Timotheus; and that the Epistle in 
which the writer has concealed his heresy and coloured it with a coating of truth, must not in simplicity be 
received. For in the Chapters he has boldly laid bare his impiety, and dared to anathematize all who 
disagree with him, while in the letter he has vilely endeavoured to harm the simpler readers. 
Your holiness must therefore beware of neglecting this matter, lest when, too late, you see this heresy 
confirmed, you grieve in vain, and suffer affliction at being no longer able to defend the cause of truth. 
We have also sent you a copy of the memorial which we have given to the most pious and Christ-loving 
emperor, containing the faith of the holy Fathers at Nicaea. wherein we have rejected the newly-invented 
heresies of Cyril, and adjudged them to be opposed to the orthodox faith. 

Since in accordance with the orders of the very pious emperor only eight of us travelled to Constantinople, 
we have subjoined the copy of the order given us by the holy synod, that you may be acquainted with the 
provinces contained in it. Your holiness will learn them from the signatures of the metropolitans. We salute 
the brotherhood which is with you. 

CLXXI. Letter of Theodoret to John, bishop of Antioch, after the reconciliation. (1) 

God, who governs all things in wisdom, who provides for our unanimity, and cares for the salvation of His 
people, has caused us to be assembled together, and has shewn us that the views of all of us are in 
agreement with one another. We have assembled together, and read the Egyptian Letter;(2) we have 
carefully examined its purport, and we have discovered that its contents are quite in accordance with our 
own statements, and entirely opposed to the Twelve Chapters, against which up to the present time we 
have continued to wage war, as being contrary to true religion. Their teaching was that God the Word was 
carnally made flesh; that there was an union of hypostasis, and that the combination in union was of nature, 
and that God the Word was the first-born flora the dead. They forbade all distinction in the terms used of our 
Lord, and further contained other doctrines at variance with the seeds sown by the apostles, and outcome of 
heretical tares. The present script, however, is beautified by apostolic nobility of origin. For in it our Lord 
Jesus Christ is exhibited as perfect God and perfect man; it shews two natures, and the distinction between 
them; an unconfounded union, made not by mixture and compounding, but in a manner ineffable and divine, 
and distinctly preserving the properties of the natures; the impassibility and immortality of God the Word; the 
possibility and temporary surrender to death of the temple, and its resurrection by the power of the united 
God; that the holy Spirit is not of the Son, nor derives existence from the Son, but proceeds from the Father, 
and is properly stated to be of the Son, as being of one substance. [1] Beholding this orthodoxy in the letter, 
we have hymned Him who heals our stammering tongues, and changes our discordant noises into the 
harmony of sweet music.(2) 

CLXXII. Letter of Theodore tus to Nestorius.(3) 

To the very reverend and religions lord and very holy Father, Nestorius, the bishop Theodoretus sends 
greeting in the Lord. Your holiness is, I think, well aware that I take no pleasure in cultivated society, nor in 
the interests of this life, nor in reputation, nor am I attracted by other sees. Had I learn, this lesson from no 
other source, the very solitude of the city(4) over which I am called to preside would suffice to teach me this 
philosophy. It is not indeed distinguished only for solitude, but also by very many disturbances which may 
check the activity even of those who most delight in them. 

Let no one therefore persuade your holiness that I have accepted the Egyptian writings as orthodox, with my 
eyes shut, because I covet any see. For really, to speak the truth, after frequently reading and carefully 
examining them, I have discovered that they are free from all heretical taint, and I have hesitated to put any 
stress upon them, though I certainly have no love for their author, who was the originator of the disturbances 
which have agitated the world. For this I hope to escape punishment in the day of Judgment, since the just 
Judge examines motives. But to what has been done unjustly and illegally against your holiness, not even if 
one were to cut off both my hands would I ever assent, God's grace helping me and supporting my infirmity. 
This I have stated in writing to those who require it. I have sent to your holiness my reply to what you wrote to 
me, that you may know that, by God's grace, no time has changed me like the centipedes and chameleons 
who imitate by their colour the stones and leaves among which they live. I and all with me salute all the 
Brotherhood who are with you in the Lord. 

CLXXIII. Letterto Andreas, Monk of Constantinople. (1) 

"God is faithful who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will with the temptation also 
make a way to escape that ye may be able to bear it, "(2) and convicts falsehood, -although now refuted 
assertion of the falsehood is approved,-and the power of truth has been shewn. For, lo, they, who by their 
impious reasoning had confused the natures of our Saviour Christ, and dared to preach one nature, and 
therefore insulted the most holy and venerable Nestorius, high priest of God, their mouths held, as the 
prophet says, with bit and bridle(3) and turned from wrong to right, have once again learnt the truth, adopting 
the statement of him who in the cause of truth has borne the brunt of the battle. For instead of one nature they 
now confess two, anathematizing all who preach mixture and confusion. They adore the impossible 
Godhead of Christ; they attribute passion to the flesh; they distinguish between the terms of the Gospels, 
ascribing the lofty and divine to the Godhead, and the lowly to the manhood. Such are the writings now 
brought from Egypt. 

CLXXIV. To Himerius, bishop of Nicomedia.(l) 

We wish to acquaint your holiness that on reading and frequently discussing the letter brought from Egypt 
we find it in harmony with the doctrine of the Church. Of the twelve Chapters we have proved the contrary, 
and up to the present time we continue to oppose them. We have therefore determined, if your holiness has 
recovered the churches divinely entrusted to you, that you ought to communicate with the Egyptians and 
Constantinopolitans and others who have fought with them against us, because they have professed to hold 
our faith, or I should rather say the faith of the apostles; but not to give your consent to the alleged 
condemnation of the very holy and venerable Nestorius. For we hold it impious and unjust in the case of 
charges in which both appeared as defendants to lavish favour on the one and shut the door of repentance 
on the other. Far more unjust and impious is it to condemn an innocent man to death. Your holiness should 
be assured that you ought not to communicate with them before you have recovered your churches. For this 
not only I but all the holy bishops of our district decreed in the recent Council. 

CLXXV. To Alexander of Hierapolis.(2) 

I have already informed your holiness that if the doctrine of the very holy and venerable bishop, my lord 
Nestorius, is condemned, I will not communicate with those who do so. If it shall please your holiness to 
insert this in the letter which is being sent to Antioch so be it. Let there then, I beseech you, be no delay! 

CLXXVI. Letterto the same Alexander after he had learnt that John, bishop of Antioch, had 
anathematized the doctrine of Nestorius. (3) 

Be it known to your holiness that when read the letter addressed to the emperor I was much distressed, 
because I know perfectly well that the writer of the letter, being of the same opinions, has unwisely and 
impiously condemned one who has never held or taught anything contrary to sound doctrine. But the form of 
anathema, though it be more likely than his assent to the condemnation, to grieve a reader, nevertheless 
has given me some ground of comfort, in that it is laid down not in wide general terms, but with some 
qualification. For he has not said "We anathematize his doctrine" but 'whatever he has either said or held 
other than is warranted by the doctrine of the apostles." 

CLXXVII. Letterto Andreas, bishop of Samosata.(l) 

The illustrious Aristolaus has sent Magisterianus from Egypt with a letter of Cyril in which he anathematizes 
Arius, Eunomius Apollinarius and all who assert Christ's Godhead to be passible and maintain the 
confusion and commixture of the two natures. Hereat we rejoice, although he did withhold his consent from 
our statement. He requires further subscription to the condemnation which has been passed, and that the 
doctrine of the holy bishop Nestorius be anathematized. Your holiness well knows that if any one 
anathematizes, without distinction, the doctrine of that most holy and venerable bishop, it is just the same as 
though he seemed to anathematize true religion. 

We must then if we are compelled anathematize those who call Christ mere man, or who divide our one Lord 
Jesus Christ into two sons and deny His divinity, etc. 

CLXXVIII. Letterto Ale xander of Hie rapolis. (2) 

I think that more than all the very holy and venerable bishop, my lord John, must have been gratified at my 

refusing either to give my consent to the condemnation of the very holy and venerable bishop Nestorius or 

to violate the pledges made at Tarsus, Chalcedon and Ephesus.(3) 

He remembers also what was frequently received from us at Antioch after our departure. 

Let no one therefore deceive your holiness into the belief that I should ever do this, for God is without doubt 

on my side and strengthening me. 

CLXXIX. Letter of Cyril to John, bishop of Antioch, against Theodoret.(l) 

CLXXX. Letter of Theodoretus, as some suppose, to Domnus, bishop of Antioch, written on 
the death of Cyril, bishop of Alexandria. (2) 

At last and with difficulty the villain has gone. The good and the gentle pass away all too soon; the bad 
prolong their life for years. 

The Giver of all good, methinks, removes the former before their time from the troubles of humanity; He frees 
them like victors from their contests and transports them to the better life, that life which, free from death, 
sorrow and care, is the prize of them that contend for virtue. They, on the other hand, who love and practise 
wickedness are allowed a little longer to enjoy this present life, either that sated with evil they may 
afterwards learn virtue's lessons, or else even in this life may pay the penalty for the wickedness of their own 
ways by being tossed to and fro through many years of this life's sad and wicked waves. 
This wretch, however, has not been dismissed by the ruler of our souls like other men, that he may possess 
for longer time the things which seem to be full of joy. Knowing that the fellow's malice has been daily 
growing and doing harm to the body of the Church, the Lord has lopped him off like a plague and "taken 
away the reproach from Israel. "(1) His survivors are indeed delighted at his departure. The dead, maybe, 
are sorry. There is some ground of alarm lest they should be so much annoyed at his company as to send 
him back to us, or that he should run away from his conductors like the tyrant of Cyniscus in Lucian.(2) 
Great care must then be taken, and it is especially your holiness's business to undertake this duty, to tell the 
guild of undertakers to lay a very big and heavy stone upon his grave, for fear he should come back again, 
and show his changeable mind once more. Let him take his new doctrines to the shades below, and preach 
to them all day and all night. We are not at all afraid of his dividing them by making public addresses 
against true religion and by investing an immortal nature with death. He will be stoned not only by ghosts 
learned in divine law, but also by Nimrod, Pharaoh and Sennacherib, or any other of God's enemies. 
But I am wasting words. The poor fellow is silent whether he will or no, "his breath goeth forth, he returneth to 
his earth, in that very day his thoughts perish. "(3) He is doomed too to silence of another kind. His deeds, 
detected, tie his tongue, gag his mouth, curb his passion, strike him dumb and make him bow down to the 
ground. 

I really am sorry for the poor fellow. Truly the news of his death has not caused me unmixed delight, but it is 
tempered by sadness. On seeing the Church freed from a plague of this kind I am glad and rejoice; but I am 
sorry and do mourn when I think that the wretch knew no rest from his crimes, but went on attempting greater 
and more grievous ones till he died. His idea was, so it is said, to throw the imperial city into confusion by 
attacking true doctrines a second time, and to charge your holiness with supporting them. But God saw and 
did not overlook it. "He put his hook into his nose and his bridle into his lips,"(1) and turned him to the earth 
whence he was taken. Be it then granted to your holiness's prayers that he may obtain mercy and pity and 
that God's boundless clemency may surpass his wickedness. I beg your holiness to drive away the 
agitations of my soul. Many different reports are being bruited abroad to my alarm announcing general 
misfortunes. It is even said by some that your reverence is setting out against your will for the court, but so far 
I have despised these reports as untrue. But finding every one repeating one and the same story I have 
thought it right to try and learn the truth from your holiness that I may laugh at these tales if false, or sorrow not 
without reason if they are true. 

CLXXXI. Letter to Abundius, bishop of Como.(2) 

To my dear lord and very holy brother Abundius Theodoretus sends greeting in the Lord. I have discovered 
that your piety religiously preserves the true and apostolic faith; and I have thanked Almighty God that the 
truth which was in peril has been renewed and brought to light by your holiness. 

Of old, after the flood, it came to pass that Noah and his sons were left for seed of the human race. Just so in 
our own day are reserved the fathers of the West, that by them the holy churches of the East may be able to 
preserve that true religion which has been threatened with devastation and destruction by a new and 
impious heresy. Well may we quote those words of the prophet "Except the Lord of hosts had left unto us a 
very small remnant we should have been as Sodom and we should have been like unto Gomorrah. "(3) So 
upon us from this impious heresy the wrath of God has fallen like a flood and invasion. 

Now we acknowledge the presence of our Saviour in a human body, and one Son of God, His perfect 

Godhead and His perfect manhood. We do not divide our one Lord Jesus Christ into two sons for He is one; 

but we recognise the distinction between God and man; we know that one is of the Father, the other of the 

seed of David and Abraham, according to the divine Scriptures, and that the divine nature is free from 

passion, the body which was before subject to passion being now itself too free from passion; for after the 

resurrection it is plainly delivered from all passion. 

This we have learnt from the letter of the very holy and religious Archbishop our lord Leo. For we have read 

what he wrote to Flavianus, of holy and blessed memory, and have thanked the loving-kindness of the Lord 

because we have found an advocate and defender of the truth. To this letter I have given my adhesion, and 

have subjoined a copy of it to my present epistle, which I have also subscribed and have thereby proved 

that I obey the apostolic rules, that is true doctrines; that I abide in them to this day, and am suffering in their 

cause. 

Assent has also been given by my lord Ibas and my lord Aquilinus against whom the inventors of the new 

heresy have armed the imperial power. 

It remains for you with your very holy colleagues to bring aid to the sacred Church, and to drive away the war 

that threatens it. Banish the impious party which has been roused against the truth; give back the churches 

their ancient peace; so will you receive from the Lord, Who has promised to grant this boon, the fruits of your 

apostolic labours. 

All the very religious and godly presbyters and reverend deacons and brethren by your holiness I greet; 

and I and all who are with me salute your reverence. (1) 

JEROME AND GENNADIUS: ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 

[... 11 7. Gregory another bishop. 

11 8. Lucius the bishop. 

1 19.Diodorus the bishop. 

120.Eunomius the heresiarch. 

121 .Priscillianus the bishop. 

122.Latronianus. 

123.Tiberianus. 

124.Ambrose the bishop. 

125.Evagriusthe bishop. 

126.Ambrose the disciple of Didymus. 

127.Maximus,first philosopher, then bishop. 

128.Another Gregory, also a bishop. 

129John the presbyter. 

130.Gelasiusthe bishop. 

131 Theotimus the bishop. 

132. Dexter, son of Pacianus, now praetorian prefect. 

133.Amphilochius the bishop. 

134.Sophronius. 

135. Jerome the presbyter.] 

CHAPTER I. 

SIMON PETER(1) the son of John, from the village of Bethsaida in the province of Galilee, brother of 
Andrew the apostle, and himself chief of the apostles, after having been bishop of the church of Antioch and 
having preached to the Dispersion(2)-the believers in circumcision, (3) in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, 
Asia and Bithynia-pushed on to Rome in the second year of Claudius to over-throw Simon Magus, (4) and 
held the sacerdotal chair there for twenty-five years until the last, that is the fourteenth, year of Nero. At his 
hands he received the crown of martyrdom being nailed to the cross with his head towards the ground and 
his feet raised on high, asserting that he was unworthy to be crucified in the same manner as his Lord. He 
wrote two epistles which are called Catholic, the second of which, on account of its difference from the first in 
style, is considered by many not to be by him. Then too the Gospel according to Mark, who was his disciple 
and interpreter, is ascribed to him. On the other hand, the books, of which one is entitled his Acts, another his 
Gospel, a third his Preaching, a fourth his Revelation, a fifth his "Judgment" are rejected as apocryphal. (5) 
Buried at Rome in the Vatican near the triumphal way he is venerated by the whole world. (1) 

CHAPTER II. 

JAMES, (2) who is called the brother of the Lord, (3) surnamed the Just, the son of Joseph by another wife, as 
some think, but, as appears to me, the son of Mary sister of the mother of our Lord of whom John makes 
mention in his book,(4) after our Lord's passion at once ordained by the apostles bishop of Jerusalem, 
wrote a single epistle, which is reckoned among the seven Catholic Epistles and even this is claimed by 
some to have been published by some one else under his name, and gradually, as time went on, to have 
gained authority. Hegesippus who lived near the apostolic age, in the fifth book of his Commentaries, writing 
of James, says "After the apostles, James the brother of the Lord surnamed the Just was made head of the 
Church at Jerusalem. Many indeed are called James. This one was holy from his mother's womb. He drank 
neither wine nor strong drink, ate no flesh, never shaved or anointed himself with ointment or bathed. He 
alone halt the privilege of entering the Holy of Holies, since indeed he did not use woolen vestments but 
linen and went alone into the temple and prayed in behalf of the people, insomuch that his knees were 
reputed to have acquired the hardness of camels' knees." He says also many other things, too numerous to 
mention. Josephus also in the 20th book of his Antiquities, and Clement in the 7th of his Outlines mention that 
on the death of Fetus who reigned over Judea, Albinus was sent by Nero as his successor. Before he had 
reached his province, Ananias the high priest, the youthful son of Ananus of the priestly class taking 

advantage of the state of anarchy, assembled a council and publicly tried to force James to deny that Christ 
is the son of God. When he refused Ananius ordered him to be stoned. Cast down from a pinnacle of the 
temple, his legs broken, but still half alive, raising his hands to heaven he said, "Lord forgive them for they 
know not what they do." Then struck on the head by the club of a fuller such a club as fullers are accustomed 
to wring out garments(1) with-he died. This same Josephus records the tradition that this James was of so 
great sanctity and reputation among the people that the downfall of Jerusalem was believed to be on 
account of his death. He it is of whom the apostle Paul writes to the Galatians that "No one else of the 
apostles did I see except James the brother of the Lord," and shortly after the event the Acts of the apostles 
bear witness to the matter. The Gospel also which is called the Gospel according to the Hebrews, (2) and 
which I have recently translated into Greek and Latin and which also Origen(3) often makes use of, after the 
account of the resurrection of the Saviour says, "but the Lord, after he had given his grave clothes to the 
servant of the priest, appeared to James (for James had. sworn that he would not eat bread from that hour in 
which he drank the cup of the Lord until he should see him rising again from among those that sleep)" and 
again, a little later, it says" ' Bring a table and bread,' said the Lord." And immediately it is added, "He 
brought bread and blessed and brake and gave to James the Just and said to him, ' my brother eat thy 
bread, for the son of man is risen from among those that sleep.'" And so he ruled the church of Jerusalem 
thirty years, that is until the seventh year of Nero, and was buried near the temple from which he had been 
cast down. His tombstone with its inscription was well known until the siege of Titus and the end of Hadrian's 
reign. Some of our writers think he was buried in Mount Olivet, but they are mistaken. 

CHAPTER III. 

MATTHEW, (4) also called Levi, apostle and aforetimes publican, composed a gospel of Christ at first 
published in Judea in Hebrew(5) for the sake of those of the circumcision who believed, but this was 
afterwards translated into Greek though by what author is uncertain. The Hebrew itself has been preserved 
until the present day in the library, at Caesarea which Pamphilus so diligently gathered. I have also had the 
opportunity of having the volume described to me by the Nazarenes(l) of Beroea,(2) a city of Syria, who use 
it. In this it is to be noted that wherever the Evangelist, whether on his own account or in the person of our 
Lord the Saviour quotes the testimony of the Old Testament he does not follow the authority of the 
translators of the Septuagint but the Hebrew. Wherefore these two forms exist "Out of Egypt have I called my 
son," and "for he shall be called a Nazarene." 

CHAPTER IV. 

JUDE (3) the brother of James, left a short epistle which is reckoned among the seven catholic epistles, and 
because in it(4) he quotes from the apocryphal book of Enoch it is rejected by many. Nevertheless by age 
and use it has gained authority and is reckoned among the Holy Scriptures. 

CHAPTER V. 

PAUL, (4) formerly called Saul, an apostle outside the number of the twelve apostles, was of the tribe of 
Benjamin and the town of Giscalis(6) in Judea. When this was taken by the Romans he removed with his 
parents to Tarsus in Cilicia. Sent by them to Jerusalem to study law he was educated by Gamaliel a most 
learned man whom Luke mentions. But after he had been present at the death of the martyr Stephen and 
had received letters from the high priest of the temple for the persecution of those who believed in Christ, he 
proceeded to Damascus, where constrained to faith by a revelation, as it is written in the Acts of the 
apostles, he was transformed from a persecutor into an elect vessel. As Sergius Paulus Proconsul of 
Cyprus was the first to believe on his preaching, he took his name from him because he had subdued him to 
faith in Christ, and having been joined by Barnabas, after traversing many cities, he returned to Jerusalem 
and was ordained apostle to the Gentiles by Peter, James and John. And because a full account of his life 
is given in the Acts of the Apostles, I only say this, that the twenty-fifth year after our Lord's passion, that is the 
second of Nero, at the time when Fetus Procurator of Judea succeeded Felix, he was sent bound to Rome, 
and remaining for two years in free custody, disputed daily with the Jews concerning the advent of Christ. It 
ought to be said that at the first defence, the power of Nero having not yet been confirmed, nor his 
wickedness broken forth to such a degree as the histories relate concerning him, Paul was dismissed by 
Nero, that the gospel of ChriSt might be preached also in the West. As he himself writes in the second 
epistle to Timothy, at the time when he was about to be put to death dictating his epistle as he did while in 
chains; "At my first defence no one took my part, but all forsook me: may it not be laid to their account. But 
the Lord stood by(1) me and strengthened me; that through me the message might be fully proclaimed and 
that all the Gentiles might hear, and I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion"(2)- clearly indicating Nero 

as lion on account of his cruelty. And directly following he says "The Lord delivered me from the month of 
the lion" and again shortly "The Lord delivered me(3) from every evil work and saved me unto his heavenly 
kingdom, "(4) for indeed he felt within himself that his martyrdom was near at hand, for in the same epistle he 
announced "for I am already being offered and the time of my departure is at hand. "(5) He then, in the 
fourteenth year of Nero on the same day with Peter, was beheaded at Rome for Christ's sake and was 
buried in the Ostian way, the twenty-seventh year after our Lord's passion. He wrote nine epistles to seven 
churches: To the Romans one, To the Corinthians two, To the Galatians one, To the Ephesians one, To the 
Philippians one, To the Colossians one, To the Thessalonians two; and besides these to his disciples, To 
Timothy two, To Titus one, To Philemon one. The epistle which is called the Epistle to the Hebrews is not 
considered his, on account of its difference from the others in style and language, but it is reckoned, either 
according to Tertullian to be the work of Barnabas, or according to others, to be by Luke the Evangelist or 
Clement afterwards bishop of the church at Rome, who, they say, arranged and adorned the ideas of Paul in 
his own language, though to be sure, since Paul was writing to Hebrews and was in disrepute among them 
he may have omitted his name from the salvation on this account. He being a Hebrew wrote Hebrew, that is 
his own tongue and most fluently while the things which were eloquently written in Hebrew were more 
eloquently turned into Greek @ and this is the reason why it seems to differ from other epistles of Paul. 
Some read one also to(2) the Laodiceans but it is rejected by everyone. 

CHAPTER VI. 

BARNABAS(3) the Cyprian, also called Joseph the Levite, ordained apostle to the Gentiles with Paul, wrote 
one Epistle, valuable for the edification of the church, which is reckoned among the apocryphal writings. He 
afterwards separated from Paul on account of John, a disciple also called Mark,(4) none the less exercised 
the work laid upon him of preaching the Gospel. 

CHAPTER VII. 

LUKE(5) a physician of Antioch as his writings gas indicate was not unskilled in the Greek language. An 
adherent of the apostle Paul, and companion of all his journeying, he wrote a Gospel, concerning which the 
same Paul says, "We send with him a brother whose praise in the gospel is among all the churches"(6) and 
to the Colossians "Luke the beloved physician salutes you, "(7) and to Timothy "Luke only is with me. "(8) He 
also wrote another excellent volume to which he prefixed the title Acts of the Apostles, a history which 
extends to the second year of Paul's sojourn at Rome, that is to the fourth(9) year of Nero, from which we 
learn that the book was composed in that same city. Therefore the Acts of Paul and Thecla(1 0) and all the 
fable about the lion baptized by him we reckon among the apocryphal writings, (1 1) for how is it possible that 
the inseparable companion of the apostle in his other affairs, alone should have been ignorant of this thing. 
Moreover Tertullian who lived near those times, mentions a certain presbyter in Asia, an adherent of the 
apostle Paul, (12) who was convicted by John of having been the author of the book, and who, confessing 
that he did this for love of Paul, resigned his office of presbyter. Some suppose that whenever Paul in his 
epistle says "according to my gospel" he means the book of Luke and that Luke not only was taught the 
gospel history by the apostle Paul who was not with the Lord in the flesh, but also by other apostles. This he 
too at the beginning of his work declares, saying "Even as they delivered unto us, which from the beginning 
were eyewitnesses and ministers of the word." So he wrote the gospel as he had heard it, but composed 
the Acts of the apostles as he himself had seen. He was buried at Constantinople to which city, in the 
twentieth year of Constantius, his bones together with the remains of Andrew the apostle were transferred. 

CHAPTER VIM. 

MARK (1) the disciple and interpreter of Peter wrote a short gospel at the request of the brethren at Rome 
embodying what he had heard Peter tell. When Peter had heard this, he approved it and published it to the 
churches to be read by his authority as Clemens in the sixth book of his Hypotyposes and Papias, bishop of 
Hierapolis, record. Peter also mentions this Mark in his first epistle, figuratively indicating Rome under the 
name of Babylon "She who(2) is in Babylon elect together with you saluteth you(3) and so doth Mark my 
son." So, taking the gospel which he himself composed, he went to Egypt and first preaching Christ at 
Alexandria he formed a church so admirable in doctrine and continence of living that he constrained all 
followers of Christ to his example. Philo most learned of the Jews seeing the first church at Alexandria still 
Jewish in a degree, wrote a book(4) on their manner of life as something creditable to his nation telling how, 
as Luke says, the believers had all things in common(5) at Jerusalem, so he recorded that he saw(6) was 
done at Alexandria, under the learned Mark. He died in the eighth year of Nero and was buried at 
Alexandria, Annianus succeeding him. (7) 

CHAPTER IX. 

JOHN, (1) the apostle whom Jesus most loved, the son of Zebedee and brother of James, the apostle 
whom Herod, after our Lord's passion, beheaded, most recently of all the evangelists wrote a Gospel, at the 
request of the bishops of Asia, against Cerinthus and other heretics and especially against the then growing 
dogma of the Ebionites, who assert that Christ did not exist before Mary. On this account he was compelled 
to maintain His divine nativity. But there is said to be yet another reason for this work, in that when he had 
read Matthew, Mark, and Luke, he approved indeed the substance of the history and declared that the 
things they said were true, but that they had given the history of only one year, the one, that is, which follows 
the imprisonment of John and in which he was put to death. So passing by this year the events of which had 
been set forth by these, he related the events of the earlier period before John was shut up in prison, so that 
it might be manifest to those who should diligently read the volumes of the four Evangelists. This also takes 
away the discrepancy which there seems to be between John and the others. He wrote also one Epistle 
which begins as follows "That which was from the beginning, that which we have heard, that which we have 
seen with our eyes and our hands handled concerning the word of life" which is esteemed of by all men who 
are interested in the church or in learning. The other two of which the first is "The eider to the elect lady and 
her children" and the other "The elder unto Gaius(2) the beloved whom I love in truth," are said to be the 
work of John the presbyter to the memory of whom another sepulchre is shown at Ephesus to the present 
day, though some think that there are two memorials of this same John the evangelist. We shall treat of this 
matter in its turn(3) when we come to Papias his disciple. In the fourteenth year then after Nero(4) Domitian 
having raised a second persecution he was banished to the island of Patmos, and wrote the Apocalypse, 
on which Justin Martyr and Irenaeus afterwards wrote commentaries. But Domitian having been put to death 
and his acts, on account of his excessive cruelty, having been annulled by the senate, he returned to 
Ephesus under Pertinax(1) and continuing there until the tithe of the emperor Trajan, founded and built 
churches throughout all Asia, and, worn out by old age, died in the sixty-eighth year after our Lord's passion 
and was buried near the same city. 

CHAPTER X. 

HERMAS (2)(3) whom the apostle Paul mentions in writing to the Romans "Salute(4) Phlegon, Hermes, 
Patrobas, Hermas(5) and the brethren that are with them"(6)is reputed to be the author of the book which is 
called Pastor and which is also read publicly in some churches of Greece. It is in fact a useful book and 
many of the ancient writers quote from it as authority, but among the Latins it is almost unknown. 

CHAPTER XI. 

PHILO 7 the Jew, an Alexandrian of the priestly class, is placed by us among the ecclesiastical writers on 
the ground that, writing a book concerning the first church of Mark the evangelist at Alexandria, he writes to 
our praise, declaring not only that they were there, but also that they were in many provinces and calling 
their habitations monasteries. From this(8) it appears that the church of those that believed in Christ at first, 
was such as now the monks desire to imitate, (9) that is, such that nothing is the peculiar property of any one 
of them, none of them rich, none poor, that patrimonies are divided among the needy, that they have leisure 
for prayer and psalms, for doctrine also and ascetic practice, that they were in fact as Lake declares 
believers were at first at Jerusalem. They say that under Caius(10) Caligula he ventured to Rome, whither he 
had been sent as legate of his nation, and that when a second time he had come to Claudius, he spoke in 
the same city with the apostle Peter and enjoyed his friendship, and for this reason also adorned the 
adherents of Mark, Peter's disciple at Alexandria, with his praises. There are distinguished and 
innumerable works by this man: On the five books of Moses, one book Concerning the confusion of 
tongues, one book On nature and invention, one book On the things which our senses desire and we detest, 
one book On learning, one book On the heir of divine things, one book On the division of equals and 
contraries, one book On the three virtues, one book On why in Scripture the names of many persons are 
changed, two books On covenants, one book On the life of a wise man, one book Concerning giants, five 
books That dreams are sent by God, five books of Questions and answers on Exodus, four books On the 
tabernacle and the Decalogue, as well as books On victims and promises or curses, On Providence, On 
the Jews, On the manner of one's life,, On Alexander, and That dumb beasts have right reason, and That 
every fool should be a slave, and On the lives of the Christians, of which we spoke above, that is, lives of 
apostolic men, which also he entitled, On those who practice the divine life, because in truth they 
contemplate divine things and ever pray to God, also trader other categories, two On agriculture, two On 
drunkenness. There are other monuments of his genius which have not come to our hands. Concerning him 

there is a proverb among the Greeks "Either Plato philonized, or Philo platonized," that is, either Plato 
followed Philo, or Philo, Plato, so great is the similarity of ideas and language. 

CHAPTER XII. 

LUCIUS Annus Seneca(1) of Cordova disciple of the Stoic Sotion(2) and uncle of Lucan the Poet, was a 
man of most continent life, whom I should not place in the category of saints were it not that those Epistles of 
Paul to Seneca and Seneca a to Paul, which are read by many, provoke me. In these, written when he was 
tutor of Nero and the most powerful man of that time, he says that he would like to hold such a place among 
his countrymen as Paul held among Christians. He was put to death by Nero two years before Peter and 
Paul were crowned with martyrdom. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

JOSEPHUS, (1) the son of Matthias, priest of Jerusalem, taken prisoner by Vespasian and his son Titus, 
was banished. Coming to Rome he presented to the emperors, father and son, seven books On the 
captivity of the Jews, which were deposited in the public library and, on account of his genius, was found 
worthy of a statue at Rome. He wrote also twenty books of Antiquities, from the beginning of the world until 
the fourteenth year of Domitian Csar, and two of Antiquities against Appion, the grammarian of Alexandria 
who, under Caligula, sent as legate on the part of the Gentiles against Philo, wrote also a book containing a 
vituperation of the Jewish nation. Another book of his entitled, On all ruling wisdom, in which the martyr 
deaths of the Maccabeans are related is highly esteemed. In the eighth book of his Antiquities he most 
openly acknowledges that Christ was slain by the Pharisees on account of the greatness of his miracles, 
that John the Baptist was truly a prophet, and that Jerusalem was destroyed because of the murder of 
James the apostle. He wrote also concerning the Lord after this fashion: "In this same time was Jesus, a 
wise man, if indeed it be lawful to call him man. For he was a worker of wonderful miracles, and a teacher of 
those who freely receive the truth. He had very many adherents also, both of the Jews and of the Gentiles, 
and was believed to be Christ, and when through the envy of our chief men Pilate had crucified him, 
nevertheless those who had loved him at first continued to the end, for he appeared to them the third day 
alive. Many things, both these and other wonderful things are in the songs of the prophets who prophesied 
concerning him and the sect of Christians, so named from Him, exists to the present day." 

CHAPTER XIV. 

JUSTUS (2)(3) of Tiberias of the province Galilee, also attempted to write a History of Jewish affairs and 
certain brief Commentaries on the Scriptures but Josephus convicts him of falsehood. It is known that he 
wrote at the same time as Josephus himself. 

CHAPTER XV. 

CLEMENT, (4) of whom the apostle Paul writing to the Philippians says "With Clement and others of my 
fellow-workers whose names are written in the book of life,"(1) the fourth bishop of Rome after Peter, if 
indeed the second was Linus and the third Anacletus,(2) although most of the Latins think that Clement was 
second after the apostle. (3) He wrote, on the part of the church of Rome, an especially valuable Letter to the 
church of the Corinthians, which in some places is publicly read, and which seems to me to agree in style 
with the epistle to the Hebrews which passes under the name of Paul but it differs from this same epistle, not 
only in many of its ideas, but also in respect of the order of words, and its likeness in either respect is not 
very great. There is also a second Epistle under his name which is rejected by earlier writers, and a 
Disputation between Peter and Appion written out at length, which Eusebius in the third book of his Church 
history rejects. He died in the third year of Trajan and a church built at Rome preserves the memory of his 
name unto this day. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

IGNATIUS, (4) third bishop of the church of Antioch after Peter the apostle, condemned to the wild beasts 
during the persecution of Trajan, was sent bound to Rome, and when he had come on his voyage as far as 
Smyrna, where Polycarp the pupil of John was bishop@ he wrote one epistle To the Ephesians, another To 
the Magnesians a third To the Trallians a fourth To the Romans, and going thence, he wrote To the 
Philadelphians and To the Smyrneans and especially To Polycarp, commending to him the church at 
Antioch. In this last(5) he bore witness to the Gospel which I have recently translated, in respect of the person 

of Christ saying, "I indeed saw him in the flesh after the resurrection and I believe that he is," and when he 
came to Peter and those who were with Peter, he said to them "Behold ! touch me and see me bow that I am 
not an incorporeal spirit" and straightway they touched him and believed. Moreover it seems worth while 
inasmuch as we have made mention of such a man and of the Epistle which he wrote to the Romans, to give 
a few "quotations"(6): "From Syria even unto Rome I fight with wild beasts, by land and by sea, by night and 
by day, being bound amidst ten leopards, that is to say soldiers who guard me and who only become 
worse when they are well treated. Their wrong doing, however is my schoolmaster, but I am not thereby 
justified. May I have joy of the beasts that are prepared for me; and I pray that I may find them ready; I will 
even coax them to devour me quickly that they may not treat me as they have some whom they have 
refused to touch through fear. And if they are unwilling, I will compel them to devour me. Forgive me my 
children, I know what is expedient for me. Now do I begin to be a disciple, and desire none of the things 
visible that I may attain unto Jesus Christ. Let fire and cross and attacks of wild beasts, let wrenching of 
bones, cutting apart of limbs, crushing of the whole body, tortures [1] of the devil,— let all these come upon 
me if only I may attain unto the joy which is in Christ." 

When he had been condemned to the wild beasts and with zeal for martyrdom heard the lions roaring, he 
said "I am the grain of Christ. I am ground by the teeth of the wild beasts that I may be found the bread of the 
world." He was put to death the eleventh year of Trajan and the remains of his body lie in Antioch outside 
the Daphnitic gate in the cemetery. 

CHAPTER XVII. 

POLYCARP [2] disciple of the apostle John and by him ordained bishop of Smyrna was chief of all Asia, 
where he saw and had as teachers some of the apostles and of those who had seen the Lord. He, on 
account of certain questions concerning the day of the Passover, went to Rome in the time of the emperor 
Antoninus Pins while Anicetus ruled the church in that city. There he led back to the faith many of the 
believers who had been deceived through the persuasion of Marcion and Valentinus, and when. Marcion 
met him by chance and said "Do you know us" he replied, "I know the firstborn of the devil." Afterwards 
during the reign of Marcus Antoninus and Lucius Aurelius Commodus in the fourth persecution after Nero, in 
the presence of the proconsul holding court at Smyrna and all the people crying out against him in the 
Amphitheater, he was burned. He wrote a very valuable Epistle to the Philippians which is read to the 
present day in the meetings in Asia. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

PAPIAS, [1] the pupil of John, bishop of Hierapolis in Asia, wrote only five volumes, which he entitled 
Exposition of the words of our Lord, in which, when he had asserted in his preface that he did not follow 
various opinions but had the apostles for authority, he said "I considered what Andrew and Peter said, what 
Philip, what Thomas, what James, what John, [2] what Matthew or any one else among the disciples of our 
Lord, what also Aristion and the elder John, disciples of the Lord had said, not so much that I have their 
books to read, as that their living voice is heard until the present day in the authors themselves." It appears 
through this catalogue of names that the John who is placed among the disciples is not the same as the 
eider John whom he places after Aristion in his enumeration. This we say moreover because of the opinion 
mentioned above, where we record that it is declared by many that the last two epistles of John are the work 
not of the apostle but of the presbyter. 

He is said to have published a Second coming of Our Lord or Millennium. Irenaeus and Apollinaris and 
others who say that after the resurrection the Lord will reign in the flesh with the saints, follow him. Tertullian 
also in his work On the hope of the faithful, Victorinus of Petau and Lac-tantius follow this view. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

QUADRATUS [3] disciple of the apostles, after Publius bishop of Athens had been crowned with martyrdom 
on account of his faith in Christ, was substituted in his place, and by his faith and industry gathered the church 
scattered by reason of its great fear. And when Hadrian passed the winter at Athens to witness the 
Eleusinian mysteries and was initiated into almost all the sacred mysteries of Greece, those who hated the 
Christians took opportunity without instructions from the Emperor to harass the believers. At this time he 
presented to Hadrian a work composed in behalf of our religion, indispensable, full of sound argument and 
faith and worthy of the apostolic teaching. In which, illustrating the antiquity of his period, he says that he has 
seen many who, oppressed by various ills, were healed by the Lord in Judea as well as some who had 
been raised from the dead. 

CHAPTER XX. 

ARISTIDES [1] a most eloquent Athenian philosopher, and a disciple of Christ while yet retaining his 
philosopher's garb, presented a work to Hadrian at the same time that Quadratus presented his. The work 
contained a systematic statement of our doctrine, that is, an Apology for the Christians, which is still extant 
and is regarded by philologians as a monument to his genius. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

AGRIPPA [2] surnamed Castor, a man of great learning, wrote a strong refutation of the twenty-four volumes 
which Basilides the heretic had written against the Gospel, disclosing all his mysteries and enumerating the 
prophets Barcabbas and Barchob [3] and all the other barbarous names which terrify the hearers, and his 
most high God Abraxas, whose name was supposed to contain the year according to the reckoning [4] of 
the Greeks. Basilides died at Alexandria in the reign of Hadrian, and from him the Gnostic sects arose. In 
this tempestuous time also, Cochebas leader of the Jewish faction put Christians to death with various 
tortures. 

CHAPTER XXII. 

HEGESIPPUS [5] who lived at a period not far from the Apostolic age, writing a History of all ecclesiastical 
events from the passion of our Lord, down to his own period, and gathering many things useful to the reader, 
composed five volumes in simple style, trying to represent the style of speaking of those whose lives he 
treated. He says that he went to Rome in the time of Anicetus, the tenth bishop after Peter, and continued 
there till the time of Eleutherius, bishop of the same city, who had been formerly deacon under Anicetus. 
Moreover, arguing against idols, he wrote a history, showing from what error they had first arisen, and this 
work indicates in what age he flourished. [6] He says, "They built monuments and temples to their dead as 
we see up to the present day, [1] such as the one to Antinous, servant to the Emperor Hadrian, in whose 
honour also games were celebrated, and a city founded bearing his name, and a temple with priests 
established." The Emperor Hadrian is said to have been enamoured of Antinous. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

JUSTIN, [2] a philosopher, and wearing the garb of philosopher, a citizen of Neapolis, a city of Palestine, 
and the son of Priscus Bacchius, laboured strenuously in behalf of the religion of Christ, insomuch that he 
delivered to Antoninus Pius and his sons and the senate, a work written Against the nations, and did not 
shun the ignominy of the cross. He addressed another book also to the successors of this Antoninus, 
Marcus Antoninus Verus and Lucius Aurelius Corn-modus. Another volume of his Against the nations, is also 
extant, where he discusses the nature of demons, and a fourth against the nations which he entitled, 
Refutation and yet another On the sovereignty of God, and another book which be entitled, Psaltes, and 
another On the Soul, the Dialogue against the Jews, which he held against Trypho, the leader of the Jews, 
and also notable volumes Against Marcion, which Irenaeus also mentions in the fourth book [3] Against 
heresies, also another book Against all heresies which he mentions in the Apology which is addressed to 
Antoninus Pius. He, when be had held <greek>diatribas</greek> in the city of Rome, and had convicted 
Crescens the cynic, who said many blasphemous things against the Christians, of gluttony and fear of death, 
and bad proved him devoted to luxury and lusts, at last, accused of being a Christian, through the efforts and 
wiles of Crescens, he shed his blood for Christ. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

MELITO [4] of Asia, bishop of Sardis, addressed a book to the emperor Marcus Antoninus Verus, a disciple 
of Fronto the orator, in behalf of the Christian doctrine. He wrote other things also, among which are the 
following: On the passover, two books, one book On the lives of the prophets, one book On the church, [5] 
one book On the Lord's day, one book On faith, one book On the psalms (?) one On the senses, one On the 
soul and body, one On baptism, one On truth, one On the generation of Christ, On His prophecy [1] one On 
hospitality and another which is called the Key-one On the devil, one On the Apocalypse of John, one On 
the corporeality of God, and six books of Eclogues. Of his fine oratorical genius, Tertullian, in the seven 
books which he wrote against the church on behalf of Montanus, satirically says that he was considered a 
prophet by many of us. 

CHAPTER XXV. 

THEOPHILUS, [2] sixth bishop of the church of Antioch, in the reign of the emperor Marcus Antoninus Verus 
composed a book Against Marcion, which is still extant, also three volumes To Autolycus and one Against 
the heresy of Hermogenes and other short and elegant treatises, well fitted for the edification of the church. I 
have read, under his name, commentaries On the Gospel and On the proverbs of Solomon which do not 
appear to me to correspond in style and language with the elegance and expressiveness of the above 
works. 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

APOLLINARIS, [3] bishop of Hierapolis in Asia, flourished in the reign of Marcus Antoninus Verus, to whom 
he addressed a notable volume in behalf of the faith of the Christians. There are extant also five other books 
of his Against the Nations, two On truth and Against the Cataphrygians written at the time when Montanus 
was making a beginning with Prisca and Maximilla. 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

DIONYSIUS, [4] bishop of the church of Corinth, was of so great eloquence and industry that he taught not 
only the people of his own city and province but also those of other provinces and cities by his letters. Of 
these one is To the Lacedaemonians, another To the Athenians, a third To the Nicomedians, a fourth To the 
Cretans, a fifth To the church at Amastrina and to the other churches of Pontus, a sixth To the Gnosians and 
to Pinytus bishop of the same city, a seventh To the Romans, addressed to Sorer their bishop, an eighth To 
Chrysophora a holy woman. He flourished in the reign of Marcus Antoninus Verus and Lucius Aurelius 
Commodus. 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

PINYTUS [1] of Crete, bishop of the city of Gnosus, wrote to Dionysius bishop of the Corinthians, an 
exceedingly elegant letter in which he teaches that the people are not to be forever fed on milk, lest by 
chance they be overtaken by the last day while yet infants, but that they ought to be fed also on solid food, 
that they may go on to a spiritual old age. He flourished under Marcus Antoninus Verus and Lucius Aurelius 
Corn-modus. [2] 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

TATIAN [3] who, while teaching oratory, won not a little glory in the rhetorical art, was a follower of Justin 
Martyr and was distinguished so long as he did not leave his master's side. But afterwards, inflated [4] by a 
swelling of eloquence, he rounded a new heresy which is called that of the Encratites, the heresy which 
Severus afterwards augmented in such wise that heretics of this party are called Severians to the present 
day. Tatian wrote besides innumerable volumes, one of which, a most successful book Against the nations, 
is extant, and this is considered the most significant of all his works. He flourished in the reign of Marcus 
Antoninus Verus and Lucius Aurelius Commodus. 

CHAPTER XXX. 

PHILIP [5] bishop of Crete, that is of the city of Gortina, whom Dionysius mentions in the epistle which he 
wrote to the church of the same city, published a remarkable book Against Marcion and flourished in the 
time of Marcus Antoninus Verus and Lucius Aurelius Commodus. 

CHAPTER XXXI. 

MUSANUS, [6] not inconsiderable among those who have written on ecclesiastical doctrine, in the reign of 
Marcus Antoninus Verus wrote a book to certain brethren who had turned aside from the church to the 
heresy of the Encratites. 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

MODESTUS [1] also in the reign of Marcus Antoninus and Lucius Aurelius Commodus wrote a book Against 
Marcion which is still extant. Some other compositions pass under his name but are regarded by scholars 
as spurious. 

CHAPTER XXXIII. 

BARDESANES [2] of Mesopotamia is reckoned among the distinguished men. He was at first a follower of 
Valentinus and afterwards his opponent and himself founded a new heresy. He has the reputation among 
the Syrians of having been a brilliant genius and vehement in argument. He wrote a multitude of works 
against almost all heresies which had come into existence in his time. Among these a most remarkable and 
strong work is the one which he addressed to Marcus Antoninus On fate, and many other volumes On 
persecution which his followers translated from the Syriac language into Greek. If indeed so much force and 
brilliancy appears in the translation, how great it must have been in the original. 

CHAPTER XXXIV. 

VICTOR, [3] thirteenth bishop of Rome, wrote, On the Paschal Controversy and some other small works. He 
ruled the church for ten years in the reign of the Emperor Severus. 

CHAPTER XXXV. 

IRENAEUS, [4] a presbyter trader Pothinus the bishop who ruled the church of Lyons in Gaul, being sent to 
Rome as legate by the martyrs of Ibis place, on account of certain ecclesiastical questions, presented to 
Bishop Eleutherius certain letters under his own name which are worthy of honour. Afterwards when 
Pothinus, nearly ninety years of age, received the crown of martyrdom for Christ, he was put in his place. It is 
certain too that he was a disciple of Poly-carp, the priest and martyr, whom we mentioned above. He wrote 
five books Against heresies and a short volume, Against the nations and another On discipline, a letter to 
Marcianus his brother On apostolical preaching, a book of Various treatises; also to Blastus, On schism, [5] 
to Florinus On monarchy or That God is not the author of evil, also an excellent Commentary on the Ogdoad 
at the end of which indicating that he was near the apostolic period he wrote "I adjure thee whosoever shall 
transcribe this book, by our Lord Jesus Christ and by his glorious advent at which He shall judge the quick 
and the dead, that you diligently compare, after you have transcribed, and amend it according to the copy 
from which you have transcribed it and also that you shall similarly transcribe this adjuration as you find it in 
your pattern." Other works of his are in circulation to wit: to Victor the Roman bishop On the Paschal 
controversy in which he warns him not lightly to break the unity of the fraternity, if indeed Victor believed that 
the many bishops of Asia and the East, who with the Jews celebrated the passover, on the fourteenth day of 
the new moon, were to be condemned. But even those who differed from them did not support Victor in his 
opinion. He flourished chiefly in the reign of the Emperor Commodus, who succeeded Marcus Antoninus 
Verus in power. 

CHAPTER XXXVI. 

PANTAENUS, [2] a philosopher of the stoic school, according to some old Alexandrian custom, where, 
from the time of [3] Mark the evangelist the ecclesiastics were always doctors, was of so great prudence 
and erudition both in scripture and secular literature that, on the request of the legates of that nation, he was 
sent to India by Demetrius bishop of Alexandria, where he found that Bartholomew, one of the twelve 
apostles, had preached the advent of the Lord Jesus according to the gospel of Matthew, and on his return 
to Alexandria he brought this with him written in Hebrew characters. Many of his commentaries on Holy 
Scripture are indeed extant, but his living voice was of still greater benefit to the churches. He taught in the 
reigns of the emperor Severus and Antoninus surnamed Caracalla. 

CHAPTER XXXVII. 

RHODO, [4] a native of Asia, instructed in the Scriptures at Rome by Tatian whom we mentioned above, 
published many things especially a work Against Marcion in which he tells how the Marcionites differ from 
one another as well as from the church and says that the aged Apelles, another heretic, was once engaged 
in a discussion with him, and that he, Rhodo, held Apelles up to ridicule because he declared that he did not 
know the God whom he worshipped. He mentioned in the same book, which he wrote to Callistion, that he 
had been a pupil of Tatian at Rome. He also composed elegant treatises On the six days of creation and a 
notable work against the Phrygians. [1] 
He flourished in the reigns of Commodus and Severus. 

CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

CLEMENS, [2] presbyter of the Alexandrian church, and a pupil of the Pantaenus mentioned above, led the 
theological school at Alexandria after the death of his master and was teacher of the Catechetes. He is the 
author of notable volumes, full of eloquence and learning, both in sacred Scripture and in secular literature; 
among these are the Stromata, eight books, Hypotyposes eight books, Against the nations one book, On 
pedagogy [3] three books, On the Passover, Disquisition on fasting and another book entitled, What rich 
mast is saved? one book On Calumny, On ecclesiastical canons and against those who follow the error of 
the Jews one book which he addressed to Alexander bishop of Jerusalem. He also mentions in his 
volumes of Stromata the work of Tatian Against the nations which we mentioned above and a 
Chronography of one Cassianus, a work which I have not been able to find. He also mentioned certain 
Jewish writers against the nations, one Aristobulus and Demetrius and Eupolemus who after the example of 
Josephus asserted the primacy of Moses and the Jewish people. There is a letter of Alexander the bishop 
of Jerusalem who afterwards ruled the church with Narcissus, on the ordination of Asclepiades the 
confessor, addressed to the Antiochians congratulating them, at the end of which he says "these writings 
honoured [4] brethren I have sent to you by the blessed presbyter Clement, a man illustrious and approved, 
whom you also know and with whom now you will become better acquainted a man who, when he had come 
hither by the special providence of God. strengthened and enlarged the church of God." Origen is known to 
have been his disciple. He flourished moreover during the reigns of Severus and his son Antoninus. 

CHAPTER XXXIX. 

MILTIADES [1] of whom Rhodo gives an account in the work which he wrote against Montanus, Prisca and 
Maximilla, wrote a considerable volume against these same persons, and other books Against the nations 
and the Jews and addressed an Apology to the then ruling emperors. He flourished in the reign of Marcus 
Antoninus and Commodus. 

CHAPTER XL. 

APOLLONIUS, [2] an exceedingly talented man, wrote against Montanus, Prisca and Maximilla a notable 
and lengthy volume, in which he asserts that Montanus and his mad prophetesses died by hanging, and 
many other things, among which are the following concerning Prisca and Maximilla, "if they denied that they 
have accepted gifts, let them confess that those who do accept are not prophets and I will prove by a 
thousand witnesses that they have received gifts, for it is by other fruits that prophets are shown to be 
prophets indeed. Tell me, does a prophet dye his hair? Does a prophet stain her eyelids with antimony? Is 
a prophet adorned with fine garments and precious stones? Does a prophet play with dice and tables? 
Does he accept usury? Let them respond whether this ought to be permitted or not, it will be my task to 
prove that they do these things." He says in the same book, that the time when he wrote the work was the 
fortieth year after the beginning of the heresy of the Cataphrygians. Tertullian added to the six volumes 
which he wrote On ecstasy against the church a seventh, directed especially against Apollonius, in which he 
attempts to defend all which Apollonius refuted. Apollonius flourished in the reigns of Commodus and 
Severus. 

CHAPTER XLI. 

SERAPION, [3] ordained bishop of Antioch in the eleventh year of the emperor Commodus, wrote a letter to 
Caricus and Pontius [4] on the heresy of Montanus, in which he said " that you may know moreover that the 
madness of this false doctrine, that is the doctrine of a new prophecy, is reprobated by all the world, I have 
sent to you the letters of the most holy Apollinaris bishop of Hierapolis in Asia." He wrote a volume also to 
Domnus, who in time of persecution went over to the Jews, and another work on the gospel which passes 
under the name of Peter, a work to the church of the Rhosenses in Cilicia who by the reading of this book 
had turned aside to heresy. There are here and there short letters of his, harmonious in character with the 
ascetic life of their author. 

CHAPTER XLII. 

APOLLONIUS, [1] a Roman senator under the emperor Commodus, having been denounced by a slave as 
a Christian, gained permission to give a reason for his faith and wrote a remarkable volume which he read 
in the senate, yet none the less, by the will of the senate, he was beheaded for Christ by virtue of an ancient 
law among them, that Christians who had once been brought before their judgment seat should not be 
dismissed unless they recanted. 

CHAPTER XLIII. 

THEOPHILUS, [2] bishop of Caesarea in Palestine, the city formerly called Turris Stratonis, in the reign of 
the emperor Severus wrote, in conjunction with other bishops, a synodical letter of great utility against those 
who celebrated the passoverwith the Jews on the fourteenth day of the month. 

CHAPTER XLIV. 

BACCHYLUS, [3] bishop of Corinth, was held in renown under the same emperor Severus, and wrote, as 
representative of all the bishops who were in Achaia, an elegant work On the passover. 

CHAPTER XLV. 

POLYCRATES [4] bishop of the Ephesians with other bishops of Asia who in accordance with some ancient 
custom celebrated the passoverwith the Jews on the fourteenth of the month, wrote a synodical letter 
against Victor bishop of Rome in which he says that he follows the authority of the apostle John and of the 
ancients. From this we make the following brief quotations, "We therefore celebrate the day according to 
usage, inviolably, neither adding anything to nor taking anything from it, for in Asia lie the remains of the 
greatest saints of those who shall rise again on the day of the Lord, when he shall come in majesty from 
heaven and shall quicken all the saints, I mean Philip one of the twelve apostles who sleeps at Hierapolis 
and his two daughters who were virgins until their death and another daughter of his who died at Ephesus full 
of the Holy Spirit. And John too, who lay on Our Lord's breast and was his high priest carrying the golden 
frontlet on his forehead, both martyr and doctor, fell asleep at Ephesus and Polycarp bishop and martyr 
died at Smyrna. Thraseas of Eumenia also, bishop and martyr, rests in the same Smyrna. What need is 
there of mentioning Sagaris, bishop and martyr, who sleeps in Laodicea and the blessed Papyrus and 
Melito, eunuch in the Holy Spirit, who, ever serving the Lord, was laid to rest in Sardis and there awaits his 
resurrection at Christ's advent. These all observed the day of the passover on the fourteenth of the month, in 
nowise departing from the evangelical tradition and following the ecclesiastical canon. I also, Poly-crates, 
the least of all your servants, according to the doctrine of my relatives which I also have followed (for there 
were seven of my relatives bishops indeed and I the eighth) have always celebrated the passover when 
the Jewish people celebrated the putting away of the leaven. And so brethren being sixty-five years old in 
the Lord and instructed by many brethren from all parts of the world, and having searched all the Scriptures, I 
will not fear those who threaten us, for my predecessors said "It is fitting to obey God rather than men." I 
quote this to show through a small example the genius and authority of the man. He flourished in the reign of 
the emperor Severus in the same period as Narcissus of Jerusalem. 

CHAPTER XLVI. 

HERACLITUS [1] in the reign of Commodus and Severus wrote commentaries on the Acts and Epistles. 

CHAPTER XLVII. 

MAXIMUS, [2] under the same emperors pro-pounded in a remarkable volume the famous questions, What 
is the origin of evil? and Whether matter is made by God. 

CHAPTER XLVIII. 

CANDIDUS [3] under the above mentioned emperors published most admirable treatises On the six days 
of creation. 

CHAPTER XLIX. 

APPION (1) under the emperor Severus likewise wrote treatises On the six days of creation. 
CHAPTER L. 

SEXTUS (2) in the reign of the emperor Severus wrote a book On the resurrection. 
CHAPTER LI. 

ARABIANUS (3) under the same emperor published certain small works relating to christian doctrine. 

CHAPTER Lll. 

JUDAS, (4) discussed at length the seventy weeks mentioned in Daniel and wrote a Chronography of 
former times which he brought up to the tenth year of Severus. He is convicted of error in respect of this work 
in that he prophesied that the advent of Anti-Christ would be about his period, but this was because the 
greatness of the persecutions seemed to forebode the end of the world. 

CHAPTER Llll. 

TERTULLIAN (5) the presbyter, now regarded as chief of the Latin writers after Victor and Apollonius, was 
from the city of Carthage in the province of Africa, and was the son of a proconsul or Centurion, a man of 
keen and vigorous character, he flourished chiefly in the reign of the emperor Severus and Antoninus 
Caracalla and wrote many volumes which we pass by because they are well known to most. I myself have 
seen a certain Paul an old man of Concordia, a town of Italy, who, while he himself was a very young man 
had been secretary to the blessed Cyprian who was already advanced in age. He said that he himself had 
seen how Cyprian was accustomed never to pass a day without reading Tertullian, and that be frequently 
said to him, "Give me the master," meaning by this, Tertullian. He was presbyter of the church until middle 
life, afterwards driven by the envy and abuse of the clergy of the Roman church, he lapsed to the doctrine of 
Montanus, and mentions the new prophecy in many of his books. 

He composed, moreover, directly against the church, volumes: On modesty, On persecution, On fasts, On 
monogamy, six books On ecstasy, and a seventh which he wrote Against Apollonius. He is said to have 
lived to a decrepit old age, and to have composed many small works, which are not extant. 

CHAPTER LIV. 

ORIGEN, (1) surnamed Adamantius, a persecution having been raised against the Christians in the tenth 
year of Severus Pertinax, and his father Leonidas having received the crown of martyrdom for Christ, was 
left at the age of about seventeen, with his six brothers and widowed mother, in poverty, for their property 
had been confiscated because of confessing Christ. When only eighteen years old, he undertook the work 
of instructing the Catechetes in the scattered churches of Alexandria. Afterwards appointed by Demetrius, 
bishop of this city, successor to the presbyter Clement, he flourished many years. When he had already 
reached middle life, on account of the churches of Achaia, which were torn with many heresies, he was 
journeying to Athens, by way of Palestine, under the authority of an ecclesiastical letter, and having been 
ordained presbyter by Theoctistus and Alexander, bishops of Caesarea and Jerusalem, he offended 
Demetrius, who was so wildly enraged at him that he wrote everywhere to injure his reputation. It is known 
that before he went to Caesarea, he had been at Rome, trader bishop Zephyrinus. Immediately on his return 
to Alexandria he made Heraclas the presbyter, who continued to wear his philosopher's garb, his assistant 
in the school for catechetes. Heraclas became bishop of the church of Alexandria, after Demetrius. How 
great the glory of Origen was, appears from the fact that Firmilianus, bishop of Caesarea, with all the 
Cappadocian bishops, sought a visit from him, and entertained him for a long while. Sometime afterwards, 
going to Palestine to visit the holy places, he came to Caesarea (2) and was instructed at length by Origen 
in the Holy Scriptures. It appears also from the fact that he went to Antioch, on the request of Mammaea, 
mother of the Emperor Alexander, and a woman religiously disposed, and was there held in great honour, 
and sent letters to the Emperor Philip, who was the first among the Roman rulers, to become a christian, and 
to his mother, letters which are still extant. Who is there, who does not also know that he was so assiduous in 
the study of Holy Scriptures, that contrary to the spirit of his time, and of his people, he learned the Hebrew 
language, and taking the Septuagint translation, he gathered the other translations also in a single work, 
namely, that of Aquila, of Ponticus the Proselyte, and Theodotian the Ebonite, and Symmachus an adherent 
of the same sect who wrote commentaries also on the gospel according to Matthew, from which he tried to 
establish his doctrine. And besides these, a fifth, sixth, and seventh translation, which we also have from his 
library, he sought out with great diligence, and compared with other editions. And since I have given a list of 
his works, in the volumes of letters which I have written to Paula, in a letter which I wrote against the works of 
Varro, I pass this by now, not failing however, to make mention of his immortal genius, how that he 
understood dialectics, as well as geometry, arithmetic, music, grammar, and rhetoric, and taught all the 
schools of philosophers, in such wise that he had also diligent students in secular literature, and lectured to 
them daily, and the crowds which flocked to him were marvellous. These, he received in the hope that 
through the instrumentality of this secular literature, he might establish them in the faith of Christ. 

It is unnecessary to speak of the cruelty of that persecution which was raised against the Christians and 
under Decius, who was mad against the religion of Philip, whom he had slain,-the persecution in which 
Fabianus, bishop of the Roman church, perished at Rome, and Alexander and Babylas, Pontifs of the 
churches of Jerusalem and Antioch, were imprisoned for their confession of Christ. If any one wishes to know 
what was done in regard to the position of Origen, he can clearly learn, first indeed from his own epistles, 
which after the persecution, were sent to different ones, and secondly, from the sixth book of the church 
history of Eusebius of Caesarea, and from his six volumes in behalf of the same Origen. 
He lived until the time of Gallus and Volusianus, that is, until his sixty-ninth year, and died at Tyre, in which 
city he also was buried. 

CHAPTER LV. 

AMMONIUS, (1) a talented man of great philosophical learning, was distinguished at Alexandria, at the 
same time. Among many and distinguished monuments of his genius, is the elaborate work which he 
composed On the harmony of Moses and Jesus, and the Gospel canons, which he worked out, and which 
Eusebius of Caesarea, afterwards followed. Porphyry falsely accused him of having become a heathen 
again, after being a Christian, but it is certain that he continued a Christian until the very end of his life. 

CHAPTER LVI. 

AMBROSIUS, (1) at first a Marcionite but afterwards set right by Origen, was deacon in the church, and 
gloriously distinguished as confessor of the Lord. To him, together with Protoctetus the presbyter, the book 
of Origen, On martyrdom was written. Aided (2) by his industry, funds, and perseverance, Origen dictated a 
great number of volumes. He himself, as befits a man of noble nature, was of no mean literary talent, as his 
letters to Origen indicate. He died moreover, before the death of Origen, and is condemned by many, in that 
being a man of wealth, he did not at death, remember in his will, his old and needy friend. 

CHAPTER LVII. 

TRYPHO, (3) pupil of Origen, to whom some of his extant letters are addressed, was very learned in the 
Scriptures, and this many of his works show here and there, but especially the book which he composed On 
the red heifer (4) in Deuteronomy, and On the halves, which with the pigeon and the turtledoves were offered 
by Abraham as recorded in Genesis. (5) 

CHAPTER LVIII. 

MINUCIUS (6) Felix, a distinguished advocate of Rome, wrote a dialogue representing a discussion 
between a Christian and a Gentile, which is entitled Octavius, and still another work passes current in his 
name, On fate, or Against the mathematicians, but this although it is the work of a talented man, does not 
seem to me to correspond in style with the above mentioned work. Lactantius also mentions this Minucius in 
his works. 

CHAPTER LIX. 

GAIUS, (7) bishop of Rome, in the time of Zephyrinus, that is, in the reign of Antoninus, the son of Severus, 
delivered a very notable disputation Against Proculus, the follower of Montanus, convicting him of temerity in 
his defence of the new prophecy, and in the same volume also enumerating only thirteen epistles of Paul, 
says that the fourteenth, which is now called, To the Hebrews, is not by him, and is not considered among 
the Romans to the present day as being by the apostle Paul. 

CHAPTER LX. 

BERYLLUS, (1) bishop of Bostra in Arabia, after he had ruled the church gloriously (2) for a little while, finally 
lapsed into the heresy which denies that Christ existed before the incarnation. Set right by Origen, he wrote 
various short works, especially letters, in which he thanks Origen. The letters of Origen to him, are also 
extant, and a dialogue between Origen and Beryllus as well, in which heresies are discussed. He was 
distinguished during the reign of Alexander, son of Mammaea, and Maximinus and Gordianus, who 
succeededhimin power. 

CHAPTER LXI. 

HIPPOLYTUS, (3) bishop of some church (the name of the city I have not been able to learn) wrote A 
reckoning of the Paschal feast and chronological tables which be worked out up to the first year of the 
Emperor Alexander. He also discussed the cycle of sixteen years, which the Greeks called 
<greek>ekkaQdekaeGhrida</greek> and gave the cue to Eusebius, who composed on the same Paschal 
feast a cycle of nineteen years, that is <greek>euueakaidekaeGhrida</greek>. He wrote Some 
commentaries on the Scriptures, among which are the following: On the six days of creation, On Exodus, On 
the Song of Songs, On Genesis, On Zechariah, On the Psalms, On Isaiah, On Daniel, On the Apocalypse, 
On the Proverbs, On Ecclesiastes, On Saul, On the Pythonissa, On the Antichrist, On the resurrection, 
Against Marcion, On the Passover, Against all heresies, and an exhortation On the praise of our Lord and 
Saviour, in which he indicates that he is speaking in the church in the presence of Origen. Ambrosius, who 
we have said was converted by Origen from the heresy of Marcion, to the true faith, urged Origen to write, in 
emulation of Hyppolytus, commentaries on the Scriptures, offering him seven, and even more secretaries, 
and their expenses, and an equal number of copyists, and what is still more, with incredible zeal, daily 
exacting work from him, on which account Origen, in one of his epistles, calls him his'Task-master." 

CHAPTER LXII. 

ALEXANDER, (1) bishop of Cappadocia, desiring to visit the Holy Land, came to Jerusalem, at the time 
when Narcissus, bishop of this city, already an old man, ruled the church. It was revealed to Narcissus and 
many of his clergy, that on the morning of the next day, a bishop would enter the city, who should be 
assistant on the sacerdotal throne. And so it came to pass, as it was predicted, and all the bishops I of 
Palestine being gathered together, Narcissus himself being especially urgent, Alexander took with him the 
helm of the church of Jerusalem. At the end of one of his epistles, written to the Antinoites On the peace of 
the church. He says "Narcissus, who held the bishopric here before me, and now with me exercises his 
office by his prayers, being about a hundred and sixteen years old, salutes you, and with me begs you to 
become of one mind." He wrote another also To the Antiocheans, by the hand of Clement, the presbyter of 
Alexandria, of whom we spoke above, another also To Origen, and In behalf of Origen against Demetrius, 
called forth by the fact that, according to the testimony of Demetrius, he had made Origen presbyter. There 
are other epistles of his to different persons. In the seventh persecution under Decius, at the time when 
Babylas of Antioch was put to death, brought to Caesarea and shut up in prison, he received the crown of 
martyrdom for confessing Christ. 

CHAPTER LXIII. 

JULIUS Africanus, (2) whose five volumes On Chronology, are yet extant, in the reign of Marcus Aurelius 
Antoninus, who succeeded Macrinus, received a commission to restore the city of Emmaus, which 
afterwards was called Nicopolis. There is an epistle of his to Origen, On the question of Susanna, where it is 
contended that this story is not contained in the Hebrew, and is not consistent with the Hebrew etymology in 
respect of the play on "prinos and prisai," "schinos and schisai." In reply to this, Origen wrote a learned 
epistle. There is extant another letter of his, To Aristides, in which he discusses at length the discrepancies, 
which appear in the genealogy of our Saviour, as recorded by Matthew and Luke. 

CHAPTER LXIV. 

GEMINUS, (1) presbyter of the church at Antioch, composed a few monuments of his genius, flourishing in 
the time of the Emperor Alexander and Zebennus, bishop of his city, especially at the time at which 
Heraclas was ordained Pontiff of the church at Alexandria. 

CHAPTER LXV. 

THEODORUS, (2) afterwards called Gregory, bishop of Neocaesarea in Pontus, while yet a very young 
man, in company with his brother Athenodorus, went from Cappadocia to Berytus, and thence to Caesarea 
in Palestine, to study Greek and Latin literature. When Origen had seen the remarkable natural ability of 
these men, he urged them to study philosophy, in the teaching of which he gradually introduced the matter of 
faith in Christ, and made them also his followers. So, instructed by him for five years, they were sent back by 
him to their mother. Theodorus, on his departure, wrote a panegyric of thanks to Origen, and delivered it 
before a large assembly. Origen himself being present. This panegyric is extant at the present day. 
He wrote also a short, but very valuable, paraphrase On Ecclesiastes, and current report speaks or other 
epistles of his, but more especially of the signs and wonders, which as bishop, he performed to the great 

glory of the churches. 

CHAPTER LXVI. 

CORNELIUS, (3) bishop of Rome, to whom eight letters of Cyprian are extant, wrote a letter to Fabius, (4) 
bishop of the church at Antioch, On the Roman, Italian, and African councils, and another On Novatian and 
those who had fallen from the faith, a third On the acts of the council, and a fourth very prolix one to the same 
Fabius, containing the causes of the Novatian heresy and an anathema of it. He ruled the church for two 
years under Gallus and Volusianus. He received the crown of martyrdom for Christ, and was succeeded by 
Lucius. 

CHAPTER LXVII. 

CYPRIAN (5) of Africa, at first was famous as a teacher of rhetoric, and afterwards on, the persuasion of the 
presbyter Caecilius, from whom he received his surname, he became a Christian, and gave all his 
substance to the poor. Not long after he was inducted into the presbytery, and was also made bishop of 
Carthage. It is unnecessary to make a catalogue of the works of his genius, since they are more 
conspicuous thou the sun. 

He was put to death under the Emperors Valerian and Gallienus, in the eighth persecution, on the same day 
that Cornelius was put to death at Rome, but not in the same year. 

CHAPTER LXVIII. 

PONTIUS, (1) deacon of Cyprian, sharing his exile until the day of his death, left a notable volume On the life 
and death of Cyprian. 

CHAPTER LXIX. 

DIONYSIUS, (2) bishop of Alexandria, as presbyter had charge of the catechetical school under Heraclas, 
and was the most distinguished pupil of Origen. Consenting to the doctrine of Cyprian and the African synod, 
on the rebaptizing (3) of heretics, he sent many letters to different people, which are yet extant; He wrote one 
to Fabius, bishop of the church at Antioch, On penitence, another To the Romans, by the hand of Hippolytus, 
two letters To Xystus, who had succeeded Stephen, two also To Philemon and Dionysius, presbyters of the 
church at Rome, and another To the same Dionysius, afterwards bishop of Rome; and To Novatian, 
treating of their claim that Novatian had been ordained bishop of Rome, against his will. The beginning of 
this epistle is as follows: "Dionysius to Novatian, his brother greeting. If you have been ordained unwillingly, 
as you say, you will prove it, when yon shall willingly retire." 

There is another epistle of his also To Dionysius and Didymus, and many Festal epistles on the passover, 
written in a declamatory style, also one to the church of Alexandria On exile, one To Hierax, (4) bishop in 
Egypt, and vet others On mortality, On the Sabbath, and On the gymnasium, also one To Hermammon and 
others On the persecution of Decius, and two books Against Nepos the bishop, who asserted in his writings 
a thousand years reign in the body. Among other things he diligently discussed the Apocalypse of John, 
and wrote Against Sabellius and To Ammon, bishop of Bernice, and To Telesphorus, also To Euphranor, 
also four books To Dionysius, bishop of Rome, to the Laodiceans On penitence, to Origen On martyrdom, 
to the Armenians On penitence, (1) also On the order of transgression, to Timothy On nature, to Euphranor 
On temptation, many letters also To Basilides, in one of which he asserts that he also began to write 
commentaries on Ecclesiastes. The notable epistle which he wrote against Paul of Samosta, a few days 
before his death is also current. He died in the twelfth year of Gallienus. 

CHAPTER LXX. 

NOVATIANUS, (2) presbyter of Rome, attempted to usurp the sacerdotal chair occupied by Cornelius, and 
established the dogma of the Novatians, or as they are called in Greek, the Cathari, by refusing to receive 
penitent apostates. Novatus, author of this doctrine, was a presbyter of Cyprian. He wrote, On the passover, 
On the Sabbath, On circumcision, On the priesthood, On prayer, (3) On the food of the Jews On zeal, On 
Attalus, and many others, especially, a great volume On the Trinity, a sort of epitome of the work of 
Tertullian, which many mistakenly ascribe to Cyprian. 

CHAPTER LXXI. 

MALCHION, (4) the highly gifted presbyter of the church at Antioch, who had most successfully taught 
rhetoric in the same city, held a discussion with Paul of Samosata, who as bishop of the church at Antioch, 
had introduced the doctrine of Artemon, and this was taken down by short hand writers. This dialogue is still 
extant, and vet another extended epistle written by him, in behalf of the council, is addressed to Dionysius 
and Maximus, bishops of Rome and Alexandria. He flourished under Claudius and Aurelianus. 

CHAPTER LXXII. 

ARCHELAUS, (5) bishop of Mesopotamia, composed in the Syriac language, a book of the discussion 
which he held with Manichaeus, when he came from Persia. This book, which is translated into Greek, is 
possessed by many. 
He flourished under the Emperor Probus, who succeeded Aurelianus and Tacitus. 

CHAPTER LXXIII. 

ANATOLIUS (1) of Alexandria, bishop of Laodicea in Syria, who flourished under the emperors Probus and 
Cams, was a man of wonderful learning in arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, grammar, rhetoric, and dialectic. 
We can get an idea of the greatness of his genius from the volume which he wrote On the passover and his 
ten books On the institutes of arithmetic. 

CHAPTER LXXIV. 

VICTORINUS, (2) bishop of Pettau, was not equally familiar with Latin and Greek. On this account his works 
though noble in thought, are inferior in style. They are the following: Commentaries On Genesis, On Exodus, 
On Leviticus, On Isaiah, On Ezekiel. On Habakkuk, On Ecclesiastes, On the Song of Songs, On the 
Apocalypse of John, Against all heresies and many others. At the last he received the crown of martyrdom. 

CHAPTER LXXV. 

PAMPHILUS (3) the presbyter, patron of Eusebius bishop of Caesarea, was so inflamed with love of sacred 
literature, that he transcribed tim greater part of the works of Origen with his own hand and these are still 
preserved in the library at Caesarea. I have twenty-five volumes (4) of Commentaries of Origen, written in his 
hand, On the twelve prophets which I hug and guard with such joy, that I deem myself to have the wealth of 
Croesus. And if it is such joy to have one epistle of a martyr how much more to have so many thousand lines 
which seem to me to be traced in his blood. He wrote an Apology for Origen before Eusebius had written his 
and was put to death at Caesarea in Palestine in the persecution of Maximinus. 

CHAPTER LXXVI. 

PIERIUS, (5) presbyter of the church at Alexandria in the reign of Cams and Diocletian, at the time when 
Theonas ruled as bishop in tim same church, taught the people with great success and attained such 
elegance of language and published so many treatises on all sorts of subjects (which are still extant) that he 
was called Origen Junior. He was remarkable for his self-discipline, devoted to voluntary poverty, and 
thoroughly acquainted with the dialectic art. After the persecution, he passed the rest of his life at Rome. 
There is extant a long treatise of his. On the prophet Hoses which from internal evidence appears to have 
been delivered on the vigil of Passover. 

CHAPTER LXXVII. 

LUCIANUS, (1) a man of great talent, presbyter of the church at Antioch, was so diligent in the study of the 
Scriptures, that even now certain copies of the Scriptures bear the name of Lucian. Works of his, On faith, 
and short Epistles to various people are extant. He was put to death at Nicomedia for his confession of 
Christ in the persecution of Maximinus, and was buried at Helenopolis in Bithynia. 

CHAPTER LXXVIII. 

PHILEAS (2) a resident of that Egyptian city which is called Thmuis, of noble family, and no small wealth, 
having become bishop, composed a finely written work in praise of martyrs and arguing against the judge 
who tried to compel him to offer sacrifices, was beheaded for Christ during the same persecution in which 
Lucianus was put to death at Nicomedia. 

CHAPTER LXXIX. 

ARNOBIUS (3) a was a most successful teacher of rhetoric at Sicca in Africa during the reign of Diocletian, 
and wrote volumes Against the nations which may be found everywhere. 

CHAPTER LXXX. 

FIRMIANUS, (4) known also as Lactantius, a disciple of Arnobius, during the reign of Diocletian summoned 
to Nicomedia with Flavius the Grammarian whose poem On medicine is still extant, taught rhetoric there and 
on account of his lack of pupils (since it was a Greek city) he betook himself to writing. We have a Banquet 
of his which he wrote as a young man in Africa and an Itinerary of a journey from Africa to Nicomedia written 
in hexameters, and another book which is called The Grammarian and a most beautiful one On the wrath of 
God, and Divine institutes against the nations, seven books, and an Epitome of the same work in one 
volume, without a title, (6) also two books To Asclepiades, one book On persecution, four books of Epistles 
to Probus, two books of Epistles to Severus, two books of Epistles to his pupil Demetrius (1) and one book 
to the same On the work of God or the creation of man. In his extreme old age he was tutor to Crispus 
Caesar a son of Constantine in Gaul, the same one who was afterwards put to death by his father. 

CHAPTER LXXXI. 

EUSEBIUS (2) bishop of Caesarea in Palestine was diligent in the study of Divine Scriptures and with 
Pamphilus the martyr a most diligent investigator of the Holy Bible. He published a great number of 
volumes among which are the following: Demonstrations of the Gospel twenty books Preparations for the 
Gospel fifteen books, Theophany (3) five books, Church history ten books, Chronicle of Universal history 
and an Epitome of this last. Also On discrepancies between the Gospels, On Isaiah, ten books, also 
Against Porphyry, who was writing at that same time in Sicily as some think, twenty-five books, also one 
book of Topics, six books of Apology for Origen, three books On the life of Pamphilus, other brief works On 
the martyrs, exceedingly learned Commentaries on one hundred and fifty Psalms, and many others. He 
flourished chiefly in the reigns of Constantine the Great and Constantius. His surname Pamphilus arose from 
his friendship for Pamphilus the martyr. 

CHAPTER LXXXII. 

RETICIUS (4) bishop of Autun, among the Aedui, had a great reputation in Gaul in the reign of Constantine. I 
have read his commentaries On the Song of Songs and another great volume Against Novatian but 
besides these, I have found no works of his. 

CHAPTER LXXXIII. 

METHODIUS, (5) bishop of Olympus in Lycia and afterwards of Tyre, composed books Against Porphyry 
written in polished and logical style also a Banquet of the ten virgins, an excellent work On the resurrection, 
against Origen and On the Pythonissa and On free will, also against Origen. He also wrote commentaries 
On Genesis and On the Song of Songs and many others which are widely read. At the end of the recent 
persecution or, as others affirm, in the reign of Decius and Valerianus, he was crowned with martyrdom at 
Chalcis in Greece. 

CHAPTER LXXXIV. 

JUVENCUS,[1] a Spaniard of noble family and presbyter, translating the four gospels almost verbally in 
hexameter verses, composed four books. He wrote some other things in the same metre relating to the 
order of the sacraments. He flourished in the reign of Constantinus. 

CHAPTER LXXXV. 

EUSTATHIUS,[2] a Pamphilian from Side, bishop[3] first of Beroea in Syria and then of Antioch, ruled the 
church and, composing many things against the doctrine of the Arians, was driven into exile under the 
emperor Constantius[4] into Trajanopolis in Thrace where he is until this day. Works of his are extant On the 
soul, On ventriloquism Against Origen and Letters too numerous to mention. 

CHAPTER LXXXVI. 

MARCELLUS,[5] bishop of Ancyra, flourished in the reign of Constantinus and Constantius anti wrote many 
volumes of various Propositions and especially against the Arians. Works of Asterius and Apollinarius 
against him are current, which accuse him of Sabellianism. Hilary too, in the seventh book of his work 
Against the Arians, mentions him as a heretic, but he defends himself against the charge through the fact that 
Julius and Athanasius bishops of Rome and Alexandria communed with him. 

CHAPTER LXXXVII. 

ATHANASIUS [6] bishop of Alexandria, hard pressed by the wiles of the Arians, fled to Constans emperor 
of Gaul. Returning thence with letters and, after the death of the emperor, again taking refuge in flight, he kept 
in hiding until the accession of Jovian, when he returned to the church and died in the reign of Valens. 
Various works by him are in circulation; two book Against the nations one Against Valens and Ursacius, On 
virginity, very many On the persecutions of the Arians, also On the titles of the Psalms and Life of Anthony 
the monk, also Festal epistles and other works too numerous to mention. 

CHAPTER LXXVIII. 

ANTH0NY[1] the monk, whose life Athanasius bishop of Alexandria wrote a long work upon, sent seven 
letters in Coptic to various monasteries, letters truly apostolic in idea and language, and which have been 
translated into Greek. The chief of these is To the Arsenoites. He flourished during the reign of Constantinus 
and his sons. 

CHAPTER LXXXIX. 

BASIL [2] bishop of Ancyra, [a doctor of][3] medicine, wrote a book Against Marcellus and on virginity and 
some other things-and in the reign of Constantius was, with Eustathius of Sebaste, primate of Macedonia. 

CHAPTER XC. 

THE0D0RUS,[4] bishop of Heraclea in Thrace, published in the reign of the emperor Constantius 
commentaries On Matthew and John, On the Epistles and On the Psalter. These are written in a polished 
and clear style and show an excellent historical sense. 

CHAPTER XCI. 

EUSEBIUS [5] of Emesa, who had fine rhetorical talent, composed innumerable works suited to win popular 
applause and writing historically he is most diligently read by those who practise public speaking. Among 
these the chief are, Against Jews, Gentiles and Novatians and Homilies on the Gospels, brief but numerous. 
He flourished in the reign of the emperor Constantius in whose reign he died, and was buried at Antioch. 

CHAPTER XCII. 

TRIPHYLIUS, bishop of Ledra or Leucotheon,[7] in Cyprus, was the most eloquent man of his age, and was 
distinguished during the reign of Constantius. I have read his Commentary on the Song of Songs. He is said 
to have written many other works, none of which have come to our hand. 

CHAPTER XCIII. 

D0NATUS,[1] from whom the Donatians arose in Africa in the reigns of the emperors Constantinus and 
Constantius, asserted that the scriptures were given up to the heathen by the orthodox during the 
persecution, and deceived almost all Africa, and especially Numidia by his persuasiveness. Many of his 
works, which relate to his heresy, are extant, including On the Holy Spirit, a work which is Arian in doctrine. 

CHAPTER XCIV. 

ASTERIUS, [2] a philosopher of the Arian party, wrote, during the reign of Constantius, commentaries On the 
Epistle to the Romans, On the Gospels and On the Psalms, also many other works which are diligently read 
by those of his party. 

CHAPTER XCV. 

LUCIFER, [3] bishop of Cagliari, was sent by Liberius the bishop, with Pancratius and Hilary, clergy of the 
Roman church, to the emperor Constantius, as legates for the faith. When he would not condemn the Nicene 
faith as represented by Athanasius, sent again to Palestine, with wonderful constancy and willingness to 
meet martyrdom, he wrote a book against the emperor Constantius and sent it to be read by him, and not 
long after he returned to Cagliari in the reign of the emperor Julian and died in the reign ofValentinian. 

CHAPTER XCVI. 

EUSEBIUS,[4] a native of Sardinia, at first a lector at Rome and afterwards bishop of Vercelli, sent by the 
emperor Constantius to Scythopolis, and afterwards to Cappadocia, on account of his confession of the 
faith, returned to the church under the emperor Julian and published the Commentaries of Eusebius of 
Caesarea on the Psalms, which lie had translated from Greek into Latin, and died during the reign of 
Valentian and Valens. 

CHAPTER XCVII 

F0RTUNATIANUS,[5] an African by birth, bishop of Aquilia during the reign of Constantius, composed brief 
Commentaries on the gospels arranged by chapters, written in a rustic style, and is held in detestation 
because, when Liberius bishop of Rome was driven into exile for the faith, he was induced by the urgency of 
Fortunatianus to subscribe to heresy. 

CHAPTER XCVIII 

ACACIUS,[1] who, because he was blind in one eye, they nicknamed "the one-eyed," bishop of the church 
of Caesarea in Palestine, wrote seventeen volumes On Ecclesiastes and six of Miscellaneous questions, 
and many treatises besides on various subjects. He was so influential in the reign of the emperor 
Constantius that lie made Felix bishop of Rome in the place of Liberius. 

CHAPTER XCIX. 

SERAPI0N,[2] bishop of Thmuis, who on account of his cultivated genius was found worthy of the surname 
of Scholasticus, was the intimate friend of Anthony the monk, and published an excellent book Against the 
Manichaeans, also another On the titles of the Psalms, and valuable Epistles to different people. In the reign 
of the emperor Constantius he was renowned as a confessor. 

CHAPTER C. 

H@A@,a bishop of Poitiers in Aquitania, was a member of the party of Saturninus bishop of Aries. 
Banished into Phrygia by the Synod of Beziers lie composed twelve books Against the Arians and another 
book On Councils written to the Gallican bishops, and Commentaries on the Psalms that is on the first and 
second, from the fifty-first to the sixty-second, and from the one hundred and eighteenth to the end of the 
book. In this work be imitated Origen, but added also some original matter. There is a little book of his To 
Constantius which he presented to the emperor while he was living in Constantinople, and another On 
Constantius which he wrote alter his death and a book Against Valens and Ursacius, containing a history of 
the Ariminian and Selucian Councils and To Sallust the prefect or Against Dioscurus, also a book of Hymns 
and mysteries, a commentary On Matthew and treatises On Fob, which lie translated freely from the Greek 
of Origen, and another elegant little work Against Auxentius and Epistles to different persons. They say he 
has written On the Song of Songs but this work is not known to us. He died at Poictiers during the reign of 
Valentinianus and Valens. 

CHAPTER CI. 

VICT0RINUS,[1] an African by birth taught rhetoric at Rome under the emperor Constantius and in extreme 
old age, yielding himself to faith in Christ wrote books against Arius, written in dialectic style and very 
obscure language, books which can only be understood by the learned. He also wrote Commentaries on 
the Epistles. 

CHAPTER CM. 

TITUS[2] bishop of Bostra, in the reign of the emperors Julian and Jovinian wrote vigorous works against 
the Manichaeans and some other things. He died under Valens. 

CHAPTER Clll. 

DAMASUS,[3] bishop of Rome, had a fine talent for making verses and published many brief works in 
heroic metre. He died in the reign of the Emperor Theodosius at the age of almost eighty. 

CHAPTER CIV. 

AP0LLINARUS,[4] bishop of Laodicea, in Syria, the son of a presbyter, applied himself in his youth to the 
diligent study of grammar, and afterwards, writing innumerable volumes on the Holy Scriptures, died in the 
reign of the Emperor Theodosius. There are extant thirty books by him Against Porphyry, which are 
generally considered as among the best of his works. [3] 

CHAPTER CV. 

GREGORY, [6] bishop of Elvira, [7] in Baetica, writing even to extreme old age, composed various treatises 
in mediocre language, and an elegant work On Faith. He is said to be still living. 

CHAPTER CVI. 

PACIANUS,[8] bishop of Barcelona, in the Pyrenees Mountains, a man of chaste eloquence, and as 
distinguished by his life as by his speech, wrote various short works, among which are The Deer,[9] and 
Against the Novatians, and died in the reign of Emperor Theodosian, in extreme old age. 

CHAPTER CVII. 

PH0TINUS,[1] of Gallograecia, a disciple of Marcellus, and ordained bishop of Sirmium, attempted to 
introduce the Ebionite heresy, and afterwards having been expelled from the church by the Emperor 
Valentinianus, wrote many volumes, among which the most distinguished are Against the nations, and To 
Valentinianus. 

CHAPTER CVIII. 

PH0EBADIUS,[2] bishop of Agen, in Gaul, published a book Against the Arians. There are said to be other 
works by him, which I have not yet read. He is still living, infirm with age. 

CHAPTER CIX. 

DIDYMUS,[3] of Alexandria, becoming blind while very young, and therefore ignorant of the rudiments of 
learning, displayed such a miracle of intelligence as to learn perfectly dialectics and even geometry, 
sciences which especially require sight. He wrote many admirable works: Commentaries on all the Psalms, 
Commentaries on the Gospels of Matthew and John, On the doctrines, also two books Against the Arians, 
and one book On the Holy Spirit, which I translated in Latin, eighteen volumes On Isaiah, three books of 
commentaries On Hosea, addressed to me, and five books On Zechariah, written at my request, also 
commentaries On Job, and many other things, to give an account of which would be a work of itself.[4] He is 
still living, and has already passed his eighty-third year. 

CHAPTER CX. 

0PTATUS[5] the African, bishop of Milevis,[6] during the reign of the Emperors Valentinianus and Valens, 
wrote in behalf of the Catholic party six books against the calumny of the Donatian party, in which he asserts 
that the crime of the Donatists is falsely charged upon the catholic party. 

CHAPTER CXI. 

ACILIUS Severus[1] of Spain, of the family of that Severus to whom Lactantius' two books of Epistles are 

addressed, composed a volume of mingled poetry and prose which is a sort of guide book to his whole life. 
This he called Calamity or Trial. [2] He died in the reign of Valentinianus. 

CHAPTER CXII. 

CYRIL, [3] bishop of Jerusalem often expelled by the church, and at last received, held the episcopate for 
eight consecutive years, in the reign of Theodosius. Certain Catachetical lectures of his, composed while he 
was a young man, are extant. 

CHAPTER CXIII. 

EUZ0IUS,[4] as a young man, together with Gregory, bishop of Nazianzan, was educated by Thespesius 
the rhetorician at Caesarea, and afterwards when bishop of the same city, with great pains attempted to 
restore the library, collected by Origen and Pamphilus, which had already suffered injury. At last, in the reign 
of the Emperor Theodosian, he was expelled from the church. Many and various treatises of his, are in 
circulation, and one may easily become acquainted with them. 

CHAPTER CXIV. 

EPIPHANIUS,[5] bishop of Salamina in Cyprus, wrote books Against all heresies and many others which 
are eagerly read by the learned, on account of their subject matter, and also by the plain people, on 
account of their language. He is still living, and in his extreme old age composes various brief works. 

CHAPTER CXV. 

EPHRAIM,[6] deacon of the church at Edessa, composed many works in the Syriac language, and became 
so distinguished that his writings are repeated publicly in some churches, after the reading of the Scriptures. 
I once read in Greek a volume by him On the Holy Spirit, which some one had translated from the Syriac, 
and recognized even in translation, the incisive power of lofty genius. He died in the reign of Valens. 

CHAPTER CXVI. 

BASIL, [1] bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, the city formerly called Mazaca, composed admirable 
carefully written books Against Eunomius, a volume On the Holy Spirit, and nine homilies On the six days of 
creation, also a work On asceticism and short treatises on various subjects. He died in the reign of 
Gratianus. 

CHAPTER CXVII. 

GREGORY, [2] bishop of Nazianzen, a most eloquent man, and my instructor in the Scriptures, composed 
works, amounting in all to thirty thousand lines, among which are On the death of his brother Caesarius, On 
charity, In praise of the Maccabees, In praise of Cyprian. In praise of Athanasius, In praise of Maximusthe 
philosopher after he had returned from exile. This latter however, some superscribe with the pseudonym of 
Herona, since there is another work by Gregory, upbraiding this same Maximus, as if one might not praise 
and upbraid the same person at one thee or another as the occasion may demand. Other works of his are a 
book in hexameter, containing, A discussion between virginity and marriage, two books Against Eunomius, 
one book On the Holy Spirit, and one Against the Emperor Julian. He was a follower of Polemon in his style 
of speaking. Having ordained his successor in the bishopric, during his own life time, he retired to the 
country where he lived the life of a monk and died, three years or more ago, in the reign of Theodosius. 

CHAPTER CXVIII. 

LUCIUS, [3] bishop of the Arian party after Athanasius, held the bishopric of the church at Alexandria, until the 
thee of the Emperor Theodosius, by whom he was deposed. Certain festal epistles of his, On the passover 
are extant, and a few short works of Miscellaneous propositions. 

CHAPTER CXIX. 

DI0D0RUS,[4] bishop of Tarsus enjoyed a great reputation while he was still presbyter of Antioch. 
Commentaries of his On the epistles are extant, as well as many other works in the manner of Eusebius the 

great of Emesa, whose meaning he has followed, but whose eloquence he could not imitate on account of 
his ignorance of secular literature. 

CHAPTER CXX. 

EUN0MIUS,[1] bishop of Cyzicus and member of the Arian party, fell into such open blasphemy in his 
heresy, as to proclaim publicly what the others concealed. He is said to be still living in Cappadocia, and to 
write much against the church. Replies to him have been made by Apollinarius, Didymus, Basil of 
Caesarea, Gregory Nazianzen, and Gregory of Nyssa. 

CHAPTER. CXXI. 

PRISCILLIANUS,[2] bishop of Abila, belonged to the party of Hydatius and Ithacius, and was put to death at 
Treves by the tyrant Maximus. He published many short writings, some of which have reached us. He is still 
accused by some, of being tainted with Gnosticism, that is, with the heresy of Basilides or Mark, of whom 
Irenaeus writes, while his defenders maintain that he was not at all of this way of thinking. 

CHAPTER CXXII. 

LATR0NIANUS[3] of Spain, a man of great learning, and in the matter of versification worthy to be 
compared with the poets of ancient thee, was also put to death at Treves with Priscillianus, Felicissimus, 
Julianus, and Euchrotia, cooriginators with him of schism. Various fruits of his genius written in different 
metres are extant. 

CHAPTER CXXIII. 

TIBERIANUS,[4] the Baetican, in answer to an insinuation that he shared the heresy of Priscillian, wrote an 
apology in pompous and mongrel language. But after the death of his friends, overcome by the 
tediousness of exile, he changed his mind, as it is written in Holy Scripture "the dog returned to his vomit," 
and married a nun, a virgin dedicated to Christ. 

CHAPTER CXXIV. 

AMBROSE [5] a bishop of Milan, at the present thee is still writing. I withhold my judgment of him, because 
he is still alive, fearing either to praise or blame lest in the one event, I should be blamed for adulation, and 
in the other for speaking the truth. 

CHAPTER CXXV. 

EVAGRIUS,[1] bishop of Antioch, a man of remarkably keen mind, while he was yet presbyter read me 
various treatises on various topics, which he had not yet published. He translated also the Life of the 
blessed Anthony from the Greek of Athanasius into our language. 

CHAPTER CXXVI. 

AMBR0SE[2] of Alexandria, pupil of Didymus, wrote a long work On doctrines against Apollinaris, and as 
some one has lately informed me, Commentaries on Job. He is still living. 

CHAPTER CXXVII. 

MAXIMUS[3] the philosopher, born at Alexandria, ordained bishop at Constantinople and deposed, wrote a 
remarkable work On faith against the Arians and gave it to the Emperor Gratianus, at Milan. 

CHAPTER CXXVIII. 

GREG0RY[4] bishop of Nyssa, the brother of Basil of Caesarea, a few years since read to Gregory 
Nazianzan and myself a work against Eunomius. He is said to have also written many other works, and to 
be still writing. 

CHAPTER CXXIX. 

JOHN, [5] presbyter of the church at Antioch, a follower of Eusebius of Emesa and Diodorus, is said to have 
composed many books, but of these I have only read his On the priesthood. 

CHAPTER CXXX. 

GELASIUS,[6] bishop of Caesarea in Palestine after Euzoius, is said to write more or less in carefully 
polished style, but not to publish his works. 

CHAPTER CXXXI. 

THE0TIMUS,[7] bishop of Tomi, in Scythia, has published brief and epigrammatical treatises, in the form of 
dialogues, and in olden style. I hear that he is now writing other works. 

CHAPTER CXXXII. 

DEXTER, [1] son of Pacianus whom I mentioned above, distinguished in his generation and devoted to the 
Christian faith, has, I am told, written a Universal History, which I have not yet read. 

CHAPTER CXXXIII. 

AMPHIL0CHIUS,[2] bishop of Iconium, recently read to me a book On the Holy Spirit, arguing that He is 
God, that He is to be worshipped, and that He is omnipotent. 

CHAPTER CXXXIV. 

S0PHR0NIUS,[3] a man of superlative learning, wrote while yet a lad, In praise of Bethlehem and recently 
a notable volume, On the overthrow of Serapis, and also to Eustachius, On virginity, and a Life of Hilarion the 
monk. He rendered short works of mine into Greek in a very finished style, the Psalter also, and the 
Prophets, which I translated from Hebrew into Latin. 

CHAPTER CXXXV. 

I, JEROME, [4] son of Eusebius, of the city of Strido, which is on the border of Dalmatia and Pannonia and 
was overthrown by the Goths, up to the present year, that is, the fourteenth of the Emperor Theodosius, have 
written the following: Life of Paul the monk, one book of Letters to different persons, an Exhortation to 
Heliodorus, Controversy of Luciferianus and Orthodoxus, Chronicle of universal history, 28 homilies of 
Origen on Jeremiah and Ezekiel, which I translated from Greek into Latin, i On the Seraphim, On Osanna, On 
the prudent and the prodigal sons, On three questions of the ancient law, Homilies on the Song of Songs 
two, Against Helvidius, On the perpetual virginity of Mary, To Eustochius, On maintaining virginity, one book 
of Epistles to Marcella, a consolatory letter to Paula On the death of a daughter, three books of 
Commentaries on the epistle of Paul to the Galatians, likewise three books of Commentaries on the epistle 
to the Ephesians, On the epistle to Titus one book, On the epistle to Philemon one, Commentaries on 
Ecclesiastes, one book of Hebrew questions on Genesis, one book On places in Judea, one book of 
Hebrew names, Didymus on the Holy Spirit, which ]2 translated into Latin one book, 39 homilies on luke, On 
Psalms 10 to 16, seven books, On the captive Monk, The Life of the blessed Hilarion. I translated the New 
Testament from the Greek, and the Old Testament from the Hebrew, [2] and how many Letters I have written 
To Paula and Eustochius I do not know, for I write daily. I wrote moreover, two books of Explanations on 
Micah, one book On Nahum, two books On Habakkuk, one On Zephaniah, one On Haggai, and many 
others On the prophets, which are not yet finished, and which I am still at work upon. [3] 

GENNADIUS: LIST OF THE AUTHORS WHOM 
GENNADIUS ADDED, AFTER THE DEATH OF THE 
BLESSED JEROME 

GENNADIUS: LIST OF THE AUTHORS WHOM GENNADIUS ADDED, AFTER THE DEATH 
OF THE BLESSED JEROME (1) 

I James; surnamed the Wise. .Eutropius the presbyter. 
2.Julius, bishop of Rome. .Another Evagrius. 
3.Paulonas the presbyter. .Vigilius the deacon. 
4.Vitellius the African. .Atticus the holy bishop. 
5.Macrobius the presbyter. .Nestorius the heresiarch. 
6.Heliodorus the presbyter. .Caelestinus the bishop. 
7.Pachomius the presbyter-monk. Theodorus the bishop. 
8.Theodorus, his successor. .Fastidius the bishop. 
9.0resiesis the monk. ..Cyrillus the bishop. 

1 0.Macarius the monk. Timotheus the bishop. 

I I .Evagrius the monk. .Leporius the presbyter. 
12.Theodorus the presbyter. .Victorinus the rhetorician. 
13.Prudentius. .Cassianus the deacon. 
14.Audentius the bishop. .Philippus the presbyter. 
15.Commodianus. .Eucheriusthe bishop. 
16.Faustinus the presbyter. .Vincentius the Gaul. 

1 7.Rufinus the presbyter. .Syagrius. 

1 8.Tichonius the African. .Isaac the presbyter. 

19.Severus the presbyter. .Salvianus the presbyter. 

20.Antiochus the bishop. .Paulinus the bishop. 

21 .Severianus the bishop. .Hilarius the bishop. 

22.Nicaeas the bishop. .Leo the bishop. 

23.0lympius the bishop. .Mochimus the presbyter. 

24.Bachiarius. Timotheus the bishop. 

25.Sabbatius the bishop. .Asclepius the bishop. 

26. Isaac. .Peter the presbyter, 

27.Ursinus. .Paul the presbyter. 

28.Another Macarius. .Victor the bishop. 

29.Heliodorus the presbyter. the bishop. 

30John, bishop of Constantinople. .Voconius the bishop. 

31 John, another bishop. .Musaeus the presbyter. 

32.Paulus the bishop. .Vincentius the presbyter. 

33.Helvidius. .Cyrus the monk. 

34.Theophilus the bishop. .Samuel the presbyter. 

35.Eusebius the bishop. .Claudianus the presbyter. 

36.Vigilantius the presbyter. .Prosper. 

37.Simplicianus the bishop. .Faustus the bishop. 

38.Vigilius the bishop. .Servus Dei the bishop. 

39.Augustine the bishop. .Victorius. 

40.Orosius the presbyter. Theodoritus the bishop. 

41 .Maximus the bishop. .Gennadius the bishop. 

42.Petronius the bishop. Theodulus the presbyter. 

43.Pelagius the heresiarch. John the presbyter. 

44.lnnocentius the bishop. .Sidonius the bishop. 

45.Caelestius, follower of Pelagius. .Gelasius the bishop. 

46Julianus the bishop. .Honoratus the bishop. 

47.Lucianus the presbyter. .Cerealis the bishop. 

48.Avitus the presbyter. .Eugenius the bishop. 
49.Paulinus the bishop. .Pomerius the bishop. 
99.Gennadius. 

CHAPTER I. 

JAMES, (1) surnamed the Wise, was bishop of Nisibis the famous city of the Persians and one of the 
confessors under Maximinus the persecutor. He was also one of those who, in the Nicean council, by their 
opposition overthrew the Arian perversity of the Homoousia. That the blessed Jerome mentions this man in 
his Chronicle as a man of great virtues and yet does not place him in his catalogue of writers, will be easily 
explained if we note that of the three or four Syrians whom he mentions he says that he read them translated 
into the Greek. From this it is evident that, at that period, be did not know the Syriac language or literature 
and therefore he did not know a writer who had not yet been translated into another language. All his writings 
are contained in twenty-six books namely On faith, Against all heresies, On charity towards all, On fasting, 
On prayer, On particular affection towards our neighbor, On the resurrec- 
tion, On the life after death, On humility, On penitence, (2) On satisfaction, On virginity, On the worth (3) of the 
soul, On circumcision, On the blessed grapes, On the saying in Isaiah, "the grape cluster shall not be 
destroyed," That Christ is the son of God and consubstantial with the Father On chastity, Against the Nations, 
On the construction of the tabernacle, On the conversation of the nations, On the Persian kingdom, On the 
persecution of the Christians. He composed also a Chronicle of little interest indeed to the Greeks, but of 
great reliability in that it is constructed only on the authority of the Divine Scriptures. It shuts the mouths of 
those who, on some daring guess, idly philosophize concerning the advent of Antichrist, or of our Lord. This 
man died in the time of Constantius and according to the direction of his father Constantine was buried within 
the walls of Nisibis, for the protection evidently of the city, and it turned out as Constantine had expected. For 
many years after, Julian having entered Nisibis and grudging either the glory of him who was buried there or 
the faith of Constantine, whose family he persecuted on account of this envy, ordered the remains of the 
saint to be carried out of the city, and a few months later, as a matter succeeded Julian, gave over to the 
barbarians the city which, with the adjoining territory, is subject unto the Persian rule until this day. 

CHAPTER II. 

JULIUS, (1) bishop of Rome, wrote to one Dionysius a single epistle On the incarnation of Our Lord, which at 
that time was regarded as useful against those who asserted that, as by incarnation there were two persons 
in Christ, so also there were two natures, but now this too is regarded as injurious for it nourishes the 
Eutychian and Timothean heresies. 

CHAPTER III. 

PAULONAS, (2) the Presbyter, disciple of the blessed deacon Ephraim a man of very energetic character 
and learned in the holy scriptures was distinguished among the doctors of the church while his master was 
still living and especially as an extempora-neous orator. After the death of his master, overcome by love of 
reputation, separating himself from the church, he wrote many things opposed to the faith. The blessed 
Ephraim when on the point of death is reported to have said to him as he stood by his side-See to it, 
Paulonas that you do not yield yourself to your own ideas, but when you shall think that you understand God 
wholly, believe that you have not known,-for he felt beforehand from the studies or the words of Paulonus, 
that he was investigating new things, and was stretching out his mind to the illimitable, whence also he 
frequently called him the new Bardesanes. 

CHAPTER IV. 

VITELLIUS (3) the African, defending the Donatist schism wrote Why the servants of God are hated by the 
world, in which, except in speaking of us as persecutors, he published excellent doctrine. He wrote also 
Against the nations and against us as tradi-tors of the Holy Scriptures in times of persecution, and wrote 
much On ecclesiastical procedure. He was distinguished during the reign of Constans son of the emperor 
Con-stantinus. 

CHAPTER V. 

MACROBIUS (4) the Presbyter was likewise as I learned from the writings of Optatus, afterwards secretly 
bishop of the Donatians in Rome. He wrote, having been up to this time a presbyter in the church of God, a 

work To confessors and virgins, a work of ethics indeed, but of Very necessary doctrine as well and fortified 
with sentiments well fitted for the preservation of chastity. He was distinguished first in our party in Africa and 
afterwards in his own, that is among the Donatians or Montanists at Rome. 

CHAPTER VI. 

HELIODORUS (1) the Presbyter wrote a book entitled An introductory treatise on the nature of things, in 
which he showed that the beginning of things was one, that nothing was coaeval with God, that God was not 
the creator of evil, but in such wise the creator of all good, that matter, which is used for (2) evil, was created 
by God after evil was discovered, and that nothing material whatever can be regarded as established in 
any other way than by God, and that there was no other creator than God, who, when by His foreknowledge 
He knew that nature was to be changed, (3) warned of punishment. 

CHAPTER VII. 

PACHOMIUS (4) the monk, a man endowed with apostolic grace both in teaching and in performing 
miracles, and founder of the Egyptian monasteries, wrote an Order of discipline suited to both classes of 
monks, which he received by angelic dictation. He wrote letters also to the associated bishops of his 
district, in an alphabet concealed by mystic sacraments so as to surpass customary human knowledge and 
only manifest to those of special grace or desert, that is To the Abbot Cornelius one, To the Abbot Syrus 
one, and one To the heads of all monasteries exhorting that, gathered together to one very ancient 
monastery which is called in the Egyptian language Bau, they should celebrate the day of the Passover 
together as by everlasting law. He urged likewise in another letter that on the day of remission, which is 
celebrated in the month of August, the chief bishops should be gathered together to one place, and wrote 
one other letter to the brethren who had been sent to work outside the monasteries. 

CHAPTER VIM. 

THEODORUS, (5) successor to the grace and the headship of the above mentioned Abbot Pachomius, 
addressed to other monasteries letters written in the language of Holy Scripture, in which nevertheless he 
frequently mentions his master and teacher Pachomius and sets forth his doctrine and life as examples. 
This he had been taught he said by an Angel that he himself might teach again. He likewise exhorts them to 
remain by the purpose of their heart and desire, and to restore to harmony and unity those who, a 
dissension having arisen after the death of the Abbot, had broken the unity by separating themselves from 
the community.Three hortatory epistles of his are extant. 

CHAPTER IX. 

ORESIESIS (1) the monk, the colleague of both Pachomius and Theodorus, a man learned to perfection in 
Scripture, (2) composed a book seasoned with divine salt and formed of the essentials of all monastic 
discipline and to speak moderately, in which almost the whole Old and New Testament is found set forth in 
compact dissertations-all, at least, which relates to the special needs of monks. This he gave to his 
brethren almost on the very day of his death leaving, as it were, a legacy. 

CHAPTER X. 

MACARIUS, (3) the Egyptian monk, distinguished for his miracles and virtues, wrote one letter which was 
addressed to the younger men of his profession. In this he taught them that he could serve God perfectly 
who, knowing the condition of his creation, should devote himself to all labours, and by wrestling against 
every thing which is agreeable in this life, and at the same time imploring the aid of God would attain also to 
natural purity and obtain continence, as a well merited gift of nature. 

CHAPTER XI. 

EVAGRIUS (4) the monk, the intimate disciple of the above mentioned Macarius, educated in (5) sacred 
and profane literature and distinguished, whom the book which is called the Lives of the fathers mentions as 
a most continent and erudite man, wrote many things of use to monks among which are these: Suggestions 
against the eight principal sins. He was first to mention or among the first at least to teach these setting 
against them eight books taken from the testimony of the Holy Scriptures only, after the example of our Lord, 
who always met his tempter with quotations from Scripture, so that every suggestion, whether of the devil or 

of depraved nature had a testimony against it. This work I have, under instructions, translated into Latin 
translating with the same simplicity which I found in the Greek. He composed also a book of One hundred 
sentiments for those living simply as anchorites, arranged by chapters, and one of Fifty sentiments for the 
erudite and studious, which I first translated into Latin. The former one, translated before, I restored, partly by 
retranslating and partly by emendation, so as to represent the true meaning of the author, because I saw 
that the translation was vitiated and confused time. He composed also a doctrine of the common-life suited 
to Cenobites and Syno-dites, (1) and to the virgin consecrated to God, a little book suitable to her religion 
and sex. He published also a few collections of opinions very obscure and, as he himself says of them, only 
to be understood by the hearts of monks, and these likewise I published in Latin. He lived to old age, mighty 
in signs and miracles. 

CHAPTER XII. 

THEODORUS, (2) presbyter of the church at Antioch, a cautious investigator and clever of tongue, wrote 
against the Apollinarians and Anomians On the incarnation of the Lord, fifteen books containing as many as 
fifteen thousand verses, in which he showed by the clearest reasoning and by the testimony of Scripture that 
just as the Lord Jesus had a plenitude of deity, so he had a plenitude of humanity. He taught also that man 
consists only of two substances, soul and body and that sense and spirit are not different substances, but 
inherent inborn faculties of the soul through which it is inspired and has rationality and through which it makes 
the body capable of feeling. Moreover the fourteenth book of this work treats wholly of the uncreated and 
alone incorporeal and ruling nature of the holy Trinity and of the rationality of animals which he explains in a 
devotional spirit, on the authority of Holy Scriptures. In the fifteenth volume he confirms and fortifies the whole 
body of his work by citing the traditions of the fathers. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

PRUDENTIUS, (3) a man well versed in secular literature, composed a Trocheum (1) of selected persons 
from the whole Old and New Testament. He wrote a commentary also, after the fashion of the Greeks, On 
the six days of creation from creation of the world until the creation of the first man and his fall. He wrote also 
short books which are entitled in the Greek, Apotheosis, chomachia and Hamartigenia, that is On divinity, 
On spiritual conflict, On the origin of sin. He wrote also In praise of martyrs, an invitation to martyrdom in one 
book citing several as examples and another of Hymns, but specially directed Against Symmachus (2) who 
defended idolatry, from which we learn that Palatinus was a soldier. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

AUDENTIUS, (3) bishop of Spain, wrote a book against the Manicheans, Sabellians and Arians and very 
particularly against the Photinians who are now called Bonosiacians. This book he entitled On faith against 
heretics, and in it he showed the Son to have been coeternal with the Father and that He did not receive the 
beginning of his deity from God the Father, at the time when conceived by the act of God, he was born of the 
Virgin Mary his mother in true humanity. 

CHAPTER XV. 

COMMODIANUS, (4) while he was engaged in secular literature read also our writings and, finding 
opportunity, accepted the faith. Having become a Christian thus and wishing to offer the fruit of his studies to 
Christ the author of his salvation, he wrote, in barely tolerable semi-versified language, Against the pagans, 
and because he was very little acquainted with our literature he was better able to overthrow their [doctrine] 
than to establish ours. Whence also, contending against them concerning the divine counterpromises, he 
discoursed in a sufficiently wretched and so to speak, gross fashion, to their stupefaction and our despair. 
Following Tertullian, Lactantius and Papias as authorities he adopted and inculcated in his students good 
ethical principles and especially a voluntary love of poverty. 

CHAPTER. XVI. 

FAUSTINUS (1) the presbyter wrote to Queen Flaccilla seven books Against the Arians and Macedonians, 
arguing anti convicting them by the testimonies of the very Scriptures which they used, in perverted 
meaning, for blasphemy. He wrote also a book which, together with a certain presbyter named Mar-cellinus, 
he addressed to the emperors Valen-tinianus; Theodosius anti Arcadius, in defence of their fellow 
Christians. From this it appears that he acquiesced in the Luciferian schism, in that in this same book he 

blames Hilary of Poitiers and Damasus, bishop of Rome, for giving ill-advised counsel to the church, 
advising that the apostate (2) bishops should be received into communion for the sake of restoring the 
peace. For it was as displeasing to the Luciferians to receive the bishops who in the Ariminian council had 
communed with Arius, as it was to the Novatians to receive the penitent apostates. 

CHAPTER XVII. 

RUFINUS, (3) presbyter of the church at Aquileia, was not the least among the doctots of the church and bad 
a fine talent for elegant translation from Greek into Latin. In this way he opened to the Latin speaking church 
the greater part of the Greek literature; translating the works of Basil of Caesarea in Cappadocia, Gregory 
Nazianzan, that most eloquent man, the Recognitions of Clement of Rome, the Church history of Eusebius of 
Caesarea in Palestine, the Sentences of Xystus, (4) the Sentences of Evagrius and the work of Pamphilus 
Martyr Against the mathematicians. Whatever among all these which are read by the Latins have prefatory 
matter, have been translated by Rufinus, but those which are without Prologue have been translated by 
some one else who did not choose to write a prologue. Not all of Origen, however, is his work, for Jerome 
translated some which are identified by his prologue. On his own account, the same Rufinus, ever through 
the grace of God published an Exposition of the Apostles (3) creed so excellent that other expositions are 
regarded as of no account in comparison. He also wrote in a threefold sense, that is, the historical, moral 
and mystical sense, on Jacob's blessing on the patriarchs. He wrote also many epistles exhorting to fear of 
God, among which those which he addressed to Proba are preeminent. He added also a tenth and 
eleventh book to I the ecclesiastical history which we have said was written by Eusebius and translated by 
him. Moreover be responded to a detractor of his works, in two volumes, arguing and proving that he 
exercised his talent with the aid of the Lord and in the sight of God, for the good of the church, while he, on the 
other hand, incited by jealousy had taken to polemics. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

TICHONIUS, (1) an African by nationality was, it is said, sufficiently learned in sacred literature, not wholly 
unacquainted with secular literature and zealous in ecclesiastical affairs. He wrote books On internal war 
and Expositions of various causes in which for the defence of his friends, he cites the ancient councils and 
from all of which (2) he is recognized to have been a Donatist. He composed also eight Rules for 
investigating and ascertaining the meaning of the Scriptures, compressing them into one volume. He also 
expounded the Apocalypse of John entire, regarding nothing in it in a carnal sense, but all in a spiritual 
sense. In this exposition he maintained the angelical nature (3) to be corporeal, moreover he doubts that 
there will be a reign of the righteous on earth for a thousand years after the resurrection, or that there will be 
two resurrections of the dead in the flesh, one of the righteous and the other of the unrighteous, but maintains 
that there will be one simultaneous resurrection of all, at which shall arise even the aborted and the 
deformed lest any living human being, however deformed, should be lost. He makes such distinction to be 
sure, between the two resurrections as to make the first, which he calls the apocalypse of the righteous, only 
to take place in the growth of the church where, justified by faith, they are raised from the dead bodies of 
their sins through baptism to the service of eternal life, but the second, the general resurrection of all men in 
the flesh. This man flourished at the same period with the above mentioned Rufinus during the reign of 
Theodosius and his sons. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

SEVERUS (4) the presbyter, surnamed Sulpitius, of the province of Aquitania, a man distinguished by his 
birth, by his excellent literary work, by his devotion to poverty and by his humility, beloved also of the 
sainted men Martin bishop of Tours and Paulinus Nolanus, wrote small books which are far from 
despicable. He wrote to his sister many Letters exhorting to love of God and contempt of the world. These 
are well known. He wrote two to the above mentioned Paulinus Nolanus and others to others, but because, 
in some, faintly matters are included, they have not been collected for publication. He composed also a 
Chronicle, and wrote also to the profit of many, a Life of the holy Martin, monk and bishop, a man famous for 
signs and wonders and virtues. (1) He also wrote a Conference between Postumianus and Gallus, in which 
he himself acted as mediator and judge of the debate. The subject matter was the manner of life of the 
oriental monks and of St. Martin-a sort of dialogue in two divisions. In the first of these he mentions a decree 
of the bishops at the synod of Alexandria in his own time to the effect that Origen is to be read, though 
cautiously, by those who are wise, for the good that is in him, and is to be rejected by the less able on 
account of the evil. In his old age, he was led astray by the Pelagians, and recognizing the guilt of much 
speaking, kept silent until his death, in order that by penitent silence he might atone for the sin which he had 

contracted by speaking. 

CHAPTER XX. 

ANTIOCHUS (2) the bishop, wrote one long a volume Against avarice and he composed a homily, full of (4) 
godly penitence and humility On the healing of the blind man whose sight was restored by the Saviour. He 
died during the reign of the emperor Arcadius. 

CHAPTER XXI. 

SEVERIANUS, (5) bishop of the church of Gab-ala, was learned in the Holy Scriptures and a wonderful 
preacher of homilies. On this account he was frequently summoned by the bishop John and the emperor 
Arcadius to preach a sermon at Constantinople. I have read his Exposition of the epistle to the Galatians 
and a most attractive little work On baptism and the feast of Epiphany. He died in the reign of Theodosius, 
his son by baptism. 

CHAPTER XXII. 

NICEAS, (1 2) bishop of the city of Romatia, composed, in simple and clear language, six books of 
Instruction for neophites. The first of these contains, How candidates who seek to obtain grace of baptism 
ought to act, the second, On the errors of relationship, in which he relates that not far from his own time a 
certain Melodius, father of a family, on account of his liberality and Garadius (3) a peasant, on account of his 
bravery, were placed, by the heathen, among the gods. A third book On faith in one sovereign, a fourth 
Against genealogy, (4) a fifth On the creed, a sixth On the sacrifice of the pas-chal lamb. He addressed a 
work also To the fallen virgin, an incentive to amendment for all who have fallen. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

OLYMPIUS (5) the bishop, a Spaniard by nationality, wrote a book of faith against those who blame nature 
and not the will, showing that evil was introduced into nature not by creation but by disobedience. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

BACHIARIUS, (6) a Christian philosopher, prompt and ready and minded to devote his time to God, chose 
travel as a means of preserving the integrity of his purpose. He is said to have published acceptable small 
works but I have only read one of them, a work On faith, in which be justified himself to the chief priest of the 
city, defending himself against those who complained and misrepresented his travel, and asserting that he 
undertook his travel not through fear of men but for the sake of God, that going forth from his land and 
kindred he might become a co-heir with Abraham the patriarch. 

CHAPTER XXV. 

SABBATIUS, (7) bishop of the Gallican province, at the request of a certain virgin, chaste and devoted to 
Christ, Secunda by name, composed a book On faith against Marcion and Valentinus his teacher, also 
against Eunomius and his Master Aeti us, showing, both by reason and by testimony of the Scriptures, that 
the origin of the deity is one, that the Author of his eternity and the Creator of the earth out of nothing, are one 
and the same, and likewise concerning Christ, that he did not appear as man in a phantasm but had real 
flesh through which eating, drinking, weary and weeping, suffering, dying, rising again he was demonstrated 
to be man indeed. For Marcion and Valentinus had been opposed to these I opinions asserting that the 
origin of Deity is twofold and that Christ came in a phantasm. To Aetius indeed and Eunomius his disciple, 
he showed that the Father and Son are not of two natures and equal in divinity but of one essence and the 
one from the other, that is the Son from the Father, the one coeternal with the other, which belief Aneetius and 
Eunomius opposed. 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

ISAAC (1) wrote On the Holy Trinity and a book On the incarnation of the Lord, writing in a very obscure style 
of argument and involved language, maintaining that three persons exist in one Deity, in such wise that any 
thing may be peculiar to each which another does not have, that is to say, that the Father has this peculiarity 
that He, himself without source, is the source of others, that the Son has this peculiarity, that, begotten, He is 

not posterior to the begetter, that the Holy Spirit has this peculiarity, that He is neither made nor begotten but 
nevertheless is from another. Of the incarnation of the Lord indeed, he writes that the person of the Son of 
God is believed to be one, while yet there are two natures existing in him. 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

URSINUS (2) the monk wrote against those who say that heretics should be rebaptized, teaching(3) that it is 
not legitimate nor honouring God, that those should be rebaptized who have been baptized either in the 
name of Christ alone or h@ the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, though the formula 
has been used in a vitiated sense. He considers that after the simple confession of the Holy Trinity and of 
Christ, the imposition of the hands of the catholic priest is sufficient for salvation. 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

MACARIUS (1) another monk, wrote at Rome books Against the mathematicians, in which labour he sought 
the comfort of oriental writings. 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

HELI0D0RUS,(2) presbyter of Antioch, published an excellent volume gathered from Holy Scriptures On 
Virginity. 

CHAPTER XXX. 

[JOHN (3)(4) bishop of Constantinople, a man of marvelous knowledge and in sanctity of life, in every 
respect worthy of imitation, wrote many and very useful works for all who are hastening to divine things. 
Among them are the following On compunction of soul one book, That no one is injured except & himself, an 
excellent volume In praise of the blessed Paul the apostle, On the excesses and ill reputation of Eutropius a 
praetorian prefect and many others, as I have said, which may be found by the industrious.] 

CHAPTER XXXI. 

ANOTHER John,(5)(6) bishop of Jerusalem, wrote a book against those who disparaged his studies, in 
which he shows that he follows the genius of Origen not his creed. 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

PAUL the bishop wrote a short work On penitence in which he lays down this law for penitents; that they 
ought to repent for their sins in such manner that they be not beyond measure overwhelmed with despairing 
sadness. 

CHAPTER XXXIII. 

HELVIDIUS,(7) a disciple of Auxentius and imitator of Symmachus, wrote, indeed, with zeal for religion but 
not according to knowledge, a book, polished neither in language nor in reasoning, a work in which he so 
attempted to twist the meaning of the Holy Scriptures to his own perversity, as to venture to assert on their 
testimony that Joseph and Mary, after the nativity of our Lord, had children who were called brothers of the 
Lord. In reply to his perverseness Jerome, published a book against him, well filled with scripture proofs. (1) 

CHAPTER XXXIV. 

THE0PHILUS,(2) bishop of the church(3) of Alexandria, wrote one great volume Against Origen in which he 
condemns pretty nearly all his sayings and himself likewise, at the same time saying that he was not original 
in his views but derived them from the ancient fathers especially from Heraclas, that he was deposed 
from(4) the office of presbyter driven from the church and compelled to fly from the city. He also wrote 
Against the Anthropomorphites, heretics who say that God has the human form and members, confuting in a 
long discussion and arguing by testimonies of Divine Scripture and convincing. He shows that, according to 
the belief of the Fathers, God is to be thought of as incorporal, not formed with any suggestion of members 
at all, and therefore there is nothing like Him among created things in substance, nor has the incorruptibility 
nor unchangeableness nor incorporeality of his nature been given to any one but that all intellectual natures 

are corporeal, all corruptible, all mutable, that He alone should not be subject to corruptibility or 
changeableness, who alone has immortality and life. Likewise the return of the paschal feast which the great 
council at Nicea had found would take place after ninety years at the same time, the same month and day 
adding some observations on the festival and explanations he gave to the emperor Theodosius. I have 
read also three hooks On faith, which bear his name but, as their language is not like his, I do not very much 
think they are by him. 

CHAPTER XXXV. 

EUSEBIUS(5) wrote On the mystery of our Lord's cross and the faithfulness of the apostles, and especially 
of Peter, gained by virtue of the cross. 

CHAPTER XXXVI. 

VIGILANTIUS,(6) a citizen of Gaul, had the church of Barcelona. He wrote also with some zeal for religion 
but, overcome by the desire for human praise and presuming above his strength, being a man of polished 
language but not practised in the meaning of Scriptures, he expounded the vision of Daniel in a perverted 
sense and said other frivolous things which are necessarily mentioned in a catalogue of heretics. [To him 
also the blessed Jerome the presbyter responded.](1) 

CHAPTER XXXVII. 

SIMPLICIANUS,(2) the bishop, exhorted Augustine then presbyter, in many letters, that he should exercise 
his genius and take time for exposition of the Scriptures that, as it were, a new Arabrosius, the task master of 
Origen might appear. Wherefore also he sent to him many examinations of scriptures. There is also an 
epistle of his of Questions in which he teaches by asking questions as if wishing to learn. 

CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

VIGILIUS (3) the bishop wrote to one Simplicianus a small book In praise of martyrs and an epistle 
containing the acts of the martyrs in his time among the barbarians. 

CHAPTER XXXIX. 

AUGUSTINE, (4) of Africa, bishop of Hipporegensis, a man renowned throughout the world for learning both 
sacred and secular, unblemished in the faith, pure in life, wrote works so many that they cannot all be 
gathered. For who is there that can boast himself of having all his works, or who reads with such diligence as 
to read all he has written?(5) As an old man even, he published fifteen books On the Trinity which he had 
begun as a young man. In which, as scripture says, brought into the chamber of the king and adorned with 
the manifold garment of the wisdom of God, he exhibited a church not having spot or wrinkle or any such 
thing. In his work On the incarnation of the Lord also he manifested a peculiar piety. On the resurrection of the 
dead he wrote with equal sincerity, and left it to the less able to raise doubts respecting abortions. (6)(7) 

CHAPTER XL. 

0R0SIUS,(1) a Spanish presbyter, a man most eloquent and learned in history, wrote eight books against 
those enemies of the Christians who say that the decay of the Roman State was caused by the Christian 
religion. In these rehearsing the calamities and miseries and disturbances of wars, of pretty much the whole 
world from the creation(2) he shows that the Roman Empire owed to the Christian religion its undeserved 
continuance and the state of peace which it enjoyed for the worship of God. 

In the first book he described the world situated within the ever flowing stream of Oceanus and intersected 
by the Tanais, giving the situations of places, the names, number and customs of nations, the 
characteristics of various regions, the wars begun and the formation of empires sealed with the blood of 
kinsmen. 

This is the Orosius who, sent by Augustine to Hieronymus to teach the nature of the soul, returning, was the 
first to bring to the West relics of the blessed Stephen the first martyr then recently found. He flourished 
almost(3) at the end of the reign of the emperor Honorius. 

CHAPTER XLI. 

MAXIM US, (4) bishop of the church at Turin, a man fairly industrious in the study of the Holy Scripture, and 
good at teaching the people extemporaneously, composed treatises In praise of the apostles and John the 
Baptist, and a Homily on all the martyrs. Moreover he Wrote many acute comments on passages from the 
Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles. He wrote also two treatises, On the life(5) of Saint Eusebius, bishop of 
Vercelli, and confessor, and On Saint Cyprian, and published a monograph On the grace of baptism. I have 
read his On avarice, On hospitality, On the eclipse of the moon, On almsgiving, On the saying, in Isaiah, 
Your winedealers mix wine with water, On Our Lord's Passion, A general treatise On fasting by the servants 
of God, On the quadragesimal fast in particular, and That there should be no jesting on fast day, On Judas, 
the betrayer, On Our Lord's cross, On His sepulchre, On His resurrection, On the accusation and trial of Our 
Lord before Pontius Pilate, On the Kalends of January, a homily On the day of Our Lord's Nativity, also 
homilies On Epiphany, On the Passover, On Pentecost, many also, On having no fear of carnal Foes, On 
giving thanks after meat, On the repentance of the Ninivites, and other homilies of his, published(l) on 
various occasions, whose names I do not remember. He died in the reign of Honorius and Theodosius the 
younger. 

CHAPTER XLII. 

PETR0NIUS,(2) bishop of Bologna in ltaly(3) a man of holy life and from his youth practised in monastic 
studies, is reputed to have written the Lives of the Fathers, to wit of the Egyptian monks, a work which the 
monks accept as the mirror and pat tern of their profession. I have read a treatise which bears his name On 
the ordination of bishops, a work full of good reasoning and notable for its humility, but whose polished style 
shows it not to have been his, but perhaps, as some say, the work of his father Petronius,(4) a man of great 
eloquence and learned in secular literature. This I think is to be accepted, for the author of the work 
describes himself as a praetorian prefect. He died in the reign of Theodosius and Valentinianus. 

CHAPTER XLIII. 

PELAGIUS (5) the heresiarch, before he was proclaimed a heretic wrote works of practical value for 
students: three books On belief in the Trinity, and one book of Selections from Holy Scriptures bearing on 
the Christian life. This latter was preceded by tables of contents, after the model of Saint Cyprian the martyr. 
After he was proclaimed heretic, however, he wrote works bearing on his heresy. 

CHAPTER XLIV. 

INN0CENTIUS,(6) bishop of Rome, wrote the decree which the Western churches passed against the 
Pelagians and which his successor, Pope Zosimus, afterwards widely promulgated. 

CHAPTER XLV. 

CAELESTIUS,(7) before he joined Pelagius, while yet a very young man, wrote to his parents three epistles 
On monastic life, written as short books, and containing moral maxims suited to every one who is seeking 
God, containing no trace of the fault which afterwards appeared but wholly devoted to the encouragement of 
virtue. 

CHAPTER XLVI. 

JULIANUS (1) the bishop, a man of vigorous character, learned in the Divine Scriptures, and proficient both 
in Greek and Latin, was, before he disclosed his participation in the ungodliness of Pelagius, distinguished 
among the doctors of the church. But afterwards, trying to defend the Pelagian heresy, he wrote four books, 
Against Augustine, the opponent of Pelagius, and then again, eight books more. There is also a book 
containing a discussion, where each defends his side. 

This Julianus, in time of famine and want, attracting many through the alms which he gave, and the glamour 
of virtue, which they cast around him, associated them with him in his heresy. He died during the reign of 
Valentinianus, the son of Constantius. 

CHAPTER XLVII. 

LUCIANUS (2) the presbyter, a holy man to whom, at the time when Honorius and Theodosius were 
Emperors, God revealed the place of the sepulchre and the remains of Saint Stephen the Protomartyr, 
wrote out that revelation in Greek, addressing it to all the churches. 

CHAPTER XLVIII. 

AVITUS(3) the presbyter, a Spaniard by race, translated the above mentioned work of the presbyter 
Lucianus into Latin, and sent it with his letter annexed, by the hand of Orosius the presbyter, to the Western 
churches. 

CHAPTER XLIX. 

PAULINUS,(4) bishop of Nola in Campania, composed many brief works in verse, also a consolatory work 

to Celsus On the death of a christian and baptized child, a sort of epitaph, well fortified with christian hope, 

also many Letters to Severus, and A panegric in prose written before he became bishop, On victory over 

tyrants which was addressed to Theadosius and maintained that victory lay rather in faith and prayer, than in 

arms. He wrote also a Sacramentary and Hymnal. 

He also addressed many letters to his sister, On contempt of the world, and published treatises of different 

sorts, on various occasions. (1) 

The most notable of all his minor works., are the works On repentance, and A general panegyric of all the 

martyrs. He lived in the reign of Honorius and Valentinianus, and was distinguished, not only for erudition(2) 

and holiness of life, but also for his ability to cast out demons. 

CHAPTER L. 

EUTR0PIUS,(3) the presbyter, wrote to two sisters, handmaids of Christ, who had been disinherited by their 
parents on account of their devotion to chastity and their love for religion, two Consolatory letters in the form 
of small books, written in polished and clear language and fortified not only by argument, but also by 
testimonies from the Scriptures. 

CHAPTER LI. 

ANOTHER EVAGRIUS (4) wrote a Discussion between Simon the Jew and Theophilus the Christian, a work 
which is very well known. 

CHAPTER Lll. 

VIGILIUS (5) the deacon, composed ant of the traditions of the fathers a Rule for monks, which is 
accustomed to be read in the monastery for the profit of the assembled monks. It is written in condensed 
and clear language and covers the whole range of monastic duties. 

CHAPTER Llll. 

ATTICUS (6) bishop of Constantinople, wrote to the princess daughters(7) of the Emperor Arcadius, On faith 
and virginity, a most excellent work, in which he attacks by anticipation the Nestorian doctrine. 

CHAPTER LIV. 

NESTORIUS (8)(9) the heresiarch, was regarded, while presbyter of the church at Antioch, as a remarkable 
extemporaneous teacher,(10) and composed a great many treatises on various s Questions, into which 
already at that time(1) he infused that subtle evil, which afterwards became the poison of acknowledged 
impiety, veiled meanwhile by moral exhortation. But afterwards, when commended by his eloquence and 
abstemiousness he had been made pontiff of the church at Constantinople, showing openly what he had for 
a long while concealed, he became a declared enemy of the church, and wrote a book On the incarnation 
of the Lord, formed of sixty-two passages from Divine Scripture, used in a perverted meaning. What he 
maintained in this book may be found in the catalogue of heretics. 

CHAPTER LV. 

CAELESTINUS,(2) bishop of Rome, addressed a volume to the churches of the East and West, giving an 
account of the decree of the synod against the above mentioned Nestorius and maintaining that while there 
are two complete natures in Christ, the person of the Son of God is to be regarded as single. The above 
mentioned Nestorius was shown to be opposed to this view. Xystus likewise, the successor of Caelestinus, 

wrote on the same subject and to the same Nestorius and the Eastern bishops, giving the views of the 
Western bishops against his error. 

CHAPTER LVI. 

THEODOTUS,(3)(4) bishop of Ancyra in Galatia, while at(5) Ephesus, wrote against Nestorius a work of 
defence and refutation, (6) written, to be sure, in dialectic style, but interwoven with passages from the Holy 
Scriptures. His method was to make statements and then quote proof texts from the Scriptures. 

CHAPTER LVII. 

FASTIDIUS,(7) bishop in Britain, wrote to one Fatalis, a book On the Christian life, and another On 
preserving the estate of virginity, (8) a work full of sound doctrine, and doing honour to God. 

CHAPTER LVIII. 

CYRIL, (9) bishop of the church at Alexandria, published various treatises on various Questions, and also 
composed many homilies, which are recommended for preaching by the Greek bishops. Other books of his 
are; On the downfall of the synagogue, On faith against the heretics, and a work directed especially against 
Nestorius and entitled, A Refutation, in which all the J secrets of Nestorius are exposed and his published 
opinions are refuted. 

CHAPTER LIX. 

TIM0THEUS,(1) the bishop composed a book On the nativity of Our Lord according to the flesh, which is 
supposed to have been written at Epiphany. 

CHAPTER LX. 

LEP0RIUS,(2) formerly monk afterwards presbyter, relying on purity, (3) through his own free will and 
unaided effort, instead of depending on the help of God, began to follow the Pelagian doctrine. But having 
been admonished by the Gallican doctors, and corrected by Augustine in Africa, he wrote a book 
containing his retraction, in which he both acknowledges his error and returns thanks for his correction. At the 
same time in correction of his false view of the incarnation of Christ, he presented the Catholic view, 
acknowledging the single person of the Son of God, and the two natures existing in Christ in his 
substance. (4) 

CHAPTER LXI. 

VICT0RUS,(5) a rhetorician of Marseilles, wrote to his son Etherius, a commentary On Genesis, 

commenting, that is, from the beginning of the book to the death of the patriarch Abraham, and published 

four(6) books in verse, words which have a savour of piety indeed, but, in that he was a man busied with 

secular literature and quite untrained in the Divine Scriptures, they are of slight weight, so far as ideas are 

concerned. 

He died in the reign of Theodosius and Valentinianus. 

CHAPTER LXII. 

CASSIANUS,(7) Scythian by race, ordained deacon by bishop John the Great, at Constantinople, and a 
presbyter at Marseilles, rounded two monasteries, that is to say one for men and one for women, which are 
still standing. He wrote from experience, and in forcible language, or to speak more clearly, with meaning 
back of his words, and action back of his talk. He covered the whole field of practical directions, for monks 
of all sorts, in the following works: On dress, also On the canon of prayers, and the Usage in the saying of 
Psalms, (for these in the Egyptian monasteries, are said day and night), three books. One of Institutes, eight 
books On the origin, nature and remedies for the eight principal sins, a book on each sin. He also compiled 
Conferences with the Egyptian fathers, as follows: On the aim of a monk and his creed, On discretion, On 
three vocations to the service of God, On the warfare of the flesh against the spirit and the spirit against the 
flesh, On the nature of all sins, On the slaughter of the saints, On fickleness of mind, On principalities, On the 
nature of prayer, On the duration of prayer, On perfection, On chastity, On the protection of God, On the 
knowledge of spiritual things, On the Divine graces, On friendship, On whether to define or not to define, On 

three ancient kinds of monks and a fourth recently arisen, On the object of cenobites and hermits, On true 
satisfaction in repentance, On the remission of the Quinquagesimal fast, On nocturnal illusions, On the 
saying of the apostles, "For the good which I would do. I do not, but the evil which I would not, that I do," On 
mortification, and finally at the request of Leo the archdeacon, afterwards bishop of Rome, he wrote seven 
books against Nestorius, On the incarnation of the Lord, and writing this, made an end, both of writing and 
living, at Marseilles, in the reign of Theodosius and Valentinianus. 

CHAPTER LXIII. 

PHILIP, (1) the presbyter Jerome's best pupil, published a Commentary on Job, written in an unaffected 
style, I have read his Familiar letters, exceedingly witty, exhorting the endurance of poverty and sufferings. 
He died in the reign of Martianus and Avitus. 

CHAPTER LXIV. 

EUCHERIUS,(2) bishop of the church at Lyons, wrote to his relative Valerianus, On contempt for the world 
and worldly philosophy, a single letter, written in a style which shows sound learning and reasoning. He 
wrote also to his sons, Salonius and Veranius, afterward bishops, a discussion On certain obscure 
passages of Holy Scriptures, and besides, revising and condensing certain works of Saint Cassianus, he 
compressed them into one volume, and wrote other works suited to ecclesiastical or monastic pursuits. He 
died in the reign of Valentinianus and Martianus. 

CHAPTER LXV. 

VINCENTIUS,(1) the Gaul, presbyter in the Monastery on the Island of Lerins, a man learned in the Holy 
Scriptures and very well informed in matters of ecclesiastical doctrine, composed a powerful disputation, 
written in tolerably finished and clear language, which, suppressing his name, he entitled Peregrinus against 
heretics. The greater part of the second book of this work having been stolen, he composed a brief 
reproduction of the substance of the original work, and published in one [book]. He died in the reign of 
Theodosius and Valentinianus. 

CHAPTER LXVI. 

SYAGRIUS (2) wrote On faith, against the presumptuous words, which heretics assume for the purpose of 
destroying or superseding the names of the Holy Trinity, for they say that the Father ought not to be called 
Father; lest the name, Son should harmonize with that of Father, but that he should be called the Unbegotten 
or the Imperishable and the Absolute, in order that whatever may be distinct from Him in person, may also 
be separate in nature, showing that the Father, who is unchangeable in nature may be called the 
Unbegotten, though the Scripture may not call Him so, that the person of the Son is begotten from Him, not 
made, and that the person of the Holy Spirit proceeds from Him not begotten, and not made. Under the 
name of this Syagrius I found seven books, entitled On Faith and the rules of Faith, but as they did not agree 
in style, I did not believe they were written by him. 

CHAPTER LXVII. 

ISAAC, (3) presbyter of the church at Antioch, whose many works cover a long period, wrote in Syriac 
especially against the Nestorians and Eutychians. He lamented the downfall of Antioch in an elegiac poem, 
taking up the same strain that Ephraim, the deacon, sounded on the downfall of Nicomedia. He died during 
the reign of Leo and Majorianus. 

CHAPTER LXVIII. 

SALVIANUS, (1) presbyter of Marseilles, well informed both in secular and in sacred literature, and to speak 
without invidiousness, a master among bishops, wrote many things in a scholastic and clear style, of which I 
have read the following: four books On the Excellence of virginity, to Marcellus the presbyter, three books 
Against avarice, five books On the present judgment, (2) and one book On punishment according to desert, 
addressed to Salonius the bishop, also one book of Commentary on the latter part of the book of 
Ecclesiastes, addressed to Claudius bishop of Vienne, one book of Epistles. (3) He also composed one 
book in verse after the Greek fashion, a sort of Hexaemeron, covering the period from the beginning of 
Genesis to the creation of man, also many Homilies delivered to the bishops, and I am sure I do not know 

how many On the sacraments. He is still living at a good old age. 

CHAPTER LXIX. 

PAULINUS (4) composed treatises On the beginning of the Quadragesimal, of which I have read two, On the 
Passover Sabbath, On obedience, On penitence, On neophytes. 

CHAPTER LXX. 

HILARY, (5) bishop of the church at Aries, a man learned in Holy Scriptures, was devoted to poverty, and 
earnestly anxious to live in narrow circumstances, not only in religiousness of mind, but also in labour of 
body. To secure this estate of poverty, this man of noble race and very differently brought up, engaged in 
farming, though it was beyond his strength, and yet did not neglect spiritual matters. He was an acceptable 
teacher also, and without regard to persons administered correction to all. (6) He published some few 
things, brief, but showing immortal genius, and indicating an erudite mind, as well as capacity for vigorous 
speech; among these that work which is of so great practical value to many, his Life Saint Honoratus, his 
predecessor. He died during the reign of Valentinianus and Martianus. 

CHAPTER LXXI. 

LEO, (1) bishop (2) of Rome, wrote a letter to Flavianus, bishop of the church at Constantinople, against 
Eutyches the presbyter, who at that time, on account of his ambition for the episcopate was trying to 
introduce novelties into the church. In this he advises Flavianus, if Eutyches confesses his error and 
promises amendment, to receive him, but if he should persist in the course he had entered on, that he 
should be condemned together with his heresy. He likewise teaches in this epistle and confirms by divine 
testimony that as the Lord Jesus Christ is to be considered the true son of the Divine Father, so likewise he 
is to be considered true man with human nature, that is, that he derived a body of flesh from the flesh of the 
virgin and not as Eutyches asserted, that be showed a body from heaven. (3) He died in the reign of Leo 
and Majorianus. 

CHAPTER LXXII. 

MOCHIMUS, (4) the Mesopotamian, a presbyter at Antioch, wrote an excellent book Against Eutyches, and 
is said to be writing others, which I have not yet read. 

CHAPTER LXXIII. 

TIMOTHEUS, (5) (6) when Proterius (7) had been put to death by the Alexandrians, in response to popular 
clamour, willingly or unwillingly allowed himself to be made bishop by a single bishop in the place of him 
who bad been put to death. And lest he, having been illegally appointed, should be deservedly deposed at 
the will of the people who had bated Pro-terius, he pronounced all the bishops of his vicinity to be 
Nestorians, and boldly presuming to wash out the stain on his conscience by hardihood, wrote a very 
persuasive book to the Emperor Leo, which he attempted to fortify by testimonies of the Fathers, used in a 
perverted sense, so far as to show, for the sake of deceiving the emperor and establishing his heresy, that 
Leo of Rome, pontiff of the city, and the synod of Chalcedon, and all the Western bishops were 
fundamentally Nestorians. But by the grace of God, the enemy of the church was refuted and overthrown at 
the Council of Chalcedon. He is said to be living in exile, still an heresiarch, and it is most likely so. This 
book of his for learning's sake, I translated by request of the brethren into Latin and prefixed a caveat. (1) 

CHAPTER LXXIV. 

ASCLEPIUS, (2) the African, bishop of a large see (3) within the borders of Bagais, wrote against the Arians, 
and is said to be now writing against the Donatists. He is famous for his extemporaneous teaching. 

CHAPTER LXXV. 

PETER, (4) presbyter of the church at Edessa, a famous preacher, wrote Treatises on various subjects, and 
Hymns after the manner of Saint Ephrem, the deacon. 

CHAPTER LXXVI. 

PAUL (5) the presbyter, a Pannonian by nationality, as I learned from his own mouth wrote On preserving 
virginity, and contempt for the world, and the Ordering of life or the correction of morals, written in a mediocre 
style, but flavoured with divine salt. The two books were addressed to a certain noble virgin devoted to 
Christ, Constantia by name, and in them he mentions Jovinian the heretic and preacher of voluptuousness 
and lusts, who was so far removed from leading a continent and chaste life, that he belched forth his life in 
the midst of luxurious banquets. (6) 

CHAPTER LXXVII. 

PASTOR (7) the bishop composed a short work, written in the form of a creed, and containing pretty much 
the whole round of Ecclesiastical doctrine in sentences. In this, among other heresies which he 
anathematizes without giving the names of their authors, he condemns the Priscillians and their author. 

CHAPTER LXXVIII. 

VICTOR, (8) bishop of Cartenna in Mauritania, wrote one long book against the Arians, which he sent to king 
Genseric by his followers, as I learned from the preface to the work, (9) and a work On the repentance of the 
publican, (1 0) in which he drew up a rule of life for the penitent, according to the authority of Scriptures. He 
also wrote a consolatory work to one Basilius, On tHe death of a son, filled with resurrection hope and good 
counsel. He also composed many Homilies, which have been arranged as continuous works and are as I 
know, made use of by brethren anxious for their own salvation. 

CHAPTER LXXIX. 

VOCONIUS, (1) bishop of Castellanum in Mauritania, wrote Against the enemies of the church, Jews, Arians, 
and other heretics. He composed also an excellent work On the Sacraments. (2) 

CHAPTER LXXX. 

MUSAEUS, (3) presbyter of the church at Marseilles, a man learned in Divine Scriptures and most accurate 
in their interpretation, as well as master of an excellent scholastic style, on the request of Saint Venerius the 
bishop, selected from Holy Scriptures passages suited to the various feast days of the year, also 
passages from the Psalms for responses suited to the season, and the passages for reading. The readers 
in the church found this work of the greatest value, in that it saved them trouble and anxiety in the selection of 
passages, and was useful for the instruction of the people as well as for the dignity of the service. He also 
addressed to Saint Eustathius (4) the bishop, successor to the above mentioned man of God, an excellent 
and sizable volume, a Sacramentary, (5) divided into various sections, according to the various offices and 
seasons, Readings and Psalms, both for reading and chanting, but also filled throughout with petitions to the 
Lord, (6) and thanksgiving for his benefits. By this work we know him to have been a man of strong 
intelligence and chaste eloquence. He is said to have also delivered homilies, which are, as I know, valued 
by pious men, but which I have not read. He died in the reign of Leo and Majorianus. 

CHAPTER LXXXI. 

VINCENTIUS (7) the presbyter, a native of Gaul, practised in Divine Scripture and possessed of a style 
polished by speaking and by wide reading, wrote a Commentary On the Psalms. A part of this work, he: 
read in my hearing, to a man of God, at Cannatae, promising at the same time, that if the Lord should spare 
his life and I strength, he would treat the whole Psalter in the same way. 

CHAPTER LXXXII. 

CYRUS, (1) an Alexandrian by race, and a physician by profession, at first a philosopher then a monk, an 
expert speaker, at first wrote elegantly and powerfully against Nestorius, but afterwards, since he began to 
inveigh against him too intemperately (2) and dealt in syllogism rather than Scripture, he began to foster the 
Timothean doctrine. Finally he declined to accept the decree of the council of Chalcedon, and did not think 
the doctrine that after the incarnation the Son of God comprehended two natures, was to be acquiesced in. 

CHAPTER LXXXIII. 

SAMUEL (3) presbyter of the church at Edessa, is said to have written many things in Syriac against the 
enemies of the church, especially against the Nestorians, the Euty-chians and the Timotheans, new 
heresies all, but differing from one another. On this account he frequently speaks of the triple beast, while he 
briefly refutes by the opinion of the church, and the authority of Holy Scriptures, showing to the Nestorians, 
that the Son was God in man, not simply man born of a Virgin, to the Eutychians, that he had true human 
flesh, taken on by God, and not merely a body made of thick air, or shown from Heaven; to the Timotheans, 
that the Word was made flesh in such wise, that the Word remains Word in substance, and, human nature 
remaining human nature, one person of the Son of God is produced by union, not by mingling. He is said to 
be still living at Constantinople, for at the beginning of the reign of Anthemius, I knew his writings, and knew 
that he was in the land of the living. 

CHAPTER LXXXIV. 

CLAUDIANUS, (1) presbyter of the church at Vienne, a master speaker, and shrewd in argument, 
composed three books, On the condition and substance of the soul, in which he discusses how far anything 
is incorporeal excepting God. 

[He wrote also some other things, among which are, A Hymn on Our Lord's Passion, which begins "Pange 
lingua gloriosi." He was moreover brother of Mamertus, bishop of Vienne.] (2) (See note.) 

CHAPTER LXXXV. 

PROSPER (3) of Aquitania, a man scholastic in style and vigorous in statement, is said to have composed 
many works, of which I have read a Chronicle, which bears his name, and which extends from the creation of 
the first man, according to Divine Scripture, until the death of the Emperor Valenti-nianus and the taking of 
Rome by Genseric king of the Vandals. I regard as his also an anonymous book against certain works of 
Cassianus, which the church of God finds salutary, but which he brands as injurious, and in fact, some of the 
opinions of Cassian and Prosper on the grace of God and on free will are at variance with one another. 
Epistles of Pope Leo against Eutyches, On the true incarnation of Christ, sent to various persons, are also 
thought (4) to have been dictated by him. 

CHAPTER LXXXVI. 

FAUSTUS, (5) first abbot of the monastery at Lerins, and then made bishop (6) of Ritz in Gaul, a man 
studious of the Divine Scriptures, taking his text from the historic creed of the church, composed a book On 
the Holy Spirit, in which he shows from the belief of the fathers, that the Holy Spirit is consubstantial and 
coeternal with the Father and the Son, the fulness of the Trinity and therefore God. (7) He published also an 
excellent work, On the grace of God, through which we are saved, (8) in which he teaches that the grace of 
God always invites, precedes and helps our will, and whatever gain that freedom of will may attain for its 
pious effect, is not its own desert, but the gift of grace, I have read also a little book of his Against the Arians 
and Macedonians, in which he posits a coessential Trinity, and another against those who say that there is 
anything incorporeal in created things, in which he maintains from the testimony of Scriptures, and by 
quotations from the fathers, that nothing is to be regarded as incorporeal but God. There is also a letter of 
his, written in the form of a little book, and addressed to a certain deacon, named Graecus, who, leaving the 
Catholic faith, had gone over to the Nestorian impiety. 

In this epistle he admonishes him to believe that the holy Virgin Mary did not bring forth a mere human 
being, who afterwards should receive divinity, but true God in true man. There are still other works by him, 
but as I have not read, I do not care to mention them. This excellent doctor is enthusiastically believed in 
and admired. He wrote afterwards also to Felix, the Prae-tonian prefect, anti a man of Patrician rank son of 
Magnus the consul a very pious letter, exhorting to the fear of God, a work well fitted to induce one to repent 
with his whole heart. 

CHAPTER LXXXVII. 

SERVUS Dei (1) the bishop, wrote against those who say that Christ while living in this world did not see the 
Father with his eves of flesh-But after his resurrection from the dead and his ascension into heaven when he 
had been translated into the glory of God the Father as in reward so to speak to him for his abnegation and 
a compensation for his martyrdom. In this work he showed both from his own argument and from the 
testimony of Sacred Scriptures that the Lord Jesus from his conception by the Holy Spirit and his birth of the 
Virgin through which true God in true man himself also man made God was born, always beheld with his 
eyes of flesh both the Father and the Holy Spirit through the special and complete union of God and man. 

CHAPTER LXXXVIII. 

VICTORIUS (2) the Aquitanian, a careful (3) reckoner, on invitation of St. Hilary bishop of Rome, composed 
a Paschal cycle with the most careful investigation following his four predecessors, that is Hippolytus, 
Eusebius, Theophilus and Prosper, and extended the series of years to the year five hundred and thirty-two, 
reckoning in such wise that in the year 533 the paschal festival should take place again on the same month 
and day and the same moon as on that first year when the Passion and resurrection of our Lord took place. 

CHAPTER LXXXIX. 

THEODORETUS (1) (2) bishop of Cyrus (for the city founded by Cyrus king of the Persians preserves until 
the present day in Syria the name of its founder) is said to have written many works. Such as have come to 
my knowledge are the following: On the incarnation of the Lord, Against Eutyches the presbyter and 
Dioscorus bishop of Alexandria who deny that Christ had human flesh; strong works by which he confirmed 
through reason and the testimony of Scripture that He had real flesh from the maternal substance which he 
derived from His Virgin mother just as he had true deity which he received at birth by eternal generation from 
God the Father. There are ten books of the ecclesiastical history which he wrote in imitation of Eusebius of 
Caesarea beginning where Eusebius ends and extending to his own time, that is from the Vicennalia of 
Constantine until the accession of the eider Leo in whose reign he died. 

CHAPTER XC. 

GENNADI US (3) a Patriarch (4) of the church of Constantinople, a man brilliant in speech and of strong 
genius, was so richly equipped by his reading of the ancients that he was able to expound the prophet 
Daniel entire commenting on every word. He composed also many Homilies. He died while the eider Leo 
was Emperor. 

CHAPTER XCI. 

THEODULUS, (5) (6) a presbyter in Coelesyria is said to have written many works, but the only one which 
has come to my hand, is the one which he composed On the harmony of divine Scripture, that is, the 
Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments, against the ancient heretics who on account of discrepancies in 
the injunctions of the ritual, say that the God of the Old Testament is different from the God of the New. In this 
work he shows it to have been by the dispensation of one and the same God, the author of both Scriptures, 
that one law should be given by Moses to those of old in a ritual of sacrifices anti in judicial laws, and 
another to us through the presence of Christ in the holy mysteries and future promises, that they should not 
be considered different, but as dictated by one spirit and one author, since these things which if observed 
only according to the letter, would slay, if observed according to the spirit, would give life to the mind. This 
writer died three years since (1) in the reign of Zeno. 

CHAPTER XCII. 

[SIDONIUS (2) bishop of the Arverni wrote several acceptable works and being a man sound in doctrine as 
well as thoroughly imbued with divine and human learning and a man of commanding genius wrote a 
considerable volume of Letters to different persons written in various metres or in prose and this showed his 
ability in literature. Strong in Christian vigour even in the midst of that barbaric ferocity which at that time 
oppressed the Gauls he was regarded as a catholic father and a distinguished doctor. He flourished during 
the tempest which marked the rule of Leo and Zenos.] (3) 

CHAPTER XCIII. 

JOHN (4) of Antioch first grammarian, and then Presbyter, wrote against those who assert that Christ is to be 
adored in one substance only and do not admit that two natures are to be recognized in Christ. He taught 
according to the Scriptural account that in Him God and man exist in one person, and not the flesh and the 
Word in one nature. 

He likewise attacked certain sentiments of Cyril, bishop of Alexandria, unwisely (5) delivered by Cyril 
against Nestorius, which now are an encouragement and give strength to the Timotheans. (6) He is said to 
be still living and preaching. 

CHAPTER XCIV. 

[GELASIUS, (1) (2) bishop of Rome wrote Against Eutyches and Nestorius a great and notable volume, 
also Treatises on various parts of the scripture and the sacraments written in a polished style. He also wrote 
Epistles against Peter and Acacius which are still preserved in the catholic church. He wrote also Hymns 
after the fashion of bishop Ambrosius. He died during the reign of the emperor Anastasius. 

CHAPTER XCV. 

HONORATUS, (3) bishop of Constantina in Africa wrote a letter to one Arcadius who on account of his 
confession of the catholic faith had been exiled to Africa by King Genseric. (4) This letter was an exhortation 
to endure hardness for Christ and fortified by modern examples and scripture illustrations showing that 
perseverance in the confession of the faith not only purges past sins but also procures the blessing of 
martyrdom. 

CHAPTER XCVI. 

CEREALIS (5) the bishop, an African by birth, was asked by Maximus bishop of the Arians whether he could 
establish the catholic faith by a few testimonies of Divine Scripture and without any controversial assertions. 
This he did in the name of the Lord, truth itself helping him, not with a few testimonies as Maximus had 
derisively asked, but proving by copious proof texts from both Old and New Testaments and published in a 
little book. 

CHAPTER XCVII. 

EUGENIUS, (6) bishop of Carthage in Africa and public confessor, commanded by Hu-neric (7) King of the 
Vandals to write an exposition of the catholic faith and especially to discuss the meaning of the word 
Homoou-sian, with the consent of all the bishops and confessors of Mauritania in Africa and Sar-dinia and 
Corsica, who had remained in the catholic faith, composed a book of faith, fortified not only by quotations 
from the Holy Scriptures but by testimonies of the Fathers, and sent it by his companions in confession. But 
now, exiled as a reward for his faithful tongue, like an anxious shepherd over his sheep he has left behind 
works urging them to remember the faith and the one sacred baptism to be preserved at all hazards. He 
also wrote out the Discussions which he held through messengers with the leaders of the Arians and sent 
them to be given to Huneric by his major domo. Likewise also he presented to the same, petitions for the 
peace of the Christians which were of the nature of an Apology, and he is said to be still living for the 
strengthening of the church. 

CHAPTER XCVIII. 

POMERIUS (1) the Mauritanian was ordained presbyter in Gaul. He composed a dialecti-cal treatise in 
eight books On the nature of the soul and its properties, also one On the resurrection and its particular 
bearing for the faithful in this life and in general for all men, written in clear language and style, in the form of a 
dialogue between Julian the bishop, and Verus the presbyter. The first book contains discourses on what 
the soul is and in what sense it is thought to be created in the image of God, the second, whether the soul 
should be thought of as corporeal or incorporeal, the third, how the soul of the first man (2) was made, fourth, 
whether the soul which is put in the body at birth is newly created and without sin, or produced from the 
substance of the first man like a shoot from a root it brings also with it the original sin of the first man, fifth, a 
review of the fourth book of the discussion, (1) and an inquiry as to what is the capability of the soul, that is its 
possibilities, and that it gains its capability from a single and pure will, the sixth, whence arises the conflict 
between flesh and the spirit, spoken of by the apostle, seventh, on the difference between the flesh and the 
spirit in respect of life, of death and of resurrection, the eighth, answers to questions concerning the things 
which it is predicted will happen at the end of the world, to such questions, that is, as are usually propounded 
concerning the resurrection. I remember to have once read a hortatory work of his, addressed to some one 
named Principius, On contempt of the world, and of transitory things, and another entitled, On vices and 
virtues. He is said to have written yet other works, which have not come to my knowledge, and to be still 
writing. He is still living, and his life is worthy of Christian profession, and his rank in the church. 

CHAPTER XCIX. 

I GENNADIUS (2) a presbyter of Marseilles, have written eight books Against all her-esies, five (3) books 

Against Nestorius, ten (4) books Against Eutyches, three books Against Pelagius, also treatises On the 
Millennium and On the Apocalypse of Saint John, also an epistle On my creed, sent to the blessed 
Gelasius, bishop of Rome. 

RUFINUS" APOLOGY. 
BOOK I. 

The following is an epitome of the argument: 

1 . 1 must submit to the taunts of my adversary as Christ did to those of the Jews. 

2. Yet the substantial charges must be answered. 

3. I praised him but he has wounded me. 

4. 1 am no heretic, but declare my faith, that of my baptism. 

5. 1 give a further proof of my faith in the resurrection of the flesh. 

6-9. The resurrection body is a spiritual body. 

10. Origen's doctrines in the ll<greek>eri</greek> 'A<greek>rkpn</greek>. 

1 1 . What led to the translation. 

12. 13. Pamphilus' Apology for Origen. 

14. Preface to the Translation of the ll<greek>eri</greek> 'A<greek>rkpn</greek>. 

15. Treatise on the Adulteration of the works of Origen. 

16. The difficulties of translation. 

17. Explanation of Origen's words "The Son does not see the Father." 

18. Difference between seeing and knowing. 

19. The Translation interpolated by Eusebius of Cremona. 

20. Eusebius, if acting honestly, should have shown me what he thought dangerous. 

21. Jerome's method of translation was the same as mine. 

22. Jerome's reference to his Commentary on the Ephesians. 

23. Jerome has not really changed his mind about Origen. 

24. Women turned into men and bodies into souls. 

25. The foundation (<greek>katabolh</greek> of the world explained by Jerome as a casting down. 

26. Jerome, under the name of "another," gives his own views. 

27. The fall of souls into human bodies is taught by Jerome. 

28. Predestination. 

29. "Another," who gives strange views, is Jerome himself. 

30. "Hopers" and "fore-hopers." 

31 . and 30 (a). Jerome has confessed these views to be his own. 
31 (a) and 32. Further identification of Jerome's views with Origen's. 

33. The commentary on the Ephesians, selected by Jerome, is his condemnation. 34, 35. Principalities and 

Powers. 

36. Jerome's complaint of new doctrines may be retorted on himself. 

38, 39. Origin of men, angels, and heavenly bodies. 

40, 41 . The body as a prison. 

42. All creatures, including the fallen angel, partaking in the final restoration. 43. Arrogance of Jerome's 

teaching. 

44. If Origen is not to be pardoned, neither is Jerome. 

I have read the document sent from the East by our friend and good brother to a distinguished member of 
the Senate, Pammachius, which you have copied and forwarded to me. It brought to my mind the words of 
the Prophet:(1) " The sons of men whose teeth are spears and arrows and their tongue a sharp sword." But 
for these wounds which men inflict on one another with the tongue we can hardly find a physician; so I have 
betaken myself to Jesus, the heavenly physician, and he has brought out for me from the medicine chest of 
the Gospel an antidote of sovereign power; he has assuaged the violence of my grief with the assurance of 
the righteous judgment which I shall have at his hands. The potion which our Lord dispensed to me was 
nothing else than these words:(2) " Blessed are ye when men persecute you and say all manner of evil 
against you falsely. Rejoice and leap for joy, for great is your reward in heaven, for so persecuted they the 
Prophets which were before you." With this medicine I was content, and, as far as the matter concerned me, I 
had determined for the future to keep silence; for I said within myself,(1) "If they have called the Master of the 

house Beelzebub, how much more them of his household?" (that is, you and me, unworthy though we are). 
And, if it was said of him, (2) " He is a deceiver, he deceiveth the people," I must not be indignant if I hear that 
I am called a heretic, and that the name of mole is applied to me because of the slowness of my mind, or 
indeed my blindness. Christ who is my Lord, aye, and who is God over all, was called(3) "a gluttonous man 
and a wine bibber, a friend of publicans and sinners." How can I, then, be angry when I am called a carnal 
man(4) who lives in luxury? 

2. Nevertheless, a necessity, as it were, is laid upon me to reply, as a simple matter of justice: I mean, 
because many, as I hear, are likely to be upset by what he has written unless the true state of the case is 
laid before them. I am compelled, against my resolution and even my vows, to make reply, lest by keeping 
silence I should seem to acknowledge the accusation to be true. It is, indeed, in most cases, a Christian's 
glory to follow our Lord's example of silence, and thereby to repel the accusation; hut to follow this course in 
matters of faith causes stumbling blocks to spring up in vast numbers. It is true that, in the beginning of his 
invective he promises that he will avoid personalities, and reply only about the things in question and the 
charges made against him; but his profession in both cases is false; for how can he answer a charge when 
no charge has been made? and how can a man be said to avoid personalities when he never ceases to 
attack and tear to pieces the translator of the books in question from the first line to the last of his invective? I 
shall avoid all pretence of saying less than I mean, and similar subterfuges of hypocrisy which are hateful in 
God's sight; and, though my words may be uncouth and my style unadorned, I will make my reply. I trust, and 
I shall not trust in vain, that my readers will pardon my lack of skill, since my object is not to amuse others but 
to endeavour to clear myself from the reproaches directed against me. My wish is that what may shine forth 
in me may not be style but truth. 

3. But, before I begin to clear up these points, there is one in which I confess that he has spoken the truth in 
an eminent degree; namely, when he says that be is not rendering evil speaking for evil speaking. This, I 
say, is quite true; for it is not for evil speaking but for speaking well of him and praising him that he has 
rendered reproach and evil speaking. But it is not true, as he says, that he turns the left cheek to one who 
smites him on the right. It is on one who is stroking him and caressing him on the cheek that he suddenly 
turns and bites him. I praised his eloquence and his industry in the work of translating from the Greek. I said 
nothing in derogation of his faith; but he condemns me on both these points. He must therefore pardon me if I 
say some things rather roughly and rudely; for he has challenged to a reply a man who has no great 
rhetorical skill, and who has not, as he knows, the power to make one whom he wishes to injure and to 
wound appear to have, received neither wounds nor injuries. Those who love this kind of eloquence must to 
seek it in a man whom every light report stirs up to fault-finding and vituperation, and who thinks himself 
bound, as if he were the censor, to be always coming up to set things to rights. A man who desires to clear 
himself from the stains which have been cast upon him, does not trouble himself, in the answer which he is 
compelled to make, about the elegance and neat turns of his reply, but only about its truth. 

4. At the very beginning of his work he says, "As if they could not be heretics by themselves, without me." I 
must first show that, whether with him or without him, we are no heretics: then, when our status is made clear, 
we shall be safe from having the infamous imputation hurled at us from other men's reports. I was already 
living in a monastery, where, as both he and all others know, about 30 years ago, I was made regenerate by 
Baptism, and received the seal of the faith at the hands of those saintly men, Chromatius,(1) Jovinus(2) and 
Eusebius,(3) all of them now bishops, well-tried and highly esteemed in the church of God, one of whom was 
then a presbyter of the church under Valerian of blessed memory, the second was archdeacon, the third 
Deacon, and to me a spiritual father, my teacher in the creed and the articles of belief. These men so taught 
me, and so I believe, namely, that the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit are of one Godhead, of one 
Substance: a Trinity coeternal, inseparable, incorporeal, invisible, incomprehensible, known to itself alone 
as it truly is in its perfection: For " No man(4) knoweth the Son but the Father, neither knoweth any man the 
Father but the Son": and the Holy Spirit is he who "searcheth(5) the deep things of God": that this Trinity, 
therefore, is without all bodily visibility, but that it is with the eye of the understanding that the Son and the 
Holy Spirit see the Father even as the Father sees the Son and the Holy Spirit; and further, that in this Trinity 
there is no diversity except that one is Father, another Son and a third Holy Spirit. There is a Trinity as 
touching the distinction of persons, a unity in the reality of the Substance. We received, further, that the only 
begotten Son of God, through whom in the beginning all existing things were made, whether visible or 
invisible, in these last days took upon him a human body and Soul, and was made man, and suffered for our 
salvation; and the third day he rose again from the dead in that very flesh which had been laid in the 
sepulchre; and in that very same flesh made glorious he ascended into the heavens, whence we look for 
his coming to judge the quick and the dead. But further we confess that he gave us hope that we too should 
rise in a similar manner, so that we believe that our resurrection will be in the same manner and process, 
and in the same form, as the resurrection of our Lord himself from the dead: that the bodies which we shall 
receive will not be phantoms or thin vapours, as some slanderously affirm that we say, but these very 
bodies of ours in which we live and in which we die. For how can we truly believe in the resurrection of the 

flesh, unless the very nature of flesh remains in it truly and substantially? It is then without any equivocation, 
that we confess the resurrection of this real and substantial flesh of ours in which we live. 

5. Moreover, to give a fuller demonstration of this point, I will add one thing more. It is the compulsion of 
those who calumniate me which forces me to exhibit a singular and special mystery of my own church. It is 
this, that, while all the churches thus hand down the Sacrament of the Creed in the form which, after the words 
" the remission of sins" adds " the resurrection of the flesh," the holy church of Aquileia (as though the Spirit 
of God had foreseen the calumnies which would be spoken against us) puts in a particular pronoun at the 
place where it delivers the resurrection of the dead; instead of saying as others do, "the resurrection of the 
flesh," we say "the resurrection of this flesh." At this point, as the custom is at the close of the Creed, we touch 
the forehead of this flesh with the sign of the cross, and with the mouth of this flesh, which we have so 
touched, we confess the resurrection; that so we may stop up every entrance through which the poisoned 
tongue might bring in its calumnies against us. Can any confession be fuller than this? Can any exposition of 
the truth be more perfect? Yet I see that this remarkable provision of the Holy Spirit has been of no profit to 
us. Evil and busy tongues still find room for cavilling. Unless, says he, you name the members one by one, 
and expressly designate the head with its hair, the hands, the feet, the belly, and that which is below the 
belly, you have denied the resurrection of the flesh. 

6. Behold the discovery of this man of the new learning! a thing which escaped the notice of the Apostles 
when they delivered the faith to the Church; a thing which none of the saints knew till it was revealed to this 
man by the spirit of the flesh. He indeed cannot expound it without bringing in an indecency. Nevertheless, I 
will set it forth in his hearing both more worthily and more truly. Christ is the first fruits of those that sleep;(1) he 
is also called(2) the first begotten from the dead; as also the Apostle says, (3) " Christ is the beginning, 
afterward they that are Christ's." Since then we have Christ as the undoubted first fruits of our resurrection, 
how can any question arise about the rest of us? It must be evident that, whatever the members, the hair, the 
flesh, the bones, were in which Christ rose, in the same shall we also rise. For this purpose be offered 
himself to the, disciples to touch after his resurrection, so that no hesitation as to his resurrection should 
remain. Since then Christ has given his own resurrection as a typical instance, one that is quite evident, and 
(as I may say) capable of being felt and handled by the hand, who can be so mad as to think that he himself 
will rise otherwise than as He rose who opened the door of the resurrection? This also confirms the truth of 
this confession of ours that, while it is the actual natural flesh and no other which will rise, vet it will rise purged 
from its faults and having laid aside its corruption; so that the saying of the Apostle is true:(4) "It is sown in 
corruption, it will be raised in incorruption; it is sown in dishonour, it will be raised in glory; it is sown a 
natural(5) body, it will be raised a spiritual body." Inasmuch then as it is a spiritual body, and glorious, and 
incorruptible, it will be furnished and adorned with its own proper members, not with members taken from 
elsewhere, according to that glorious image of which Christ is set forth as the perpetual type, as it is said by 
the Apostle:(6) "Who shall change the body of our humiliation, that it may be conformed to the body of his 
glory." 

7. Since then, in reference to our hope of the resurrection, Christ is set forth all through as the archetype, 
since he is the first born of those who rise, and since he is the head of every creature, as it is written, (7) " 
Who is the head of all, the first born from the dead, that in all things he might have the preeminence;" how is it 
that we stir up these vain strifes of words, and conflicts of evil surmises? Does not the faith of the church 
consist in the confession which I have set forth above ? And is it not evident that men are moved to accuse 
others not by difference of belief, but by perversity of disposition? At this point, however, in arguing about the 
resurrection of the flesh, our friend, as his habit is, mixes up what is ridiculous and farcical with what is 
serious. He says: 

"Some poor creatures of the female sex among us are fond of asking what good the resurrection will be to 
them? They touch their breasts, and stroke their beardless faces, and strike their thighs and their bellies, 
and ask whether this poor weak body is to rise again. No, they say, if we are to be like angels we shall have 
the nature of angels." 

Who the poor women are whom he thus takes to task, and whether they are deserving of his attacks, he 
knows best. And if he considers himself to be one of those who are bound to preach that it is not our part to 
attack another out of revenge, but that in this instance he is right in attacking others when they have given 
him no cause for revenge; or if, again, he considers that it is no business of his to take care that weak 
women of his company should be subjected to attacks only for real causes, and not for such false and 
fictitious reasons as these-of all this, I say, he is himself the best judge. For us it is sufficient to act as he said 
that he would act: we shall not render evil for evil. But it is evident that the man who is angry with a woman 
because she says that she hopes not to have a frail body in the resurrection is of the opinion that the frailties 
of the body will remain. Only, what then, we ask, are we to make of the words of the Apostle: " It is sown in 
weakness, it will be raised in power; it is sown a natural body, it will be raised a spiritual body"? What frailty 
can you suppose to exist in a spiritual body? It is to rise in power; how then is it again to be frail? If it is frail, 
how can it be in power? I Are not those poor women after all more right than you, when they say that their 

bodily frailty cannot have dominion over them in the world beyond? Why should you mock at them, when 
they are only following the Apostle's words: "This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must 
put on immortality?" The Apostles never taught that the body which would rise from the dead would be frail, 
but, on the contrary, that it would rise in power and in glory. Whence entries this opinion which you now 
produce? Perhaps it is one obtained from some of your Jews,(1) which is now to be promulgated as a new 
law for the church, so that we may learn their ways: for in truth the Jews have such an opinion as this about 
the resurrection; they believe that they will rise, but in such sort as that they will enjoy all carnal delights and 
luxuries, and other pleasures of the body. What else, indeed, can this " bodily frailty" of yours mean except 
members given over to corruption, appetites stimulated and lusts inflamed? 

8. But suffer it to be so, I beg you, as you are lovers of Christ, that the body is to be in incorruption and without 
these conditions when it rises from the dead: then let such things henceforward cease to be mentioned. Let 
us believe that in the resurrection even lawful intercourse will no longer exist between the sexes, since there 
would be danger that unlawful intercourse would creep in if such things remained present and unforgotten. 
What is the use of carefully and minutely going over and discussing "the belly and what is below it?" You tell 
us that we live amidst carnal delights: but I perceive that it is your belief that we are not to give up such things 
even in the resurrection. Let us not deny that this very flesh in which we now live is to rise again: but neither 
let us make men think that the imperfections of the flesh are wrapped up in it and will come again with it. The 
flesh, indeed, will rise, this very flesh and not another: it will not change its nature, but it will lose its frailties 
and imperfections. Otherwise, if its frailties remain, it cannot even be immortal. And thus, as I said, we avoid 
heresy, whether with you or without you. For the faith of the Church, of which we are the disciples, takes a 
middle path between two dangers: it does not deny the reality of the natural flesh and body when it rises 
from the dead, but neither does it assert, in contradiction to the Apostle's words, (1) that in the kingdom which 
is to come corruption will inherit incorruption. We therefore do not assert that the flesh or body will rise, as 
you put it, with some of its members lost or amputated, but that the body will be whole and complete, having 
laid aside nothing but its corruption and dishonour and frailty and also having amputated all the 
imperfections of mortality: nothing of its own nature will be lacking to that spiritual body which shall rise from 
the dead except this corruption. 

9. I have made answer more at length than I had intended on this single article of the resurrection, through 
fear lest by brevity I should lay myself open to fresh aspersions. Consequently, I have made mention again 
and again not only of the body, as to which cavils are raised, but of the flesh: and not only of the flesh; I have 
added "this flesh;" and further I have spoken not only of "this flesh" but of " this natural flesh;" I have not even 
stopped here, but have asserted that not even the completeness of the several members would be lacking. 
I have only demanded that it should be held as part of the faith that, according to the words of the Apostle, it 
should rise incorruptible instead of corruptible, glorious in stead of dishonoured, immortal instead of frail, 
spiritual instead of natural; and that we should think of the members of the spiritual body as being without 
taint of corruption or of frailty. I have set forth my faith in reference to the Trinity, the Incarnation of the Lord oar 
Saviour, to his Passion and Resurrection, his second coming and the judgment to come. I have also set it 
forth in the matter of the resurrection of our flesh, and have left nothing, I think, in ambiguity. Nothing in my 
opinion remains to be said, so far as the faith is concerned. 

10. But in this, he says, I convict you, that you have translated the work of Origen, in which he says that there 
is to be a restitution of all things, in which we must believe that not only sinners but the devil himself and his 
angels will at last be relieved from their punishment, if we are to set before oar minds in a consistent manner 
what is meant by the restitution of all things. And Origen, he says, teaches further that souls have been made 
before their bodies, and have been brought down from heaven and inserted into their bodies. I am not now 
acting on Origen's behalf, nor writing an apology for him. Whether he stands accepted before God or has 
been cast away is not mine to judge: to his own lord he stands or falls. (1) But I am compelled to make 
mention of him in a few words, since our great rhetorician, though seeming to be arguing against him is 
really striking at the; and this he does no longer indirectly, but ends by openly attacking me with his sword 
drawn and turns his whole fury against me. I say too little in saying that he attacks me; for indeed, in order to 
vent his rage against me, he does not even spare his old teacher:(2) he thinks that in the books which I have 
translated he can find something which may enable him to hurl his calumnies against me. In addition to other 
things which he finds to blame in me he adds this invidious remark, that I have chosen for translation a work 
which neither he nor any of the older translators had chosen. I will begin, therefore, since it is here that I am 
chiefly attacked, by stating how it came to pass that I attempted the translation of this work in preference to 
any other, and I will do so in the fewest and truest words. This is, no doubt, superfluous for you, my 
well-beloved son, since you know the whole affair as it occurred; yet it is desirable that those who are 
ignorant of it should know the truth: besides, both he and all his followers make this a triumphant accusation 
against me, that I promised in my Preface to adopt one method of translation but adopted a different one in 
the work itself. Hence, I will make an answer which will serve not only for them, but for many besides whose 
judgment is perverted either by their own malice or by the accusations which others make against me. 

1 1 . Some time ago, Macarius, a man of distinction from his faith, his learning, his noble birth and his personal 
life, had in hand a work against fatalism or, as it is called, Mathesis,(1) and was spending much necessary 
and fruitful toil on its composition; but he could not decide many points, especially how to speak of the 
dispensations of divine Providence. He found the matter to be one of great difficulty. But in the visions of the 
night the Lord, he said, had shown him the appearance of a ship far off upon the sea coming towards him, 
which ship, when it entered the port, was to solve all the knotty points which had perplexed him. When he 
arose, he began anxiously to ponder the vision, and he found, as he said, that that was the very moment of 
my arrival; so that he forthwith made known to me the scope of his work, and his difficulties, and also the 
vision which he had seen. He proceeded to inquire what were the opinions of Origen, whom he understood 
to be the most renowned among the Greeks on the points in question, and begged that I would shortly 
explain his views on each of them in order. I at first could only say that the task was one of much difficulty: but 
I told him that that saintly man the Martyr Pamphilus had to some extent dealt with the question in a work of 
the kind he wished, that is in his Apology for Origen. Immediately he begged me to translate this work into 
Latin. I told him several times that I had no practice in this style of composition, and that my power of writing 
Latin had grown dull through the neglect of nearly thirty years. He, however, persevered in his request, 
begging earnestly that by any kind of words that might be possible, the things which he longed to know 
should be placed within his reach. I did what he wished in the best language in my power; but this only 
inflamed him with greater desire for the full knowledge of the work itself from which, as he saw, the few 
translations which I had made had been taken. I tried to excuse myself; but he urged me with vehemence, 
taking God to witness of his earnest request to me not to refuse him the means which might assist him in 
doing a good work. It was only because he insisted so earnestly, and it seemed clear that his desire was 
according to the will of God, that I at length acquiesced, and made the translation. 

12. But I wrote a Preface(1) to each of these works, and in both, but especially in the Preface to the work of 
Pamphilus, which was translated first, I set in the forefront an exposition of my faith, affirming that my belief is 
in accordance with the catholic faith; and I stated that whatever men might find in the original or in my 
translation, my share in it in no way implicated my own faith, and further, in reference to the 
ll<greek>eri</greek> 'A<greek>rkpn</greek> I gave this warning. I had found that in these books some 
things relating to the faith were set forth in a catholic sense, just as the Church proclaims them, while in other 
places, when the very same thing is in question, expressions of a contrary kind are used. I had thought it 
right to set forth these points in the way in which the author had set them forth when he had propounded the 
catholic view of them: on the other hand, when I found things which were contrary to the author's real opinion, 
I looked on them as things inserted by others, (for he witnesses by the complaints contained in his letter that 
this has been done), and therefore rejected them, or at all events considered that I might omit them as 
having none of the "godly edifying in the faith." It will not, I think, be considered superfluous to insert these 
passages from my Prefaces, so that proof may be at hand for each statement. And further, to prevent the 
reader from falling into any mistake as to the passages which I insert from other documents, I have, where 
the quotation is from my own works, placed a single mark against the passage, but, where the words are 
those of my opponent, a double mark.(2) 

13. In the Preface to the Apology of Pamphilus, after a few other remarks, I said: 

'What the opinions of Origen are may be gathered from the tenor of this treatise. But as for those things in 
which he is found to contradict himself, I will point out how this has come to pass in a few words which I have 
added at the close of this Preface. As for us, we believe what has been delivered to us by the holy 
Prophets, namely: that the holy Trinity is coeternal, and is of one power and substance: and that the Son of 
God in these last days was made man and suffered for our sins, and, in that very flesh in which he suffered, 
rose from the dead; and thereby imparted the hope of a resurrection to the whole race of men. When we 
speak of the resurrection of the flesh, we do so not with any subterfuges, as some slanderously affirm: we 
believe that the flesh which is to rise is this very flesh in which we now live: we do not put one thing for 
another, nor when we say body, mean something different from this flesh. If, therefore, we say that the body 
is to rise again, we speak as the Apostle spoke; for this word body was the word which he employed: Or if, 
again, we speak of the flesh, our confession coin tides with the words of the creed. It is a foolish and 
calumnious invention to imagine that the human body can be anything but flesh. Whether, then, we say that it 
is flesh according to the common faith, or body according to the Apostle, which is to rise again, our belief 
must be held, according to the definition given by the Apostle, with the understanding that that which is to rise 
again is to be raised in power and in glory, an incorruptible and a spiritual body. While, therefore, we 
maintain the superior excellence of the body or flesh which is to be, we must hold that the flesh which rises 
again will be real and perfect; the actual nature of the flesh will be preserved, while the glorious condition of 
the uncorrupted and spiritual body will not be impaired. For so it is written:(1) " Corruption shall not inherit 
incorruption." This is what is preached at Jerusalem in the church of God, by its reverend bishop John: this is 
what we with him confess and hold. If any one believes or teaches anything besides this, or thinks that we 
believe otherwise than as we have stated, let him be anathema.' 

If then any one wishes to have a statement of our faith, he has it in these words. And whatever we read or 
affirm, or whatever translations we make, we do it without prejudice to this faith of ours, according to the 
words of the apostle:(2) " Prove all things, hold fast that which is good. Abstain from every form of evil." " And 
as many as follow this rule, peace be upon them; and upon the Israel of God." 

14. I wrote these words beforehand as a statement of my faith, when as yet none of these calumniators had 
arisen, so that it should be in no man's power to say that it was merely because of their admonition or their 
compulsion that I said things which I had not believed before. Moreover, I promised that, whatever the 
requirements of translation might be, I would, while complying with them, maintain the principles of my faith 
inviolate. How then can any room be left for evil, when the very first word of my confession preserves and 
defends the from the suspicion of holding any doctrine inconsistent with it? Besides, as I have said above. I 
have learned from the words of the Lord that every one shall be justified or condemned from his own words 
and not from those of others. 

But I will show how, in the Preface(1) which I prefixed to the books <greek>Peri</greek> 
A<greek>rkpn</greek>, I declared what was to be the regulative principle of my translation, and will prove it, 
as in the former case, by quoting the words themselves: for it is right to quote from this document also 
whatever is pertinent to the matter in hand. I had made honourable mention of the man who now turns my 
praise of him into all accusation against me, for his services in having led the way and having translated a 
great many works of Origen before I had begun: I had praised both his eloquence as an expositor and his 
diligence as a translator, and had said that I took him as my model in doing a similar work. And then, after a 
few more sentences, I continued thus: 

'Him therefore we take as our model so far as in us lies, not indeed in the power of his eloquence, but in his 
method of doing his work, taking care not to reproduce things which are found in the books of Origen 
discrepant and contrary to his own true opinion,' 

I beg the reader to observe what I have said, and not to let this sentence escape him because of its brevity. 
What I said was that 'I would not reproduce the things which are found in the books of Origen discrepant and 
contrary to his own true opinion.' I did not make a general promise that I would not reproduce what was 
contrary to the faith, nor yet what was contrary to me or to some one else, but what was contrary to or 
discrepant from Origen himself. My opponents must not be allowed to propagate a false statement against 
me by snatching at a part of this sentence and saying that I had promised not to reproduce anything which 
was contrary to or discrepant from my own belief. If I had been capable of such conduct, I certainly should 
not have dared to make a public profession of it. If you find that this has been done in my work, you will know 
how to judge of it. But if you find that it has not been done, you will not think that I am to blame, since I never 
gave you any pledge which would bind me to do it. 

15. But let me add what comes after. My Preface continued as follows: 

The causes of these discrepancies I have more fully set forth in the Apology which Pamphilus expressly 
wrote for the works of Origen, to which I added a very short paper in which I shewed by proofs which appear 
to me quite clear, that his books have been in very many places tampered with by heretics and ill disposed 
men, and especially the very books which you ask me to translate, namely, the <greek>Peri</greek> 
A<greek>rkpn</greek>, which may be rendered "Concerning Beginnings''^) or "Concerning Principalities." 
which are in any case most obscure and most difficult. For in these books Origen discusses matters on 
which the philosophers have spent their whole lives without finding out the truth. In these matters, man's 
belief in a creator and his reasoning about the created world which had been made use of by the 
philosophers for the purposes of their own profanity, the Christian writer turns to the support of the true faith.' 
Here also I beg you to mark my words carefully, and to observe that I said 'belief in a Creator,' but 
'reasoning about the created world;' since what is said about God belongs to the domain of faith, but our 
discussions about created things to the domain of reason. I continued: 

'Wherever, therefore, in his works we find erroneous definitions of the Trinity as to which he has in other 
places expressed his views in accordance with the true faith, we have either left them out as passages 
which had been falsified or inserted, or else have changed the expression in accordance with the rule of 
faith which the writer again and again lays down.' 

Have I here, I ask, written incautiously? Have I said that I expressed the matter according to the ride of our 
faith, which would have been evidently going far beyond the scope of a translator whose duty was merely to 
turn Greek into Latin? On the contrary I said that I expressed these passages according to the rule of faith 
which I found again and again laid down by Origen himself. Moreover I added: 

'I grant that, when he has expressed a thing obscurely, as a man does when he is writing for those who have 
technical knowledge of the subject and wishes to go over it rapidly, I have made the sentence plainer by 
adding the fuller expression which he had given of the same thing in some of his other works which I had 
read. I did this simply in the interests of clearness. But I have expressed nothing in my own words; I have 
only restored to Origen what was really Origen's though found in other parts of his works.' 
16. 1 should have thought that this statement, I mean the words, 'I have expressed nothing in my own words; I 

have only restored to Origen what was really Origen's, though found in other part of his works,' would of itself 
have been sufficient for my defence even before the most hostile judges. Have I thrust myself forward in any 
way? Have I ever led men to expect that I should put in anything of my own? Where can they find the words 
which they pretend that I have said, and on which they ground their calumnious accusations, namely, that I 
have removed what was bad and put good words instead, while I had translated literally all that is good? It 
is time, I think, that they should show some sense of shame, and should cease from false charges and from 
taking upon themselves the office of the devil who is the accuser of the brethen. Let them listen to the words ' 
I have put in no words of my own.' Let them listen to them again and hear them constantly reiterated, ' I have 
put in no words of my own; I have only restored to Origen what was really Origen's, though found in other 
parts of his works.' And let them see how God's mercy watched over me when I put my hand to this work; let 
them mark how f was led to forebode the very acts which they are doing. For my Preface continues thus: 
' I have given this statement in my Preface for fear that my detractors should think that they had found a fresh 
reason for accusing me.' 

When I said a fresh charge I alluded to the charge which they had previously made against the reverend 
Bishop John for the letter written by him to the reverend Bishop Theophilus(l) on the articles of faith: they 
pretended that when he spoke of the human body he meant something-l know not what-different from flesh. 
Therefore I spoke of afresh charge. Take notice, then, I say, of the conduct of these perverse and 
contentious men. 

'I have undertaken this great labour, (which I have only done at your entreat) not with a view of shutting the 
mouths of my calumniators, which indeed is impossible unless God himself should do it, but in order to give 
solid information to those, who are seeking to advance in knowledge.' 

But, to show you that I foresaw and foretold that they would falsify what I was writing, observe what I said in 
the following passage: 

'Of this I solemnly warn every one who may read or copy out these books, in the sight of God the Father, the 
Son and the Holy Ghost, and adjure him by our belief in the kingdom which is to come, by the assurance of 
the resurrection from the dead, and by that eternal fire which is prepared for the devil and his angels, -I 
adjure him, as he would not have for his eternal portion that place where there is weeping and gnashing of 
teeth, where their worm dieth not and their fire is not quenched, that he should add nothing to this writing, take 
away nothing, insert nothing, and change nothing.' 

Nevertheless, after I had warned them by all these dread and terrible forms of adjuration, these men have 
not been afraid to become falsifiers and corrupters of my work, though they profess to believe that the 
resurrection of the flesh is a reality of the future. 

Why, if they even believed the simple fact of the existence of God, they would never set their hands to acts 
so injurious and so impious. I ask, further, what line of my Preface can be pointed to in which I have, as my 
accuser says, praised Origen up to the skies, or in which I have called him, as he once did, an Apostle or a 
Prophet, or anything of the kind. I may ask indeed in what other matter they find any ground of accusation. I 
made at the outset a confession of my faith in terms which I think agree in all respects with the confession of 
the Church. I made a clear statement of my canons of translation, which indeed in most respects were taken 
from the model furnished by the very man who now comes forward as my accuser. I declared what was the 
purpose I set before me in making the translation. Whether I have proved capable of fulfilling the task more 
or less completely is, no doubt, a matter for the judgment of those who read the work, and who may be 
expected to praise it or to ridicule it, but not to make it a ground for accusation when it is a question of turning 
words from one language into another with more or less propriety. 

17. But I have said that these men would have been unable to find grounds for accusation on the points I 
have mentioned, however they may take them, unless they had first falsified them: It appears to me 
therefore desirable that the chief matter on which they have laid their forgers' hands should be inserted in 
this Apology, lest they should think that I am intentionally withdrawing it from notice because they after 
making their own additions to it allege it as a ground of false accusation. In the book which I translated there 
is a passage in which I examine the tenets of those who believe that God has a bodily shape and who 
describe him as clothed with human members and dress. This is openly asserted by the heretical sects of 
the Valentinians and Anthropomorphites, and I see that those who are now our accusers have been far too 
ready to hold out the hand to them. Origen in this passage has defended the faith of the church against them, 
affirming that God is wholly without bodily form, and therefore also invisible; and then, following out his 
scrutiny in a logical manner, he says a few words in answer to the heretics, which I thus translated into 
Latin. (1) 

"But these assertions will perhaps be held to have little authority by those whose desire is to be instructed 
out of the Holy Scriptures in the things of God, and who require that from that source should be drawn the 
proof of the preeminence of the nature of God over that of the human body. Consider whether the Apostle 
does not say the same thing when he speaks thus of Christ:(2)" Who is the image of the invisible God, the 
first born of every creature." The nature of God is not, as some think, visible to some and not to others, for 

the Apostle does not say The image of God who is invisible to men, or to sinners; but he speaks quite 
distinctly of the nature of God in itself, where he says "The image of the invisible God." John also says in his 
Gospel, (3)" No man hath seen God at any time, by which he distinctly declares: to all who can understand, 
that there is no being to whom God is visible; not as if he were naturally visible and, like a being of 
attenuated substance, escaped and eluded our glance; but that, in his own nature it is impossible for him to 
be seen. But perhaps you will ask me my opinion as to the Only begotten himself. Well, if I should say that 
even to him the nature of God is invisible, since it is its very nature to be invisible, do not dismiss my answer 
as if it were impious or absurd, for I will at once give you my reason for it. Observe that seeing is a different 
thing from knowing. Seeing and being seen belong to bodies; to know and to be known belong to the 
intellectual nature. Whatever then is merely a property of bodies, this we must not attribute to the Father or 
the Son; but that which belongs to the nature of Deity governs the relations of the Father and the Son. 
Moreover, Christ himself in the Gospel(4) did not say "No man seeth the Son but the Father nor the Father 
but the Son," but "No man knoweth the Son but the Father, neither doth any one know the Father but the 
Son." By this it is clearly shown that what is called seeing and being seen in the case of bodily existence is 
called knowledge in the case of the Father and the Son: their intercourse is maintained through the power of 
knowledge not through the weakness of visibility. Since, therefore, an incorporeal nature cannot properly be 
said to see or to be seen, therefore in the Gospel it is not said either that the Father is seen by the Son or the 
Son by the Father but that each is known by the other. And if any one should ask how it is that it is said(5)" 
Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God," I think that this text wilt confirm my assertion still more. 
For what else is it to see God with the heart than, according to the explanation I have given above, to 
understand Him with the mind and to know Him?" 

18. This is the chief passage which those who were sent from the East to lay snares for me tried to brand as 
heretical, not only by perversely misunderstanding it, but by falsifying the words. But I could see nothing to 
suspect in it, as also in several similar passages of the writer I was translating, nor did I think that there was 
any reason to leave it out, since there was nothing said in it as to a comparison of the Son with the Father, 
but the question related to the nature of the Deity itself, whether in any sense the word visibility could be 
applied to it. Origen was answering, as I have said before, the heretics who assert that God is visible 
because they say that he is corporeal, the faculty of sight being a property of the body; for which reason the 
Valentinian heretics, of whom I spoke above, declare that the Father begat and the Son was begotten in a 
bodily and visiblesense. He therefore shrank, I presume, from the word Seeing as a suspicious term, and 
says that it is better, when the question turns upon the nature of the Deity, that is, upon the relation of the 
Father and the Son, to use the word which the Lord himself definitely chose, when he said: "No man knoweth 
the Son save the Father, neither doth any know the Father save the Son." He thought that all occasion which 
might be given to the aforesaid heresies would be shut out if, in speaking of the nature of the Deity he used 
the word Knowledge rather than Vision. ' Vision' might seem to afford the heretics some support. The word 
Knowledge on the other hand preserves the true relation of Father and Son in one nature never to be set 
apart; and this is specially confirmed by the authoritative language of the Gospel. Origen thought also that 
this mode of speaking would ensure that the Anthropomorphites should never in any way hear God spoken 
of as visible. It did not seem to me right that this reasoning, since it made no difference between the persons 
of the Trinity, should be completely thrown on one side, though indeed there were some words in the Greek, 
which perhaps were somewhat incautiously used, and which I thought it well to avoid using. I will suppose 
that readers may hesitate in their judgment whether or not even so, it is an argument which can be employed 
with effect against the aforesaid heresies. I will even grant that those who are practised in judging of words 
and their sense in matters of this kind and who, besides being experts, are God-fearing men, men who do 
nothing through strife or vain glory, whose mind is equally free from envy and favour and prejudice may say 
that the point is of little value either for edification or for the combating of heresy; even so, is it not competent 
for them to pass it over and to leave it aside as not valid for the repulse of our adversaries? Suppose it to 
be superfluous, does that make it criminous? How can we count as a criminal passage one which asserts 
the equality of the Father the Son and the Holy Spirit in this point of invisibility? I do not think that any one can 
really think so. I say any one: for there is no evidence that anything contained in my writings is offensive in 
the eyes of my accusers; for, if they had thought so, they would have set down my words as they stood in my 
translation. 

1 9. But what did they actually do? Consider what it was and ask yourself whether the crime is not 
unexampled? Recall the passage which says: " But perhaps you will ask me my opinion as to the 
Only-begotten himself. Well, if I should say that even to him the nature of God is invisible, since it is its very 
nature to be invisible, do not dismiss my answer as if it were impious or absurd, for I will at once give you my 
reason for it." Well, in the place of the words which I had written, "I will at once give you my reason for it" they 
put the following words: " Do not dismiss my, answer as if it were impious or absurd, for, as the Son does not 
see the Father, so the Holy Spirit also does not see the Son." If the man who did this, the man who was sent 
from their monastery(l) to Rome as the greatest expert in calumny, had been employed in the forum and 

had committed this forgery in some secular business every one knows what would be the consequence to 
him according to the public laws, when he was convicted of the crime. But now, since he has left the secular 
life, and has turned his back upon business and entered a monastery, and has connected himself with a 
renowned master, he has learned from him to leave his former self-restraint and to become a furious 
madman: he was quiet before, now he is a mover of sedition: he was peaceable, now he provokes war: 
instead of concord, he is the promoter of strife. For faith he has learnt perfidiousness, for truth forgery. He 
would, you may well think, have been the complete exemplar of wickedness and criminality of this kind, if 
you had not had before you the image of that woman Jezebel. (2) She is the same who made up the 
accusation against Naboth the Zezreelite for the sake of the vineyard, and sent word to the wicked eiders to 
urge against him a false indictment, saying that he had blessed, that is cursed, God and the king. I know not 
whether of the two is to be accounted the happier, she who sends the command or they who obey it in all its 
iniquity. These matters are serious; such a crime, as far as I know, is hitherto all but unheard of in the Church. 
Yet there is something more to be said. What is that you ask. It is this, that those who are guilty should 
become the judges, that those who plotted the accusation should also pronounce the sentence. It is, 
indeed, no new thing for a writer to make a mistake or a slip in his words, and in my opinion it is a venial fault, 
for the Scripture also says,(1) " In many things we all stumble: if any stumbleth not in word the same is a 
perfect man." Is it thought that some word is wrong? Then let it he corrected or amended, or, if expediency 
so require, let it be taken out. But to insert in what another man has written things he never wrote, to put in 
false words for no other purpose than to defame your brother, to corrupt his writings in order to attach a mark 
of infamy to the author, and to insinuate your ideas into the ears of the multitude so as to throw confusion into 
the minds of the simple; and all this with the object of staining a maws reputation among his fellows; I ask 
you whose work this can be except that of him who was a liar from the beginning, and who, from accusing the 
brethren, received the name of Diabolus, which means accuser. For when he to whom I have alluded(2) 
recited at Milan one of these sentences which had been tampered with, and I cried out that what he was 
reading was falsified, he, being asked from whom he had received the copy of the work said that a certain 
woman named Marcella had given it him. As to her, I say nothing, whosoever she may be. I leave her to her 
own conscience and to God. I am content with God's own witness and with yours. When I say yours, I mean 
your own and that of Macarius himself, the saintly man for whom I was doing that work: for both of you read 
my papers themselves at the first, even before they had been completed, and you have by you the 
completely corrected copies. You can bear witness to what I say. The words "as the Son does not see the 
Father, so also the Holy Spirit does not see the Son" not only were never written by me, but on the contrary I 
can point out the forger by whom they were written. If any man says that as the Father does not see the Son, 
so the Son does not see the Father or that the Holy Spirit does not see the Father and the Son as the Father 
sees the Son and the Son and the Holy Spirit, let him be anathema. For he sees, and sees most truly; only, 
as God sees God and the Light sees the Light; not as flesh sees flesh, but as the Holy Spirit sees, not with 
the bodily senses, but by the powers of the Deity. I say, if any one denies this let him be anathema for all 
eternity. But as the Apostle says,(1) "He that troubles you shall bear his judgment, whosoever he be." 
20. I remember indeed that one of these people, when he was convicted of having falsified this passage, 
answered me that it was so in the Greek, but that I had, of purpose, changed it in the Latin. I do not indeed, 
treat this as a serious accusation because, though what they say is untrue yet, even supposing that the 
words did stand so in the Greek, and I had changed them in the Latin, this is nothing more than I had said in 
my Preface that I should do. If I had done this with the view of making an expression which in the Greek was 
calculated to make men stumble run more suitably in the Latin, I should have been acting only according to 
my expressed purpose and plan. But I say to my accusers You certainly did not find these words in the Latin 
copies of my work. Whence then did it come into the papers from which he was reading? I, the translator, did 
not so write it. Whence then came the words which you who have got no such words of thine turn into a 
ground of accusation? Am I to be accused on the ground of your forgeries? I put the matter in the plainest 
possible way. There are four books of the work which I translated; and in these books discussions about the 
Trinity occur in a scattered way, almost as much as one in each page. Let any man read the whole of these 
and say whether in any passage of my translation such an opinion concerning the Trinity can be found as 
that which they calumniously represent as occurring in this chapter. If such an opinion can be found, then 
men may believe that this chapter also is composed in the sense which they pretend. But if in the whole 
body of these books no such difference of the persons of the Trinity exists anywhere, would not a critic be 
mad or fatuous if he decided, on the strength of a single paragraph, that a writer had given his adherence to 
a heresy which in the thousand or so other paragraphs of his work he had combated? But the circumstances 
of the case are by themselves sufficient to shew the truth to any one who has his wits about him. For if this 
man had really found the passage in question in my papers, and had felt a difficulty in what he read, he 
would of course have brought the documents to me and have at once asked for explanations, since, as you 
well know, we were living as neighbours in Rome. Up to that time we often saw one another, greeted one 
another as friends, and joined together in prayer; and therefore he would certainly have conferred with me 

about the points which appeared to him objectionable; he would have asked me how had translated them, 
and how they stood in the Greek. 

21 . 1 am sure that he would have felt that he had enjoyed a triumph if he could have shown that through his 
representations I had been induced to correct anything that I had said or written. Or, if he had been driven by 
his mental excitement to expose the error publicly instead of correcting it, he certainly would not have waited 
till I had left Rome to attack me, when he might have faced me there and put me to silence. But he was 
deterred by the consciousness that he was acting falsely; and therefore he did not bring to me as their 
author the documents which he was determined to incriminate, but carried them round to private houses, to 
ladies, to monasteries, to Christian men one by one, wherever he might make trouble by his ex parte 
statements. And he did this just when he was about to leave Rome, so that he might not be arraigned and 
made to give an account of his actions. Afterwards, by the directions, as I am told, of his master, he went 
about all through Italy, accusing me, stirring up the people, throwing confusion into the churches, poisoning 
even the minds of the bishops, and everywhere representing my forbearance as an acknowledgment that I 
was in the wrong. Such are the arts of the disciple. Meanwhile the master, out in the East, who had said in his 
letter to Vigilantius(l) "Through my labour the Latins know all that is good in Origen and are ignorant of all 
that is bad," set to work upon the very books which I had translated, and in his new translation inserted all 
that I had left out as untrustworthy, so that now, the contrary of what he had boasted has come to pass. The 
Romans by his labour know all that is bad in Origen and are ignorant of all that is good. By this means be 
endeavours to draw not Origen only but me also under the suspicion of heresy: and he goes on 
unceasingly sending out these dogs of his to bark against the in every city and village, and to attack me with 
their calumnies when I am quietly passing on a journey, and to attempt every speakable and unspeakable 
mischief against me. What crime, I ask you, have I committed in doing exactly what you have done? If you 
call me wicked For following your example, what judgment must you pronounce upon yourself? 
22. But now I will turn the tables and put my accuser to the question. Tell me, O great master, if there is 
anything to blame in a writer, is the blame to be laid on one who reads or translates his works? Heaven 
forbid, he will say; certainly not; why do you try to circumvent me by your enigmatical questions? Am not I 
myself both a reader and a translator of Origen? Read my translations and see if you can find any one of his 
peculiar doctrines in them; especially any of those which I now mark for condemnation. When driven to the 
point he says: 

"If you wish thoroughly to see how abhorent the very suggestion of such doctrines has always been to me, 
read my Commentaries on the Epistle of Paul to the Ephesians, and you will see from what I have written 
there what an opinion I formed of him from reading and translating his works. "(1) 

I ask, can we accept this man as a great and grave teacher, who in one of his works praises Origen and in 
another condemns him? who in his Introductions calls him a master second only to the Apostles, but now 
calls him a heretic? What heretic, I ask, was ever called a master of the churches? "It is true, he replies, I was 
wrong about this hut why do you go on bringing up this unfortunate Preface(2) against me? Read my 
Commentaries, and especially those which I have designated." Is there any one who will think this 
satisfactory? He has composed a great many books, in almost all of which he trumpets forth the praises of 
Origen to the skies: these books through all these years have been read and are being read by all men: 
many of these readers after accepting his opinions have left this world and gone into the presence of the 
Lord. They hold the opinion about Origen which they had learnt from the statements of this man, and they 
departed in hope that, according to this man's assurance, they would find him there as a master second 
only to the Apostles; but if we are to trust his present writings, they have found him in a state of 
condemnation, among the impious heretics and the heathen. Is this man now to turn round from his former 
contention, and to say, "For some thirty years I have been, in my studies and in my writings, praising Origen 
as equal to the Apostles, but now I pronounce him a heretic?" How is this? Has he come upon some new 
books of his which he had never read before? Not at all. It is from these same sayings of Origen that he 
formerly called him an Apostle and now calls him a heretic. But it is impossible that this should really have 
been so. For either he was right in his former praises, and his judgment has since been perverted by some 
kind of extreme ill feeling, and in that case no attention is to be paid to him; or else his former praises were 
mistaken, and he is now condemning himself, and in that case what judgment does he think others will pass 
upon him, when, according to the words of the Apostle, (1) he passes condemnation on himself. 
22 (a). But, "Surely," he says, "this judgment is done away with since I have repented." Not so fast! We all 
err, it is true, and especially in word; and we all may repent of our errors. But can a man do penance, and 
accuse others, and judge and condemn them, all in the same moment? That would be as if a harlot who had 
abstained from her harlotry for a night or two, should feel called upon to begin writing laws in favour of 
chastity, and not only to enact these laws, but to proceed to throw down the monuments of all the women 
who have died, because she suspected that they had led lives like her own. You do penance for having 
formerly been a heretic, and you do right. But what has that to do with me who never was a heretic at all? You 
are right in doing penance for your error: but the true way of doing penance is, not by accusing others but by 

crying for mercy, not by condemning but by weeping. For what sincerity can there be in penitence when the 
penitent makes a decree of indulgence for himself? He who repents of what be has spoken ill does not cure 
his wound by speaking ill again, but by keeping silence. For thus it is written:[1] "Thou hast sinned, be at 
peace." But now you first bring yourself in a criminal, then you absolve yourself from your crime, and forthwith 
change yourself from a criminal into a judge. This may be no trouble to you who thus mock at us, but it is a 
trouble to us if we suffer ourselves to be mocked by you. 

23. But let us come to these two Commentaries which he alone excepts from the general condemnation and 
renunciation which he pronounces upon all the rest of his works we shall see with what modesty and 
self-restraint he conducts himself in these: Remember that it is by these alone that he has chosen to prove 
that he is sound in the faith, and that he is altogether opposed to Origen. Let us examine then as witnesses 
these two books which alone of all his writings are satisfactory to him, namely, the three books of his 
commentary on the Epistle of Paul to the Ephesians, and the single book (I think) on Ecclesiastes. Let us for 
a moment look into the one which comes forward first, the Commentary on the Epistle to the Ephesians. 
Even here recognize in his arguments the influence of him who is as his fellow, his partner and his brother 
mystic, to use his own expression. [2] And first of all, as to these poor weak women about whom he makes 
himself merry, because they say that after the resurrection they will not have their frail bodies since they will 
be like the angels. Let us hear what he has to say about them. In the third book of his Commentaries on the 
Epistle of Paul to the Ephesians, on the passage in which it is said, [3] "He who loveth his own wife loveth 
himself, for no man ever hated his own flesh;" after a few other remarks, he says: 

"Let us men then cherish our wives and let our souls cherish our bodies in such a way as that the wives may 
be turned into men and the bodies into spirits, and that there maybe no difference of sex but that, as among 
the angels there is neither male nor female, so we who are to be like the angels may begin here to be what it 
is promised that we shall be in heaven." 

24. How, I ask, can you, seeing that your Commentaries contain such doctrines, put them forward to prove 
your soundness in the faith, and to confute those ideas which you reprove? How do your words tend to 
reprove those women whom we have spoken of? Besides, has any woman gone so far as to say what you 
write, namely, that women are to be turned into men and bodies into souls? If bodies are to be turned into 
spirits, then, according to you, there will be no resurrection not only of the flesh but even of the body, which 
you admit to be the doctrine even of those whom you have set down as heretics. Where are we to look any 
more for the body, if it is reduced to a spirit? In that case everything will be spirit, the body will be nowhere. 
And again, if the wives are to be turned into men, according to this suggestion of yours, that there is to be no 
difference of sex whatever, by which I suppose you mean that the female sex will entirely cease, being 
converted into the male, and the male sex will alone remain; I am not sure that you would have the 
permission of the women to speak here on behalf of their sex. But, even suppose that they grant you this, 
then with what consistency can you argue that the male sex is any longer necessary, when the female is 
shown not to be necessary? for there is a natural bond which unites the sexes in mutual dependence, so 
that, if one does not exist, there is no need of the other. And further, if it is man alone who is to receive at the 
resurrection the form of clay which was originally given in paradise, what becomes of that which is 
written, [1]"He made them male and female, and blessed them"? And then, if, as both you yourself say, and 
also these poor women whom you arraign, there is neither man nor woman, how can bodies be turned into 
souls, or women into men, since Paradise does not allow the existence of either sex, nor does the likeness 
of angels, as you say, admit it? And I marvel how you can demand from others a strict opinion upon the 
continuance of the diversity of sex when you yourself, as soon as you begin to discuss it, find yourself 
involved in so many knotty questions that to evolve yourself out of them becomes impossible. How much 
more right would your action be if you were to imitate us whom you blame in such matters as these and 
allow God to be the only judge of them, as is indeed the truth. It would be far better for you to confess your 
ignorance of them than to write things which in a little while you have to condemn. I should like to ask my 
accuser whether he can conscientiously say that he would ever have found, I do not say in any, even the 
least, work of mine, but even in any familiar letter which I might have written carelessly to a friend, such things 
as that bodies were to be turned into spirits and wives into men, were it not that he had put them forward as if 
he wished thorn to be inserted in brazen letters on the gates of cities, and recited in the forum, in the Senate 
house and in front of the rostra. If he had found any such thing in my writings, imagine how many heads of 
accusation he would have set down, how many volumes he would have compiled, how he would be 
assailing me with all the arms and shafts of that teeming breast of his; how he would have said: "I tell you that 
he is deceiving you by speaking of the resurrection of the body, for he denies the resurrection of the flesh; or 
even if he confesses the resurrection of the flesh he denies that of the members and the sex: but, if you do 
not believe me, behold and see the very words of his letter, in which he says that bodies are to be turned 
into souls and wives into men." Yet, when you write this, we are not to call you a heretic, but are to give 
satisfaction to you as though you were our master. And as for those women whom you have attacked with 
your indecent reproaches, they will, when they stand before the judgment seat of Christ, bring forward what 

you have taught them in these Commentaries as well as the things which you have since written, with insults 
which show that you had forgotten yourself; and both the one and the other will be read out there, where the 
favour of men will have ceased, and the applause for which you pay by flattery will be silent, and they will be 
judged together with their author for these words and deeds of yours before Christ the righteous judge. 

25. But now let us go on to discuss what he writes further as to God's judgment,[1] for this too is a matter of 
the faith. We shall find that as he alters the faith about the resurrection of the flesh in other points, so he does 
in reference to God's judgment. In the first book of the Commentaries on the Ep. of Paul to the Ephesians, he 
deals with that passage in which the Apostle says: "Even as he chose us in him before the foundation of the 
world that we should be holy and without blemish before him." On this he says: 

"For the foundation of the world the Greek has <greek>katabolhs</greek> <greek>kosmou</greek>. The 
word <greek>katabo</greek><s221<greek>h</greek> does not mean the same which we understand by 
foundation. We, therefore, shall not attempt to render a word for a word, which is here impossible on account 
of the poverty of our language and also the novelty of the sense, and because, as some one has said, the 
Greeks have a larger discourse and a happier tongue than ours. We must explain the force of the word by 
some sort of periphrasis. <greek>katabolh</greek> is properly used when something is thrown down and is 
cast from a higher into a lower place, or else when anything is taking its beginning. Hence those who lay the 
first foundations of future houses are said <greek>katabeblhkenai</greek>, that is to have thrown down the 
first foundations. Paul thus used the word to show that God framed all things out of nothing: he assigned to 
Him not a creation nor a building up, nor a making but a <greek>katabolh</greek>, that is, a beginning of a 
foundation. He wishes to show that there was not some other thing antecedent to creatures, and out of which 
creatures were formed, as is held by the Manichaeans and other heretics, who begin with a maker and a 
material, but that all things were made out of nothing. But, as to our election to be holy and without blemish 
before him, that is, before God, previously to the making of the world, of which the Apostle speaks, this 
belongs to the foreknowledge of God, to whom all future things are as if they were already done, and all 
things are known before they come into being: as Paul is predestinated in the womb of his mother, and 
Jeremiah before his birth is sanctified, chosen, and confirmed, and, as it type of Christ, is sent to be a 
prophet of the nations." 

26. So far he has set forth a single exposition of the passage; but on whose authority he wishes us to receive 
this interpretation he has not made clear. What he has done is to make void this first interpretation by what 
comes after: for he goes on: "But there is another, who tries to show that God is just." He therefore points out 
that by that first exposition the justice of God is not vindicated, which of course is contrary to the faith: and he 
goes on through the mouth of this 'other,' whose assertions he evidently wishes to exhibit as being what is 
everywhere held for catholic and indubitable, to give a testimony by which he will, as he asserts, seek to 
show that God is just. Let us see then what this 'other man' says, who proclaims the justice of God. 
"Another man," he says, "who seeks to vindicate the justice of God, argues that it is not according to his own 
pre-judgment and knowledge, but according to the merit of the elect that God's choice of men is determined; 
and he says that, before the creation of the visible world, of sky and earth and seas and all that they contain, 
there existed other invisible creatures, among which also were souls; and that these souls, for reasons 
known to God alone, were cast down[1] into this vale of tears, this place of our mournful pilgrimage, and that 
this is shewn by the prayer uttered by a holy man of old who, having his habitation fixed here, yet longed to 
return to his original abode: "Woe is me that my sojourning is prolonged, that I have my habitation among 
the inhabitants of Kedar,"[1] "my soul has long been a pilgrim," and again "O wretched man that I am, who 
will deliver me from the body of this death?"[2] and in another place "It is better to return and be with 

Christ, "[3] and elsewhere, "Before I was brought low, I sinned;"[4] and other words of a like character." 
This relates, they say to the souls' condition before they were cast down into the world. The reader of this 
will be apt to say, Master, you seem to tell us, yet do not really tell us, who these men are who say this, that 
the souls of men existed before they were cast down into the world. Then he will reply, "Was I not right in 
saying that you were blind, and no better than a mole? Did I not say before, that they are those who assert 
that God is just,-by which, if you had any sense at all, you would understand that I mean myself: for I am not 
such a heretic as not to include myself among those who vindicate the justice of God, which indeed all must 
do who have the least tincture of good sense." Then they will reply, "Tell us, then, master, tell us, what it is 
that these men say, and you among them? We understand that you say that before the souls were cast 
down into the world, and before the world, which was made up of souls, had been cast down together with its 
inhabitants into the abyss, God chose Paul and those like him, who were holy and undefiled. But if men are 
chosen, they are chosen out of a great number; there must be many in a worse condition out of whom the 
election is made. However, just as in the Babylonian captivity, when Nebuchadnezzar carried away the 
people into Chaldaea, Ezekiel and Daniel and the Three Children, and Haggai and Zechariah were sent 
with them, not because they deserved to become captives, but that they might be a comfort to those who 
were carried away; so also, in that 'casting down' of the world, those who had been chosen by God before 
the world was, were sent to instruct and train the sinful souls, so that these, through their preaching, might 

return to the place from which they had fallen; and this is what is meant by the words of the eighty-ninth 
Psalm:[5] "Lord thou hast been our refuge in generation and in offspring, before the mountains were 
established, or the earth and the world were made;" that is to say, that before the world was made, and a 
beginning was made of the generation of all things, God was a refuge to his saints." 

27. Such are the doctrines which are to be found in these works of yours which you single out from all that 
you have written, and which you desire men to read over again to the prejudice of all the rest. It is in these 
very Commentaries that these doctrines are written. There was, yon say, an invisible world before this 
visible one came into being. You say that in this world, along with the other inhabitants, that is the angels, 
there were also souls. You say that these souls, for reasons known to God alone, enter into bodies at the 
time of birth in this visible world: those souls, you say, who in a former age had been inhabitants of heaven, 
now dwell here, on this earth, and that not without reference to certain acts which they had committed while 
they lived there. You say further that all the saints, such as Paul and others like him in each generation were 
predestinated by God for the purpose of recalling them by their preaching to that habitation from which they 
had fallen: and all this you, support by very copious warranties of Scripture. But are not these statements 
precisely those for which you now arraign Origen, and for which alone you demand that he should be 
condemned? What 'other' than him who says such things as these do you condemn in your writings? And 
yet if these statements are to be condemned, as you now urge, you will first pronounce judgment on these 
statements, and then find that you have condemned yourself by anticipation. No other refuge remains for 
you. There is no room for any of these twists and turns for which you blame others: for it is just when you are 
doing penance and have been converted, when you have been corrected and put in the way of 
amendment, that you have stamped these books with fresh authority, to prove to us by their means what 
your opinion was as to the doctrines which ought to be condemned: and therefore what you have there 
written must be taken as if we heard you now distinctly making the statements contained in them. Yet in 
these very books you yourself make the statements which you say are to be condemned. But no! you will 
say: it is not I that make them. It is the 'other' who thus speaks, that is, of course, the man who I now declare 
ought to be condemned. Well, let us recall, if you please, that particular line in which you change the person 
of the speaker, that we may see who it is whom you represent as building up this strange theory. You say, 
then, that it is 'another,' who is endeavouring to show that God is just, who says these things which we have 
set down just above. If you say that this 'other' who by this assertion of his proves God to be just is separate 
and divers from yourself, what then, I ask, is your own opinion? Must we say that you deny that God is just? 
Oh, great Master, you who see so sharply, and are so hard upon the moles that have no eyes:[1] you seem 
to have got yourself into a most impossible position, where you are shut in on every side. Either you must 
deny that God is just by declaring yourself other than, and contrary to, him who says these things, or if you 
confess God to be just, as all the Church does, then it is you yourself who make the assertions in question; in 
which case the sentence which you pass upon another falls upon you, you are thrust through with your own 
spear. I think that this is enough for your conviction before the most righteous judges whose judgment 
anticipates that of God: not that they would condemn the man who sees the mote in his brother's eye but 
does not see the beam in his own; but they would try to bring him to a better mind and to true repentance. 

28. But it is possible that this particular passage may have escaped his observation, although he thought 
that he had revised these books so as to make them perfectly clear, and put them forward as giving a 
profession of his faith, to the prejudice of all the rest. Let us see then what are his opinions in other parts. In 
the same book when he comes to the passage where it is written "According to the good pleasure of his will, 
to the praise of his glory," he makes these remarks among others: 

"Here certain men seize upon the opportunity to introduce their peculiar views: they believe that before the 
foundation of the world, the souls of men dwelt in the heavenly Jerusalem with the angels, and with all the 
other celestial powers. They think that it would be impossible, in accordance with the good pleasure of God, 
and the praise of his glory and of his grace, to explain the fact that some men are born poor and barbarous, 
in slavery and weakness, while others are born as wealthy Roman citizens, free and with strong health; that 
some are born in a low, some in a high station, that they are born in different countries, in different parts of the 
world: unless there are some antecedent causes for which each individual soul had its lot assigned 
according to its merits. Moreover, the passage which some think that they understand, (though they do not) 
the passage of the Epistle to the Romans which says, [2] "Hath not the potter a right over the clay from the 
same lump to make one part a vessel unto honour, and another unto dishonour?" these men take as 
supporting this same view; for they argue that, just as the distinction between leading a good life or a bad, 
one of labour or self-indulgence, would be of little account if we did not believe in the judgment of God which 
is to come, so also the difference of conditions under which men are born would impugn the justice of God 
unless they were the results of the soul's previous deserts. For, if we do not accept this view, they say, it 
cannot be 'the good pleasure of God' nor 'to the praise of his glory and grace' that he should have chosen 
some before the foundation of the world to be holy and undefiled, and to partake of the adoption through 
Jesus Christ, and should have appointed others to the lowest position and to everlasting punishment; he 

could not have loved Jacob before he came forth from the womb and hated Esau before he had done 
anything worthy of hatred, unless there were some antecedent causes which would, if we knew them, prove 
God to be just." 

29. What can be more distinct than this statement? What could possibly be thought or said whether by 
Origen or by any of those whom you say that you condemn, which would be clearer than this, that the 
inequality of conditions which exists among those who are born into this world is ascribed to the justice of 
God? You say that the cause of the salvation or perdition of each soul is to be found in itself, that is, in the 
passions and dispositions which it has shown in its previous life in that new Jerusalem which is the mother of 
us all. "But this too," he will say no doubt, "is not said by myself. I described it as the opinion of another: 
moreover, I used the expression 'they seize upon the opportunity.'" Well, I do not deny that you make it 
appear that you are speaking of another. But you have not denied that this man about whom you are 
speaking is in agreement and accord with you: you have not said that he is in opposition or hostility to you. 
For, when you use this formula of 'another' in reference to one who is really opposed to you, you habitually, 
after setting down a few of his words, at once impugn and overthrow them: you do this in the case of Marcion, 
Valentinus, Arius and others. But when, as in this instance, you use, indeed, this formula of 'another,' but 
report his words fortified by the strongest assertions and by the most abundant testimonies of Scripture, is it 
not evident even to us who are so slow of understanding, and whom you speak of as 'moles,' that he whose 
words you set down and do not overthrow, is no other than yourself, and that we have here a case of the 
figure well known to rhetoricians, when they use another man's person to set forth their own opinions. Such 
figures are resorted to by rhetoricians when they are afraid of offending particular people, or when they wish 
to avoid exciting ill-will against themselves. But, if you think that you have avoided blame by putting forward 
'another' as the author of these statements, how much more free from it is he whom you accuse. For his 
mode of action is much more cautious. He is not content with merely saying, "This is what others say," or "so 
some men think," but, "As to this or that I do not decide, I only suggest," and, "If this seems to any one more 
probable, let him hold to it, putting the other aside." He has been very careful in his statements, as you know; 
and yet you summon him to be tried and condemned. You think that you have escaped because you speak 
of 'another': but the points on which you condemn him are precisely those in which you follow and imitate 
him. 

30. But let us proceed in our study of these Commentaries; otherwise, in dwelling too long upon a few 
special points, we may be prevented from taking notice of the greater number. In the same book and the 
same passage[1] are the words "To the end that we should be unto the praise of his glory, we who had 
before hoped in Christ." His comment is: 

"If it had been simply said 'We have trusted in Christ,' and there had not been the prefix 'before,' which 
stands in the Greek <greek>prohlpikotes</greek>, the sense would be quite clear, namely, that those who 
have hoped in Christ have been chosen in due order[2] and have been predestinated according to the 
purpose of him who orders all things according to the counsel of his own will. But, as it stands, the addition of 
the preposition 'before' compels us to explain it according to the same ideas which we argued in a former 
place to be necessary for the explanation of the passage, "Who hath blessed us with every spiritual 
blessing in the heavenly places in Christ, even as he chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that 
we should be holy and without blemish before him:" namely, that God had blessed us before in heaven with 
all spiritual blessing, and had chosen us before the world was framed; and that thus we are said to have 
hoped in Christ 'before,' that is, in the time when we were elected and predestinated and blessed in 
heaven." 

31 . But let this pass, for what follows is of more importance. I thank God that he has relieved me from a very 
serious burden of suspicion. Perhaps I seemed to some people to be acting contentiously and 
calumniously when I insinuated that, according to a figure of rhetoric, when he spoke of 'another' he meant 
himself. But to prevent all further doubt from resting in the minds of his hearers, he has himself declared that it 
is so. Like a truly good teacher, who would not wish any ambiguity about his sayings to remain in the minds 
of his pupils, he has been so good as to shew quite clearly who that 'other' was of whom he had spoken 
before. He therefore says, "But, as it stands, the addition of the preposition before' leads us to explain it 
according to the ideas which we argued in a former place to be necessary." You see, he means that it is we, 
and not some other, no one knows who, as you may have thought, who in the former place argued thus, 
when we were expounding the words "Who hath blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly 
places in Christ." It was to meet the case of the less intelligent persons, who might think that what was there 
said was spoken by some one else, to prevent any error on the point remaining in the minds of those whom 
he had begged to read these books so that they might see what his opinion of Origen was, that he now 
acknowledges this opinion as his own, and, no longer speaking of another,' says what we have quoted 
before; namely, that, as God had before blessed us with all spiritual blessing in Christ in the heavenly 
places, and had chosen us before the foundation of the world; so also we are said to have trusted in Christ 
at that former time in which we were elected and predestinated and blessed in heaven. He himself 

therefore, as it seems to me, has by his own testimony, absolved me from all suspicion of speaking a 
calumny when I say that that 'other' is no 'other' than himself. 

30 (a). But, I undertook to shew something of more importance still in what follows. After he had said that we 
had hoped in Christ before, and that in the time before the foundation of the world and before we were born 
in our bodies, we had been blessed and chosen in heaven, he again introduces that 'other' of his, and says: 
"Another, who does not admit this doctrine that we bad a previous existence and had hope in Christ before 
we lived in this body, would have us understand the matter in his own way." In this passage this 'other,' 
whoever he may be, has put forth all his ill savour. Let him tell us then whom he means by this 'other' who 
does not admit this opinion that before we lived in this body we both existed and hoped in Christ-for which 
he requires us to condemn Origen. Whom does he wish us to understand by this 'other'? Is it some one 
opposed to himself? What do you say, great master? You are pressed by that two-horned dilemma of which 
you are so fond of speaking to your disciples. For, if you say that by this 'other' who does not admit that 
souls existed before they lived in the body you mean yourself, you have betrayed the secret which in the 
previous passages was concealed. It is now found out that you by your own confession are that other who 
have fashioned all the doctrines of which you now demand the condemnation. But if we are not to believe 
you to be the 'other' of the former passage, so that the doctrines which you now impugn may not be 
ascribed to you, we have no right to consider you in this case to be the 'other' who does not admit that our 
souls existed before we lived in bodies. Choose either side you like as the ground of your acquittal. This 
'other,' whom you so frequently bring in, are we to understand by him yourself or some one else? Do you 
wish that he should be thought by us to be a catholic or a heretic? Is he to be acquitted or condemned? If 
that 'other' of yours is a catholic, the man who said in the former passage that before this visible world our 
souls had their abode among the angels and the other heavenly powers in the heavenly places in 
Jerusalem which is above, and that they there contracted those dispositions which caused the diversities of 
their birth into the world and of the other conditions to which they are now subject, then these must be 
esteemed to be catholic doctrines, and we know that it is an impiety to condemn what is catholic. But if yon 
call this 'other' a heretic, you must also brand as a heretic the 'other' who will not admit that souls existed and 
hoped in Christ before they were born in the body. Which way can you get out of this dilemma, my master? 
Whither will you break forth? To what place will you escape? Whichever way you betake yourself, you will 
stick fast. Not only is there no avenue by which you can withdraw yourself; there is not even the least 
breathing space left you. Is this all the profit you have gained from Alexander's Commentaries on Aristotle, 
and Porphyry's Introduction? Is this the result of the training of all those great Philosophers by whom you tell 
us you were educated, with all their learning, Greek and Latin, and Jewish into the bargain? Have they 
ended by bringing you into these inextricable straits, in which you are so pitifully confined that the very Alps 
could give you no refuge? 

31 (a). But let us spare him now. We must bend to our examination of the books; for, to use an expression of 
his own, a great work leaves no time for sleep; though indeed he himself spares nobody, and does not so, 
much use reasonable speech as lash with the scourge of his tongue whomsoever he pleases; and any one 
who refuses to flatter him must expect to be branded at once as a heretic both in his treatises and in 
hundreds of letters sent to all parts of the world. Let us not follow his example, but rather that of the patriarch 
David, who, when he had surprised his enemy Saul in the cave and might have slain him, refused to do so, 
but spared him. This man knows well how often I have done the same by him, both in word and deed; and if 
he does not choose to confess it, he has it fixed at least in his mind and conscience. I will pardon him then, 
though he never pardons others, but condemns men for their words without any consideration or charity; and 
for the present I will let him come out from this pit, until he falls into that other, from which all of us together will 
be unable to deliver him, however much we may wish and strive. He has to explain how it comes to pass 
that, in the first passage, where that doctrine was being asserted which sought to vindicate the justice of 
God, he really meant to speak of some one else, and that that person was the one whom he now wishes to 
have condemned; yet in the second passage, where the speaker says the opposite and does not admit 
what has been said before, the 'other' whom he speaks of means himself. It is possible that he may feel 
sure that this was what he meant, but that he was not able to make it plain in writing. Let us give him the 
benefit of the doubt, and assume that in this latter passage the 'other' is himself, and that it is he who does 
not admit the doctrine which holds that before our life in the body began our souls existed and hoped in 
Christ. I will quote the entire passage, and prosecute a fresh and diligent inquiry to see what it tends to. 
"Another who does not admit this doctrine that before our life in the body began our souls existed and 
trusted in Christ, changes the sense of the passage so as to mean that, in the advent of our Lord and 
Saviour, when in his name every knee shall bow, of things heavenly and earthly and infernal, and every 
tongue shall confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father, when all things shall be made 
subject to him, there will be some who are made subject willingly, but others only by necessity; and that 
those who before his coming in his majesty have hoped in him will be to the praise of his glory; that these 
therefore are called[2] Fore-hopers; but that those who are only found to believe through necessity, when 

even the devil and his angels will be unable to reject Christ as King are to be called simply Hopers. and that 
they are not for the praise of his glory. And this we see partly fulfilled even now, since we can distinguish 
between the reward of those who follow God willingly and those who follow Him through necessity. But,[1] 
whether by pretence or in truth, let Christ be proclaimed: only let each of them understand, both the Hopers 
and the Fore-hopers, that for the difference of their hope they will receive different rewards." 

32. In this passage all room for doubt is removed. In the former passage you said that those who before 
hoped in Christ are those who, before they were born in bodies in this visible world, dwelt in heaven and had 
hope in Christ. But, to prevent this being supposed to be your own doctrine, you introduced another 
interpretation, namely, that at that time when every knee shall bow to Jesus as Lord, the universal creation, 
of things heavenly, earthly and infernal, will consist of persons subjected to him in two different ways, some 
willingly, some by necessity. You add that all the saints, who now believe on him through the word of 
preaching are subject to him willingly, and that these are called Fore-hopers, that is those who have 
beforehand hoped in Christ: hut that those who are subject to him by necessity are those who have not 
believed now through the preaching of the word, but who then will no longer be able to deny him, such as the 
devil and his angels, and those who with them have been obliged by necessity to believe: and that all 
these, and amongst them the devil and his angels, who shall afterwards Believe, shall not be called 
Fore-hopers, Because that name belongs to those who believed in Christ before, and hoped in him willingly, 
whereas these others only did so afterward and by necessity: and you add that, consequently, they will 
receive different rewards. But you assign rewards, though they may be inferior ones, to all, even to those 
who now do not believe, that is, the devil and his angels; and, though now you hold the mere opinion, not the 
mature judgment, of another worthy of condemnation who thinks it possible that the devil may one day have 
a respite from punishment, you bring him into the kingdom of God to receive the second reward. This also 
you wish us to understand, that, as it matters not whether Christ is preached in truth or by necessity, so it is of 
no consequence whether we believe by necessity or willingly. 

33. These are the things which we learn from the Commentaries to which you direct us. These are the rules 
for the confusion[2] of our faith which you teach us. You wish us to condemn in others what you teach yourself 
in private. For, of course, if you are now that 'other' who do not admit the doctrine which holds that our souls 
existed in heaven before they were joined to bodies, you are undoubtedly the man who not only promise 
pardon to the devil and his angels and all unbelievers but also undertake that they shall be endowed with 
rewards of the second order. But if you deny this second doctrine, you must be the author of that which we 
first discussed. And I wonder that those able and learned men who read these writings of his about which he 
now writes in commendation, should laugh at me because he calls me a mole, and should not feel that he is 
all the while thinking of them much more as moles, for not seeing that the things I bare pointed out are 
imbedded in his books. For, if he thought that they could understand as well as read, he would never have 
requested them to get a copy of those books with a view to the condemnation of the very things which their 
master there teaches; for these very things which he urges us to condemn are most plainly and manifestly 
contained in them. I have shewn, at all events, that he himself in these chosen Commentaries of his asserts 
the doctrines which he desires to have condemned in another man's books, namely, that souls existed in 
heaven before they were born in bodies in this world, and that all sinners and unbelievers, together with the 
devil and his angels, will, at the thee when every knee shall bow to Jesus of things heavenly and things 
earthly and things infernal, not only receive pardon, but also be summoned to receive the second order of 
rewards. 

34. It is indeed a thing so unheard of to believe that a man can pronounce condemnation on the fabric which 
he himself has reared, that I doubt not it will with difficulty win credit; and I feel that what you desire is that I 
should, if possible, produce from his writings instances of this so clear that no room whatever may be left for 
doubting; that is, passages in which that 'other' of which be is so fond is not named at all; and this I will do. In 
this same book he declares his belief that, ill the end of the age,[1] Christ and his saints will have their throne 
above the demons in such a way that the demons themselves will act according to the will of Christ and his 
saints who reign over them. In commenting upon the passage where the Apostle says, [2] "That in the ages 
to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus," after a few 
other remarks, he says: 

"We who formerly were held bound by the law of the infernal place, and, through our vices and sins were 
given over both to the works of the flesh and to punishment, shall now reign with Christ and sit together with 
him. But we shall sit, not in some kind of low place, but[1] above all Principalities and power and Dominion, 
and every name that is named not only in this age but in the age to come. For, if Christ has been raised from 
the dead, and sits at the right hand of God in heavenly places, far above all Principality and Power and 
Dominion, and above every name that is named, not only in this age but in the age to come, we also must of 
necessity sit and reign with Christ and sit above those things above which he sits. But the careful reader will 
at this point make his inquiry and say: What? is man then greater than the angels and all the powers of 
heaven? I make answer, though it is hazardous to do so, that the Principalities and Powers and Mights and 

Dominions, and all names that are named not only in this age but in that which is to come must refer (since 
all things are subjected to the feet of Christ) not to the good part of them but the opposite; the Apostle means 
by these expressions the rebellious angels, and the prince of this world, and Lucifer who once was the 
morning star, over whom in the end of the age the saints must sit with Christ, who communicates this privilege 
to them. These powers are now infernal powers, abusing their freedom for the worst purposes, wandering 
everywhere and running together down the steep places of sin. But when they have Christ and the saints 
sitting on thrones above them, they will begin to be ruled according to the will of those who reign over them." 
Surely there is no ambiguity remaining' here; the passage needs no one to bring out its points. He says in 
the most distinct terms, without bringing in the person of any 'other,' that the rebellious angels and the prince 
of this world, and Lucifer' who once was the morning star, will in the end, when Christ sits and reigns over 
them with his saints, be fellows and sharers, not only of his kingdom but also of his will; for to act according to 
the will of Christ and of all his saints is to have arrived at the highest blessedness, and the perfection which 
we are taught in the Lord's Prayer to ask of the Father is none other than this, that his will may be done in 
earth as it is in heaven. 

35. But I beg yon to listen patiently as I follow him in his continual recurrence to these same doctrines-not 
indeed in all that he says of them, for it is so much that I should have to write many volumes if I tried to 
exhaust its but as much as will satisfy the reader that it is not by chance that he slips into these notions which 
he now proposes for imitation to his disciples, but that he supports them by large and frequent assertion. Let 
us see what it is that he teaches us in these the most approved of his Commentaries. In this same book he 
teaches that: there is for men the possibility of both rising and falling, not in the present age only but in that 
which is to come. On the passage in which the words occur: "Far above all Principality and Power and Might 
and Dominion, and every name that is named not only in this age but in that which is to come," he has the 
following among other remarks: 

"If, however, there are Principalities, Virtues, Powers and Dominions, they must necessarily have subjects 
who fear them and serve them and gain power from their strength; and this gradation of offices will exist not 
only in the present age but in that which is to come; and it must be possible that one may rise through these 
various stages of advancement and honour, while another sinks, that there will be risings and failings, and 
that our spirits may pass under each of these Powers, Virtues, Principalities, and Dominions one after the, 
other." 

36. I will address the Master in one of his own phrases. [1] Why, after nearly four hundred years, do you give 
such teachings as these to the Latin people with their peaceable and simple minds! Why do you inflict on 
unaccustomed ears new-sounding words, which no one finds in the writings of the Apostles? I beseech you, 
spare the ears of the Romans, spare that faith which the Apostle praised. [2] Why do you bring out: in public 
what Peter and Paul were unwilling to publish? Did not the Christian world exist without any of these things 
until— not as you say I made my translations, but up to the thee when you wrote what I have quoted that is till 
some fifteen years ago? For what is this teaching of yours, that in the world to come there will still be risings 
and fallings,— that some will go forward and some go back? If that be true, then what you say, that in this 
world life is either acquired or lost, is not true; unless it has some occult meaning. I do not find that you repent 
of any of these doctrines which these commentaries contain. Again, you teach that the Church is to be 
understood as being one body made up not of men only but of angels and all the powers of heaven. You 
say in commenting on the passage of the same book, in which the words occur[3] "And gave him to be 
head over all the Church," a little way down: "The Church may be understood as consisting not of men 
alone, but also of angels, and of all the powers, and reasonable creatures." Again, you say that souls, 
because in that former life they knew God, now know him not as one previously unknown, but as though after 
having forgotten him they came to recognize him again. These are the words used in a passage of the 
same book: 

"The words which he uses "In the knowledge of him"[1] some interpret by recalling that between 
<greek>gnpWis</greek> and '<greek>epignwsis</greek> (Gnosis and Epignosis) that is, between knowing 
and recognition there is this difference, that Knowing has reference to things which we did not know before 
and have since begun to know, while Recognition has to do with those things which we afterwards 
remember. Our souls, then, they say, have a kind of apprehension of a former life, after they have been cast 
down into human bodies, and have forgotten God their Father; but now we know him by revelation, 
according to that which is written:[2] "All the ends of this world shall remember and turn to the Lord;" and 
there are many similar passages." 

38. [3] Now, as to the expression which he uses, " Some persons say," I think it has been made clear by 
what I have previously said, that, when he says "some persons say" or "Another says," anti does not 
controvert the opinions which are thus introduced, it is he himself who is this 'certain' or 'other person. And 
this is proved by the numerous cases which I have pointed out in which he expresses opinions agreeing 
with these without the introduction of any such person. We must consider therefore in each case whether be 
expresses any dissent from the 'other.' For instance, an opinion is put forward that the stars and the other 

things that are in heaven are reasonable beings and capable of sinning. We must see, therefore, what his 

own opinion is on this point. Turn to his note, in this book.[4] upon the passage "He must reign till he hath put 

all his enemies: under his feet."[5] You will find, some way down, the words: 

"It may be observed that no one is without sin, that Eyed the stars are not clean in his sight,[6] and Every 

creature trembles at the coming of the Creator. Hence it is not only things on earth but also things in heaven 

which are said to have been cleansed by our Saviour's cross." 

Again, as to the opinion that it is because of their being in this body of humiliation or body of death that men 

are called children of wrath, he says, in commenting on the words[7] 'We were the children of wrath, even as 

others.' (Comm. on Ephes. on this verse, some way down.) 

"We must hold that men are by nature children of wrath because of this[1] 'body of humiliation' and[2] 'body 

of death,' and because[3] the heart of man is disposed to evil from his youth.'" 

Again, on the opinion that there is first a creation of the soul and afterwards a fashioning of the body he says 

(at the same passage, a long way down) 

"And observe carefully that he does not say, 'We are his forming and fashioning, but 4, 'We are his making.' 

For 'fashioning' implies the fact of man's origin from the slime of the earth: but 'making' from his origin 

according to the image and similitude of God. And this distinction is confirmed by the words of the 1 18th 

Psalm 5 "Thy hands have made me and fashioned me." 'Making' has the first place, 'fashioning' comes 

after.', 

Are there any other things which he wishes us to condemn? He has only to mention them, and we can draw 

them out from his own books, or rather from the bottom of his own heart. For instance. We are to condemn as 

a pestilent assertion that the nature of human souls and of angels is the same. But let us see what his own 

opinion is on this point as given in the books which be specially puts before us as containing the pattern of 

his profession and his rule of faith. Turn to the passage, 6 "He came and preached peace to them which 

were afar off and to them that were nigh." His comment on this first expounds the words of Jews and 

Gentiles, and then goes on: 

"This has been said in accordance with the Vulgate[7] translation. But, if a man reads the words of the 

Apostle when he says of Christ, [8] "Making peace through the blood of his cross for those that are in earth 

and for those that are in heaven" and the rest that is said in that place, he will not consider that it is we who 

are called the spiritual Israel are intended by 'those afar off,' and that the Jews, who are merely called 'Israel 

after the flesh' are 'those who are nigh.' He will modify the whole meaning of the passage, and apply it to the 

angels and the heavenly powers and to human souls, and as implying that Christ by his blood joined 

together things in earth and things in heaven which before were at variance, who brought back the sheep 

which had grown sickly upon the mountains to be with the rest, and put back the last piece of money among 

those which had before been safe." 

39. You observe how much difference he makes between the souls of men and the angels. Merely the 

difference between the one sheep and the others, between one drachma and the rest. But he adds 

something more, a little way further; he says: 

"As to what the Apostle says, "That he might create in himself of two one new man, so making peace," 

though it seems to be even more applicable than the former passage to the case of Jews and Gentiles, it 

may be adapted to our understanding of the passage in this way: We may suppose him to mean that man, 

who was made after the image and similitude of God, is after his reconciliation to receive the same form 

which the angels now have and he has lost: and he calls him a new man because he is renewed day by 

day, and is to dwell in the new world." 

The souls of men then, differ, according to him, from the angels as sheep from sheep or as drachma from 

drachma; and men will have that form hereafter which the angels now have, but which men once had and 

had lost. If then there is no difference between them in nature, in shape or in form, I wonder that our learned 

man is not ashamed to condemn another person for saying what he himself has said, and especially when 

you observe that this is an exposition not of the Vulgate rendering but of the real meaning of the Apostle. But 

see what is added further in the same place. He presently says: 

"And the creation of the new man will be fully and completely perfected when things in heaven and things in 

earth shall be joined in one, and we have access to the Father in one spirit, in one feeling and mind. There 

is something similar suggested by Paul to all thoughtful readers in another Epistle (though some do not 

receive it as his), in these words:[1] "All these, having had witness borne of their faith, received not the 

promise, God having provided some better thing for us, that apart from us they should not be made perfect." 

For this reason the whole creation[2] groans and travails with pain in sympathy with us who groan in this 

tabernacle, who have conceived in the womb by the fear of God, 3 and are in grief and wait for the revelation 

of the sons of God; and it waits to be delivered from the vanity of the bondage to which it is now subject; so 

that there may be one shepherd and one flock, and that the petition in the Lord's Prayer may be fulfilled "Thy 

will be done in earth as it is in heaven." " 

We are to understand then that things in heaven and those on earth, that is, Angels and men, formerly had 

one form and one sheepfold, and that so it will be in their future restoration, since Christ will come to make 
both into one flock, and men are to be what angels now are, and what they, that is their souls, previously 
were. I ask then, with what face you can mock, as we lately saw you, so pleasantly, or rather not pleasantly 
at all but scurrilously, at those poor women who, striking their bellies and thighs, said that they should not 
after the resurrection have those frail bodies but would be like the angels and have a life like theirs. You 
reprove with bitter raillery these poor women for saying the very things which are now produced as 
passages from these selected Commentaries of yours. Do not you think this is somewhat as if a man were 
to accuse another of theft, while he had the very thing that had been stolen concealed in the bosom of his 
toga; and as if, after inveighing against the supposed thief in a long and magnificent peroration, after 
bringing forward witnesses and taking the oath in due form, he should have the stolen article extracted from 
his toga which he supposed himself to have convicted another of stealing. 

There is another point. You find fault with others because, when questions are asked them about such 
matters, they do not answer at once, but hesitate and use gestures rather than words. Yet you say that the 
Apostle does much the same, at least, that he 'insinuates' something of this kind in his Epistle to thoughtful 
men. If Paul does not plainly declare these things, but 'insinuates' them, and this not to everybody but only to 
thoughtful people, why do you, whom we are bringing to see your errors, laugh at us poor creatures when we 
say about things which the Apostle has not plainly declared either that we do not know, or that we stand in 
doubt, and that, since we do not get a full understanding but a hint of his meaning, we do not declare but 
suggest an explanation. If the things which eye hath not seen nor ear heard, and which have not entered into 
the heart of man have been revealed to you; if you have attained to that which is perfect, and that which is in 
part is done away for you; shout aloud and proclaim the truth, and make quite plain the things which you say 
the Apostle 'insinuates,' since not only what he insinuates but what he asserts, as you tell us, now falls under 
your ban. All these things on which you now desire us to pronounce anathema are those which you had 
ascribed to the Apostle in your exposition of his words, and had taught as contained in the scope of his 
statements. 

40. There are one or two more things on which he wishes condemnation to be passed. One is this: that these 
men say that the body is a prison, and like a chain round the soul; and that they assert that the soul does not 
depart, but returns to the place where it originally was. Let me give quotations to show his opinion on this 
point also. In the second book of these Commentaries, on the passage" For this cause, I, Paul, the prisoner 
of Jesus Christ," he says, a little way down; 

"The Apostle in several passages calls the body the chain of the soul, because the soul is kept shut up as it 

were in a prison; and thus we may speak of Paul being kept close in the bonds of the body and does not 

return to be with Christ, so that preaching to the Gentiles maybe perfectly accomplished." 

And again in the third book of these Commentaries, on the words, "for which I am an ambassador in 

chains, "[1] after some discussion of the passage, he speaks in the character of that 'other' which is himself: 

"Another contends that he speaks thus because of the[2] body of our humiliation and the chain with which we 

are encompassed, so that we a know not yet as we ought to know, and see[4] by means of a mirror in a 

riddle: and that he will be able to disclose the mysteries of the Gospel only when he has cast off this chain 

and gone forth free from his prison. Yet perhaps even in chains that man may be considered as free who 

has his conversation in heaven, and of whom it maybe said:[5] "You are not in the prison nor in the flesh, but 

in the spirit, if so be that the spirit of God dwelleth in you." 

And in the Commentary on Paul's Epistle to Philemon, at the place where he says[6] "Epaphras my 

fellow-prisoner greeteth you," some way down he says: 

"Possibly, however, as some think, a more recondite and mysterious view is set before us, namely, that the 

two companions had been captured and bound and brought down into this vale of tears." 

41 . You see how be represents these opinions as things which are held as a kind of esoteric mystery by 
certain persons, of whom, however, he is one, as we have shewn over and over again: only, he uses this 
figure of speech so that he may escape the imputations attached to this mystic gnosis. Yon see, he will tell 
us, how the matter stands. You would never think of attributing to me the opinion that all things are eventually 
to be restored to one condition, and to be made up again into one body. I beg you not to impute this to me. If 
I say that an opinion is another man's, let it be another's; if you afterwards find any opinion written down 
without any 'other' person being thrown in, you will be right in ascribing it to me. What then? are we to lose the 
fruit of all the trouble we have taken further back on this point? Such is the power of effrontery. However, let it 
be as he chooses; I put aside the truth of the matter and accept his own terms; but he will still be convicted. I 
will refer on the matter now in hand to the second book of these Commentaries, at the passage 1 "Giving 
diligence to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. There is one body and one spirit, even as ye 
were called in one hope of your calling." After several remarks, he proceeds: 

"The question arises how there can be one hope of our calling, when in the Father's house there are many 
mansions: to which we reply that the kingdom of heaven is the one hope of our calling, as being the one 
house of our Father's but that in one house there are many mansions or rooms. For there is one glory of the 

sun, another of the moon, another of the stars. But certainly it is possible that there is a deeper meaning, 
namely, that in the consummation of the world, all things are to be restored to their primitive condition, and 
that then we shall all be made one body, and formed anew into the perfect man, and that thus the Saviour's 
Prayer will be fulfilled in us, [2] 'Father, grant that, as thou and I are one, so they also may be one in us.'" 

42. I have given you one instance in which he has expressed his own opinion without any ambiguity on the 
universal resurrection. I will give one more, and with this bring to an end the first book of my Apology. His 
statements, indeed, on this point are innumerable. The one I select is on the passage where it is written: a 
"From whom all the body, filly framed and knit together through that which every joint supplieth according to 
the working in due measure of each several part, maketh the increase of the body unto the building up of 
itself in love." He begins thus: 

"In the end of all things, when we shall have begun to know God face to face, and shall have come to the 
measure of the age[4] of the fulness of Christ, of whose fulness we all have received, [5] so that Christ will not 
be in us in part but wholly, and, leaving the rudiments of babes, we shall have grown into the perfect man, of 
whom the Prophet says, [6] "Behold the man whose name is the East," and whom John the Baptist 
announces in the words:[7] "After me cometh a man who has come to be[8] before me, for he was before 
me"; then by the concurrence in a common faith, and in a common recognition of the Son of God, whom now 
through the variety of men's minds we cannot know and recognize with one and the same faith, the whole 
body, which before had been disintegrated and torn into many parts, will be joined and fitted together, and 
brought into one; so that there will be but one administration, and one and the same operation, and an 
absolute perfection of the one age,[1] whereby the whole body will grow equally, and all its members 
according to their measure will receive an increase of age. But this whole process of up-building, by which 
the body of the church is increased in all its members, will be completed by mutual love. We can 
understand the whole mass of rational creatures by the example of a single rational animal; and whatever 
we say of the single creature, we may he sure will be applicable to every creature. Let us imagine this 
creature, then, to have had all its limbs, veins and flesh so torn apart that neither bone should cleave to 
bone nor muscle be joined to muscle, that the eyes lie in one place apart, the nose in another, that the 
hands are placed here and the feet thrown out there, and the rest of the members are in a similar way 
dispersed and divided. Then let us suppose that a physician arrives on the spot, of such skill as to be able 
to imitate the acts of AEsculapius, as told in the stories of the heathen, and to raise up a new form, the new 
man Virbius? It will be necessary for him to restore each member to its own place, to couple joint to joint, and 
to replace the various parts and glue them together, so as to make the body one again. So far this single 
comparison has carried us. But now let us take another typical case, so as, by a similar illustration to make 
clear that which we wish to have understood. A child is growing up; moment by moment, though the process 
is hidden from us, he is tending to perfect maturity. His hands enlarge, his feet undergo a proportional 
increase; the belly, though we cannot see it, is filled, the shoulders widen unmarked by the eyes, and all the 
members in each part grow according to their measure, but in such. a way that they evidently increase not for 
themselves but for the body. So will it be in the thee of the restitution of all things, when the true physician 
Jesus Christ, shall come to restore to health the whole body of the church which is now dispersed and torn. 
Every one, according to the measure of his faith and his recognition of the Son of God (it is called 
recognition because he first knew him and afterwards ceased from knowing him), will receive his proper 
place, and will begin to be what he once had been: not that, according to another opinion which is a 
heresy, [3] all will be placed in one condition, [4] that is, all restored to the condition of Angels, but that every 
member will be perfected according to its measure and office: for instance, that the apostate angel will 
begin to be that which he was originally made, and man who had been cast out of the garden of Eden will be 
brought back to cultivate the garden again. But all these things will be so constituted that they will be joined 
to one another by mutual love, each member rejoicing with its fellow and being gladdened by its 
advancement; and so the church of the first born, the body of Christ, will dwell in the heavenly Jerusalem 
which the Apostle in another place calls the mother of the Saints." 

43. These things which you have said are read by all who know Latin, and you yourself request them to read 
them: such sayings, I mean as these: that all rational creatures, as can be imagined by taking a single 
rational animal as an example, are to be formed anew into one body, just as if the members of a single man 
after being torn apart should be formed anew by the art of AEsculapius into the same solid body as before: 
that there will be among them as amongst the members of the body various offices, which you specify, but 
that the body will be one, that is, of one nature: this one body made up of all things you call the original 
church, and to this you give the name of the body of Christ; and further you say that one member of this 
church will be the apostate angel, that is, of course, the devil, who is to be formed anew into that which he 
was first created: that man in the same way, who is another of the members, will be recalled to the culture of 
the garden of Eden as its original husbandman. All those things you say one after the other, without bringing 
in the person of that 'other' whom you usually introduce when you speak of such matters cautiously, and like 
one treading warily, so as to make men think that you had some hesitation in deciding matters so secret 

and abstruse. Origen indeed, the man whose disciple you do not deny that you are, and whose betrayer 
you confess yourself to be, always did this, as we see, in dealing with such matters. But you, as if you were 
the angel speaking by the mouth of Daniel or Christ by that of Paul, give a curt and distinct opinion on each 
point, and declare to the ears of mortals all the secrets of the ages to come. Then you speak thus to us: "O 
multitude of the faithful, place no faith in any of the ancients. If Origen had some thoughts about the more 
secret facts of the divine purposes, let none of you admit them. And similarly if one of the Clements said any 
such things, whether he who was a disciple of the apostle or he of the church of Alexandria who was the 
master of Origen himself; yes even if they were said by the great Gregory of Pontus, a man of apostolic 
virtues, or by the other Gregory, of Nazianzus, and Didymus the seeing[1] prophet, both of them my 
teachers, than whom the world has possessed none more deeply taught in the faith of Christ. All these have 
erred as Origen has erred; but let them be forgiven, for I too have erred at times, and I am now behaving 
myself as a penitent, and ought to be forgiven. But Origen, since he said the same things which I have said, 
shall receive no forgiveness though he has done penance; nay, for saying the things which we all have 
said, he alone shall be condemned. He it is who has done all the mischief; he who betrayed to us the secret 
of all that we say or write, of all which makes us seem to speak learnedly, of all that was good in Greek but 
which we have made bad in Latin. Of all these let no man listen to a single one. 

Accept those things alone which you find in my Commentaries, and especially in those on the Epistle to the 
Ephesians, in which I have most painfully confuted the doctrines of Origen. My researches have reached 
this result, that you must believe and hold the resurrection of the flesh in this sense that men's bodies will be 
turned into spirits and their wives into men; and that before the foundation of the world souls existed in 
heaven, and thence, for reasons known to God alone, were brought down into this valley of tears, and were 
inserted into this body of death; that, in the end of the ages the whole of nature, being reasonable, will be 
fashioned again into one body as it was in the beginning, that man will be recalled into Paradise, and the 
apostate angel will be exalted above Peter and Paul, since they, being but men, must be placed in the 
lower position of paradise, while he will be restored to be that which he was originally created; and that all 
shall together make up I the Church of the first born in heaven, and, while placed each in his separate office, 
shall be equally members of Christ: but all of them taken together will be the perfect body of Christ. Hold then 
to these things, my faithful and discreet disciples, and guard them as my unhesitating definitions of truth; but 
for the same doctrines pronounce your condemnation upon Origen; so you will do well. Fare ye well." 
44. You do all this, you know well enough, laughing at us in your sleeve: and you profess penitence merely 
to deceive those to whom you write. Even if your penitence is sincere, as it should be, what is to become of 
all those souls who for so many years have been led astray by this poisonous doctrine as you call it which 
you then professed. Besides, who will ever mend his ways on account of your penitence, when that very 
document, in which you are at once the penitent, the accuser and the judge, sends your readers back to 
those same doctrines as i those which they are to read and to hold. Lastly, even if these things were not so, 
yet you yourself, after your penitence, have stopped up every avenue of forgiveness. You say that Origen 
himself repented of these doctrines, and that he sent a document to that effect to Fabian who was at that time 
Bishop of the city of Rome; and yet after this repentance of his, and after he has been dead a hundred and 
fifty years, you drag him into court and call for his condemnation. How is it possible then that you should 
receive forgiveness, even though you repent, since he who before was penitent for emitting those doctrines 
gains no forgiveness? He wrote just as you have written: he repented as you have repented. You ought 
therefore either both of you to be absolved for your repentance, or, if you refuse forgiveness to a penitent 
(which I do not desire to see you insist upon), to be both of you equally condemned. There is a parable of 
the Gospel which illustrates this. A woman taken in adultery was brought before our Lord by the Jews, so that 
they might see what judgment he would pronounce according to the law. He, the merciful and pitying Lord, 
said: "He that is without sin among you let him first cast a stone at her." And then, it is said, they all departed. 
The Jews, impious and unbelieving though they were, yet blushed through their own consciousness of 
guilt;[1] since they were sinners, they would not appear publicly as executing vengeance on sinners. And 
the robber upon the cross, said to the other robber who was hanging like him on a cross, and was 
blaspheming, "Dost not thou fear God, seeing we are in the same condemnation?" But we condemn in 
others the things of which we ourselves are conscious; yet we neither blush like the Jews nor are softened 
like the robber. 

RUFINUS" APOLOGY. 
BOOK II. 

1 . Jerome says that the defenders of Origen are united in a federation of perjury. 

2. Jerome's commentaries on Ephesians follow Origen's interpretation of the texts about a secret federation 
to whom higher truths are to be told. 

3. But I follow Christ in condemning all falsehood. 

4. Jerome has not only allowed perjury but has practised it. 

5. His treatise on Virginity (Ep. xxii to Eustochium) defames all orders of Christians. 

6. In his anti-Ciceronian dream he promised never to read or possess heathen books. 

7. Yet his works are filled with quotations from them. 

8. In his "Best mode of Translation" he relies on the opinions of Cicero and Horace. 

9. He confesses his obligations to Porphyry. 

8 (2). Jerome at Bethlehem had heathen books copied and taught them to boys. 

9 (2.). He condemns as heathenish unobjectionable views which he himself holds. 

10 (2). He spoke of Paula impiously as the mother-in-law of God. 

11. Such impiety is unpardonable. 

12. Jerome's boast of his teachers, Didymus and the Jew Baranina. 

13. His extravagant praises of Origen. 

14. Preface to Origen on Canticles. 

15. Preface to Commentary on Micah. 

16. Book of Hebrew Names. 

17. A story of Origen. 

18. Pamphilus the Martyr and his Library. 

19. Jerome praises Origen but condemns others fordoing the same. 

20. Jerome praises the dogmatic as well as the expository works of Origen. 

21 . Contrast of Jerome's earlier and later attitude towards Origen. 

22. The Book of Hebrew Questions. 

23. Jerome's attack upon Ambrose. 

24. Preface to Didymus on the Holy Spirit. 

25. Jerome attacks one Christian writer after another. 

26. His treatment of Melania. 

27. I never followed Jerome's errors, for which he should do penance. 
27 a. But I followed his method of translation. 

28. Jerome in condemning me condemns himself. 

29. He says I shew Origen to be heretical, yet condemns me. 

30. His pretence that the Apology for Origen is not by Pamphilus needs no answer. 

31. Others did not translate the <greek>Peri</greek> A<greek>rkpn</greek> because they did not know 
Greek. 

32. Jerome's translation of the Scriptures impugned. 

33. Authority of the LXX. 

34. Has the Church had spurious Scriptures? 

35. Danger of altering the Versions of Scripture. 

36. Origen's Hexapla-lts object. 

37. St. Paul's method of dealing with erring brethren. 

38. How Jerome should have replied to Pammachius. 

39. The Books against Jovinian. 

40. My translation of the <greek>Peri</greek> A<greek>rkpn</greek> was meant to aid in a good cause. 

41 . 42, 43. Recapitulation of the Apology. 

44. An appeal to Pammachius. 

45, 46. Why my translations of Origen had created offence, but Jerome's not. 47. A Synod, if called on to 
condemn Origen, must condemn Jerome also. 

In the first book of my Apology I have dealt and a very grave accusation, which has, like with the 
accusations of dogmatic error which he endeavours unjustly to fix upon others, and truth. It is this. He says[1] 
that certain have, by producing his own testimony, persons have joined themselves to Origen turned them 
back against him. In the in a secret society of perjury, and that the second book, I shall be able, now that I 
forms of initiation are to be found in the have settled and put aside the matters which have to do with 
controversies of faith, more confidently to reply to him on the other heads of his accusation. For there is 
another Sixth hook of his Miscellanies:[2] and that this mystery has been detected by no one but himself 
through all this space o time. I should only excite his ridicule were I to declare, even with an oath, that I was 
an entire stranger to such a secret society of perjury. The road by which I propose to reach the declaration 
of the truth is more direct: it is by proving, which I can do quite easily, that I have never possessed those 
books nor borrowed them from others to read. Not only cannot I defend myself from an accusation the 
meaning of which I do not know, but I do not see how a matter can be made the subject of a charge against 
me as to which I do not even know what it is, or whether it exists at all. I only know that my accuser declares 
that either Origen wrote or his disciples hold, that, when the Scripture says "He that speaketh truth with his 
neighbour" the words apply to a neighbour only in the sense of one of the initiated, a member of this secret 
society: and again that the Apostle's words "We speak wisdom among them that are perfect" and the words 
of Christ "Give not that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine," imply that truth is 
not to be communicated to all. 

2. Let us see what my adversary himself says on this point in those Commentaries which he has selected. In 
the second book, in commenting on the words[1] "Wherefore, putting away lying, speak every man truth to 
his neighbour, for we are members one of another" (after a short introduction) he speaks as follows: 
"Hence Paul himself, who was one of the perfect, says in another Epistle "We speak wisdom among them 
that are perfect."[2] This then is what is commanded, that those mystic and secret things, which are full of 
divine truth, should be spoken by each man to his neighhour, so that day unto day may utter speech and 
night to night shew knowledge, [3] that is, that a man should show all those clear and lucid truths which he 
knows to those to whom the words can be worthily addressed: "Ye are the light of the world. "[4] On the other 
hand, he should exhibit everything involved in darkness and wrapped up in the mist of symbols to others 
who are themselves nothing but mist and darkness, those of whom it is said "And there was darkness under 
his feet,"[5] that is, of course, under the feet of God. For on Mount Sinai Moses enters into the whirlwind and 
the mist where God was; and it is written of God, "He has made darkness his secret place. "[6] Let each man 
then thus speak truth in a mystery to his neighbour, and not give that which is holy to dogs nor cast his pearls 
before swine;[7] but those who are anointed with the oil of truth them let him lead into the bridechamber of the 
spouse, into the inner sanctuary of the King." 

Observe, I beg you, look carefully and see whether in all this passage there is any one else but himself on 
whom the condemnation can fall. If his adversaries were looking for an opportunity of convicting and 
destroying him on the ground of what he has written, what other course could they take, and what other 
testimonies could they wish to produce against him than these which he produces against himself as if he 
were pleading against another? If it were sought to pronounce a condemnation against him, his own letter 
would suffice. You have only to change the name; the test of the accusation suits no one but himself alone. 
What he calls on us on the one hand to condemn, he exhorts us on the other hand to follow: what he asserts, 
that he reproves: what he hates, that he does. How happy must be his disciples who obey and imitate him! 

3. He has endeavoured, indeed, to brand us with the stain of this false teaching by speaking to some of our 
brethren, and he repeats this by various letters, according to his recognized plan of action. It is nothing to me 
what he may write or assert, but, since he raises this question about a doctrine of perjury, I will state my 
opinion upon it, and then leave him to pass judgment upon himself. It is this. Since our Lord and Saviour 
says in the Gospels "It was said to them of old time, Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt pay to the Lord 
thy vows, but I say unto you, Swear not at all;"[1] I say that every one who teaches that for any cause 
whatever we may swear falsely, is alien from the faith of Christ and from the unity of the catholic church. 

4. But I should like, now that I have satisfied you on my own account, and supported my opinion by an 
anathema, to make this plain to you further, that he himself declares that in certain orgies and mystical 
societies to which he belongs perjury is practised by the votaries and associates. That is a certain and 
most true saying of our God, "By their fruits ye shall know them, "[2] and this also "A tree is known by its 
fruits. "[3] Well: he says that I have accepted this doctrine of perjury. If then I have been trained to this 
practice, and this evil tree has indeed its roots within me, it is impossible but that corresponding fruits should 
have grown upon me, and also that I should have gathered some society of mystic associates around me. 
As regards myself whom alone he seeks to injure by all that he writes, I will not bear witness to myself, nor 
will I say that there are cases of necessity in which it is right to swear: for I wish to avoid reproach through 
timidity if not through prudence; and, at all events, if I fail in obedience to the command, I will acknowledge 
my error. I will therefore make no boast of this. But, whether I have erred or acted prudently, he at all events 
can lay his finger on no act of mine by which he can convict me. But I can shew froth his writings, that he not 

only holds this doctrine of perjury, but practises this foul vice as a sacred duty. I will bring nothing against 
him which has been trumped up by ill will, as he does against the; but I will produce him and his writings as 
witnesses against himself, so that it may be made clear that it is not his enemies who accuse but he who 
convicts himself. 

5. When he was living at Rome he wrote[1] a treatise on tim preservation of virginity, which all the pagans 
and enemies of God, all apostates and persecutors, and whoever else hate the Christian name, vied with 
one another in copying out, because of the infamous charges and foul reproaches which it contained 
against all orders and degrees among us, against all who profess and call themselves Christians, in a 
word, against the universal church; and also because this man declared that the crimes imputed to us by the 
Gentiles, which were before supposed to be false were really true, and indeed that much worse things were 
done by our people than those laid to their charge. First, he defames the virgins themselves of whose virtue 
he professed to be writing, speaking of them in these words:[2] 

"Some of them change their dress and wear the costume of men, and are ashamed of the sex in which they 
were born; they cut their hair short, and raise their heads with the shameless stare of eunuchs. There are 
some who put on Cilician jackets, [3] and with hoods made up into shape, make themselves like horned 
owls and night birds, as if they were becoming babies again." 

There are a thousand such calumnies, and worse than these, in the book. He does not even spare widows, 
for he says of them, [4] "They care for nothing but the belly and what is next it;" and he adds many other 
obscene remarks of this kind. As to the whole race of Solitaries, it would take too long to give the passages 
written by him in which he attacks them with the foulest abuse. It would be a shame even to recount the 
indecent attacks which he makes upon the Presbyters and the deacons. I will, however, give the beginning 
of this violent invective, by which you may easily imagine what a point he reaches in its later stages. [1] 
"There are some," he says, "of my own order, who only seek the office of Presbyter or deacon so that they 
may have more license to visit women. They care for nothing but to be well dressed, to be well scented, to 
prevent their feet from being loose and bulging. Their curly hair bears the mark of the crisping iron; their 
fingers sparkle with rings; and they walk on tiptoe, for fear a fleck of mud from the road should touch their 
feet. When you see them, you would take them for bridegrooms rather than clerics." 
He then goes on to hurl his reproaches against our priests and ministers, specifying their faults, or rather 
their crimes; and to represent the access allowed them to married ladies not only in a disgraceful light, but 
so as to seem positively execrable: and after having cut to pieces with his satirical defamation the whole 
race of Christians, he does not even spare himself, as you shall presently hear. 

6. Fori will now return, altera sort of digression, to the point I had proposed, and for the sake of which it was 
necessary to mention this treatise. I will shew that perjury is looked upon by him as lawful, to such a point that 
he does not care for its being detected in his writings. In this same treatise he admonishes the reader that it 
is wrong to study secular literature, and says, [2] "What has Horace to do with the Psaltery, or Virgil with the 
Gospels, or Cicero with St. Paul? Will not your brother be offended if he sees you sitting at meat in that idol's 
temple?" And then, after more of the same kind, in which he declares that a Christian must have nothing to 
do with the study of secular literature, he gives an account of a revelation divinely made to him and filled with 
fearful threatenings upon the subject. He reports that, after he had renounced the world, and had turned to 
God, he nevertheless was held in a tight grip by his love of secular books, and found it hard to put away his 
longing for them. [3] 

Suddenly I was caught up in the spirit and dragged before the judgment seat of the Judge; and here the light 
was so bright, and those who stood around were so radiant, that I cast myself upon the ground and did not 
dare to look up. Asked who and what I was I replied 'I am a Christian.' But He who presided said: 'Thou liest; 
thou art a follower of Cicero and not of Christ. For where thy treasure is there will thy heart be also.' Instantly I 
became dumb, and amid the strokes of the lash-for He had ordered me to be scourged-l was tortured 
more severely still by. the fire of conscience, considering with myself that verse 'In the grave, who shall give 
thee thanks?' Yet for all that I began to cry and to bewail myself saying: 'Have mercy upon me, O Lord; have 
mercy upon me.' Amid the sound of the scourges this cry still made itself heard. At last the bystanders, 
failing down before the knees of Him who presided, prayed that He would have pity on my youth, and that 
He would give me space to repent of my error. He might still, they urged, inflict torture upon me, should I ever 
again read the works of the Gentiles. Under the stress of that awful moment I should have been ready to 
make even still larger promises than these. Accordingly I made oath and called upon His name, saying 
'Lord, if ever again I possess worldly books, or if ever again I read such, I have denied thee.' On taking this 
oath, I was dismissed, and returned to the upper world. 

7. You observe how new and terrible a form of oath this is which he describes. The Lord Jesus Christ sits on 
the tribunal as judge, the angels are assessors, and plead, for him; and there, in the intervals of scourgings 
and tortures, he swears that he will never again have by him the works of heathen authors nor read them. 
Now look back over the work we are dealing with, and tell me whether there is a single page of it in which he 
does not again declare himself a Ciceronian, or in which he does not speak of 'our Tully,' 'our Flaccus,' 'our 

Maro.'[1] As to Chrysippus and Aristides, Empedocles and all the rest of the Greek writers, he scatters their 
names around him like a vapour or halo, so as to impress his readers with a sense of his learning and 
literary attainments. Amongst the rest, he boasts of having read the books of Pythagoras. Many learned 
men, indeed, declare these books to be non-extant: but he, in order that he may illustrate every part of his 
vow about heathen authors, declares that he has read even those which do not exist in writing. In almost all 
his works he sets out many, more and longer quotations from these whom he calls 'his own' than from the 
Prophets and Apostles who are ours. Even in the works which he addresses to girls and weak women, who 
desire, as is right, only to be edified by teaching out of our Scriptures, he weaves in illustrations from 'his 
own' Flaccus and Tullius and Maro. 

8. Take the treatise which[2] he entitles "On the best mode of translating," though there is nothing in it except 
the addition of the title which is of the best, for all is of the worst; and in which he proves those to be heretics 
with whom he is now in communion, thus incurring the condemnation of our Apostle (not his, for those whom 
he calls 'his' are Flaccus and Tully) who says. "He who judges[1] is condemned if he eat." In that treatise, 
which tells us that no works of any kind reasonably admit of a rendering word for word (though he has come 
round now to think such rendering reasonable)[2] he inserts whole passages from a work of Cicero. [3] But 
had he not said, "What has Horace to do with the Psalter, or Maro with the Gospels, or Cicero with the 
Apostle? Will not your brother be offended if he sees you sitting in that idol temple?" Here of course he 
brings himself in guilty of idolatry; for if reading causes offence, much more does writing. But, since one who 
turns to idolatry does not thereby become wholly and completely a heathen unless he first denies Christ, he 
tells us that he said to Christ, as he sat on the judgment seat with his most exalted angel ministers around 
him, "If I ever hereafter read or possess any heathen books, I have denied thee," and now he not only reads 
them and possesses them, not only copies them and collates them, but inserts them among the words of 
Scripture itself, and in discourses intended for the edification of the Church. What I say is well enough known 
to all who read his treatises, and requires no proof. But it is just like a man who is trying to save himself from 
such a gulf of sacrilege and perjury, to make up some excuse for himself, and to say, as he does: "I do not 
now read them, I have a tenacious memory, so that I can quote various passages from different writers 
without a break, and I now merely quote what I learned in my youth." Well: if some one were to ask me to 
prove that before the sun rose this morning there was night over the earth, or that at sunset the sun had been 
shining all day, I should answer that, if a man doubted about what all men knew, it was his business to shew 
cause for his doubts, not for me to shew cause for my certainty. Still in this instance, where a man's soul is at 
stake, and the crime of perjury and of impious denial of Christ is alleged, a condemnation must not be 
thought to be a thing of course, even though the facts are known and understood by all men. We are not to 
imitate him who condemns the accused before they have undergone any examination; and not only without 
a hearing, but without summoning them to appear; and not only unsummoned, .but when they are already 
dead; and not only the dead, but those whom he had always praised, till then; and not only those whom he 
had praised, but whom he had followed and had taken as his masters. We must fear the judgment of the 
Lord, who says' "Judge not and ye shall not be judged," and again, "With what measure ye mete it shall be 
measured to you again." Therefore, though it is really superfluous, I will bring against him a single witness, 
but one who must prevail, and whom he cannot challenge, that is, once more, himself and his own writings. 
All can attest what I say in reference to this treatise of his and my assertion about it seems to be superfluous; 
but I must make use of some special testimony, lest what I say should seem unsatisfactory to those who 
have not read his works. 

9. When he wrote his treatises against Jovinian, and some one had raised objections to them, he was 
informed of these objections by Domnio, that old man whose memory we all revere; and in his answer to 
him[2] he said that it was impossible that a man like him should be in the wrong, since his knowledge 
extended to everything that could be known: and he proceeded to enumerate the various kinds of 
syllogisms, and the whole art of learning and of writing (of course supposing that the man who found fault 
with him knew nothing about such things). He then goes on tires:[3] 

"It was foolish, it appears, in me to think that I could not know all these things without the philosophers, and to 
look upon the end of the stylus which strikes out and corrects as better than the end with which we write. It 
was useless for me it seems, to have translated[4] the Commentaries of Alexander, and for my learned 
master to have brought me into the knowledge of Logic through the 'Introduction' of Porphyry; and, putting 
aside humanistic teachers, there was no reason why I should have had Gregory Nazianzen and Didymus 
as my teachers in the Scriptures." 

This, you observe, is the man who said to Christ, I have denied thee if ever I am found to possess or to read 
the works of the heathen. He might, one would think, at all events have left out Porphyry, who was Christ's 
special enemy, who endeavoured as far as in him lay to completely subvert the Christian religion, but whom 
he now glories in having had as his instructor in his Introduction to Logic. He cannot put in the plea that he 
had learned these things at a former time: for, before his conversion, he anti I equally were wholly ignorant of 
the Greek language and literature. All these things came after his oath, after that solemn engagement had 

been made. It is of no use for us to argue in such a case. It will at once be said to us: Man, you are wrong, 
God is not mocked, and no syllogisms spun out of the books of Alexander will avail with him. I think, my 
brother, it was an ill-omened event that you submitted to the Introduction of Porphyry. Into what has that 
faithless man introduced you? If it is into the place where he is now, that is the place where there is weeping 
and gnashing of teeth; for there dwell the apostate and the enemies of God; and perhaps the perjurers will 
go there too. 

10. You chose a bad introducer. If you will take my counsel, both you and I will by preference turn to him who 
introduces us to the Father and who said[1] 'No man cometh unto the Father but by me.' I lament for you, my 
brother, if you believe this; and if you believe it not, I still lament that you hunt through all sorts of ancient and 
antiquated documents for grounds for suspecting other men of perjury, while perjury, lasting and endless 
with all its inexplicable impiety, remains upon your own lips. Might not these words of the Apostle be rightly 
applied to you:[2] "Thou that art called a Jew and restest in the law, and makest thy boast in God, being 
instructed out of the law, and trustest that thou thyself art a leader of the blind, a light of them that sit in 
darkness, an instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes, who hast a form of knowledge and of the truth in the 
law: Thou therefore, that teachest others, teachest thou not thyself? Thou that sayest a man should not 
commit adultery, dost thou commit adultery? Thou that preachest that a man should not steal, dost thou 
steal? Thou that abhorrest idols, dost thou commit sacrilege"-that is perjury? And, what comes last and 
most important, "The name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you," and your love of strife. 

8 (2). We will pass on to clear up another of the charges, if only he will confess under the stress of his own 
consciousness of wrong that he has been convicted both of perjury and of making a false defence. 
Otherwise, if he attempts to deny what I say, I can produce as witnesses any number of my brethren, who, 
while living in the cells built by me on the Mount of Olives, copied out for him most of the Dialogues of Cicero. 
I often, as they wrote them out, had in my hands quaternions[1] of these Dialogues; and I looked them over 
myself, in recognition of the fact that he gave them much larger pay than is usually given for writings of other 
sorts. He himself also came to see me at Jerusalem from Bethlehem, bringing with him a book which 
contained a single Dialogue of Cicero, and also one of Plato's in Greek; he will not pretend to deny having 
given me that book, and having stayed some thee with me. But what is the use of delaying so long over a 
matter which is clearer than the light? To all that I have said this addition is to be made, after which all further 
comment is superfluous; that after he had settled in the monastery at Bethlehem, and indeed not so long 
ago, he took the office of a teacher in grammar, and explained 'his own' Maro and the comedians and 
lyrical and historical writers to young boys who had been entrusted to him that he might teach them the fear 
of the Lord: so that he actually became a teacher and professor in the knowledge of those heathen authors, 
as to whom he had sworn that if he even read them he would have denied Christ. 

9 (2). But now let us look at the other points which he blames. He says that the doctrines in question are of 
heathen origin, but in this judgment he condemns himself. He calls these doctrines heathenish; yet he 
himself incorporates them into his works. He here makes a mistake. Still, we ought to stretch out the hand to 
him, and not to press him too far: for it is only because he soars so completely above the world on the wings 
of his eloquence, and is borne along by the full tide of invective and vituperation: that he forgets himself and 
his reason loses its place. Do not be so rash, my brother, as to condemn yourself unnecessarily. Neither 
you nor Origen are at once to be set down among the heathen if, as you have yourself said, you have written 
these things to vindicate the justice of God, and to make answer to those who say that everything is moved 
by chance or by fate: if, I say, it is from your wish to show that God's providence which governs all things is 
just that you have said the causes of inequality have been acquired by each soul through the passions and 
feelings of the former life which it had in heaven; or even if you said that it is in accordance with the character 
of the Trinity, which is good and simple and unchangeable that every creature should in the end of all things 
be restored to the state in which it was first created; and that this must be after long punishment equal to the 
length of all the ages, which God inflicts on each creature in the spirit not of one who is angry but of one who 
corrects, since he is not one who is extreme to mark iniquity; and that, his design like a physician being to 
heal men, he will place a term upon their punishment. Whether in this you spoke truly, let God judge; anyhow 
such views seem to me to contain little of impiety against God, and nothing at all of heathenism, especially if 
they were put forward with the desire and intention of finding some means by which the justice of God might 
be vindicated. 

10 (2). I would not, therefore, have you distress yourself overmuch about these points, nor expose yourself 
needlessly either to penance or to condemnation. But there is a matter of real importance, as to which I can 
neither excuse nor defend you; namely, a statement openly made by yon which is not only heathenish but 
beyond all heathenism and impiety the statement in the treatise which I have mentioned above, [1] that God 
has a mother-in-law. Has anything so profane as this or so impious been said even by any of the heathen 
poets? It would be a foolish question to ask whether you find anything of the kind in the holy Scriptures. I only 
ask whether 'your' Flaccus or Maro, whether Plautus or Terence, or even whether any writer of Satires 
among all their unclean and immodest sayings has ever uttered such an outrage against God. No doubt 

you were led astray by the fact that the girl to whom you addressed the treatise[2] was called the bride of 
Christ: and hence you thought that her mother according to the flesh might be called the mother-in-law of 
God. You did not recollect that such things are said not according to the order of the flesh, but according to 
the grace of the spirit. For a woman is called the bride of Christ because the word of God is united in a kind 
of mystic wedlock with the human soul. But if the mother of the girl in question is related to Christ by this 
spiritual connexion, she herself should be called the bride of Christ, not the mother-in-law of God. As it is, you 
might as well go on to call the father of the girl God's father-in-law, and her sister his sister-in-law, or to call 
the girl herself God's daughter-in-law. The fact is, you were so anxious to appear completely possessed of 
the eloquence of Plautus or of Cicero, that you forgot that the Apostle speaks of the whole church, parents 
and children, mothers and daughters, brothers and sisters, all together, as one virgin or bride, when he 
says, '"I determined this very thing, to present you as a chaste virgin to one man, which is Christ." But you 
boast that you follow not Paul's but Porphyry's Introduction, and, since he wrote his impious and 
sacrilegious books against Christ and against God, you have fallen, through his introduction, into this abyss 
of blasphemy. 

11. If, then, you really intend to do an act of repentance for those evil speeches of yours, if you are not 
merely mocking us by saying this, and if you are not in your heart such a lover of strife and contention that 
you are willing even to defame yourself on this sole condition that you may be able thereby to besmirch 
another; if it is not in pretence but in good faith that you repent of what you have said amiss, come and do 
penance for this great and foul blasphemy; for it is indeed blasphemy against God. For if a man oversteps 
the mark by speaking erroneously of mere creatures, this is not such a very execrable crime, especially if 
he does it, as you say, not with a set purpose of blasphemy, but in seeking to vindicate the justice of God. 
But to lift up your mouth against the heaven is a grave offence; to speak violence and blasphemy against 
the Most High is worthy of death. Let us bestow our lamentations upon that which is hard to cure; for what 
man is there who has the jaundice, [2] and is in danger both of looks and life, who will complain loudly 
because of a little hangnail on his foot or because a scratch made with his own finger which easily yields to 
remedies, is not yet cured? 

12. I think very little, indeed, of one reproach which he levels against me, and think it hardly worthy of a reply; 
that, namely, in which, in recounting the various teachers whom he hired, as he says, from the Jewish 
synagogue, he says, in order to give me a sharp prick, "I have not been my own teacher, like some 
people," meaning me of course, for he brings the whole weight of his invective to bear against me from 
beginning to end. Indeed, I wonder that he should have chosen to make a point of this, when he had a 
greater and easier matter at hand by which to disparage me, namely this, that, though I stayed long among 
many eminent teachers, yet I have nothing to show which is worthy of their teaching or their training. He 
indeed, has not in his whole life stayed more than thirty days at Alexandria where Didymus lived; yet almost 
all through his books he boasts, at length and at large, that he was the pupil of Didymus the seer, that he had 
Didymus as his initiator,[1] that is, his preceptor in the holy Scriptures; and the material for all this boasting 
was acquired in a single month. But I, for the sake of God's work, stayed six years, and again after an 
interval for two more, where Didymus lived, of whom alone you boast, and where others lived who were in 
no way inferior to him, but whom you did not know even by sight, Serapion and Menites, men who are like 
brothers in life and character and learning; and Paul the old man, who had been the pupil of Peter the Martyr; 
and, to come to the teachers of the desert, on whom I attended frequently and earnestly, Macarius the 
disciple of Anthony, and the other Macarius, and Isidore and Pambas, all of them friends of God, who taught 
me those things which they themselves were learning from God. What material for boasting should I have 
from all these men, if boasting were seemly or expedient! But the truth is, I blush even while I weave together 
these past experiences, which I do with the intention, not of showing you, as you put it, that my masters did 
not do justice to my talents, but, what I grieve over far more, that my talents have not done justice to my 
masters. 

But it is foolish in me to enumerate these holy Christian men. It is not of them that be is thinking when be says 
that he has not like me been his own teacher. It is of Barabbas[2] whom, unlike me, he took as his teacher 
from the Synagogue, and of Porphyry by whose introduction he and not I had his introduction into Logic. 
Pardon me for this that I have preferred to be thought of as an unskilled and unlearned man rather than to be 
called the disciple of Barabbas. For, when Christ and Barabbas were offered for our choice, I in my 
simplicity made choice of Christ. You, it appears, are willing to join your shouts with those who say,[3]"Not 
this man but Barabbas." And I should like to know what Porphyry, that friend of yours who wrote his 
blasphemous books against our religion, taught you? What good did you get from either of those masters of 
whom you boast so much, the one drawing his inspiration from the idols which represent demons, the other, 
as you tell us, from the Synagogue of Satan. Nothing, as far as I see, but what they knew themselves. From 
Porphyry you gained the art of speaking evil of Christians, to strike at those who live in virginity and 
continence, at our deacons and presbyters, and to defame in your published writings, every order and 
degree of Christians. From that other friend of yours, Barabbas, whom you chose out of the synagogue 

rather than Christ, you learned to hope for a resurrection not in power but in frailty, to love the letter which kills 
and hate the spirit which gives life, and other more secret things, which, if occasion so require, shall 
afterwards in due thee be brought to light. 

13. But why should I prolong this discussion? I shall take no notice of his reproaches and railings; I shall 
make no answer to his violent attacks, that daily task of his, for which Porphyry sharpened his pen. For I 
have chosen Jesus, not Barabbas, for my master, and he has taught me to be silent when reviled. I will 
come to the point where I will shew how much truth there is in the excuses for himself and the accusations 
against me which he has heaped together. He says[1] that it is only in two short Prefaces that he ever was 
known to have praised Origen; and that his praise extended only to his work as an interpreter of Scripture, in 
which nothing is said of doctrine or of the faith, and that in those parts of his works which he has himself 
translated there is absolutely nothing advanced of the kind which he now reproves in the interest of the 
Synagogue rather than that of the edification of Christians. It ought, one would think, be enough to put him to 
silence, that those very things which he set forth in his own books he blames in those of others; 
nevertheless, let us see how far these other assertions of his are true. In the Preface[2] to the commentaries 
of Origen on Ezekiel, contained in fourteen homilies or short orations, he writes thus to one Vincentius: 

"It is a great thing which you ask of me, my friend, that I should translate Origen into Latin, and present to the 
ears of Romans a man of whom we may say in the words of Didymus the seer, that he was a teacher of the 
churches second only to the Apostles." 
And a little way on he adds: 

"I will briefly state for your information that Origen's works on the whole of Scripture are of three kinds. First 
come the Extracts or Notes, called in Greek Scholia, in which he shortly and summarily touches upon the 
things which seemed to him obscure or to present some difficulty. The second kind is the Hormiletics, of 
which the present commentary is a specimen. The third kind is what he called Tomes, or as we say 
Volumes. In this part of his work he gives all the sails of his genius to the breathing winds; and, drawing off 
from the land, he sails away into mid ocean. I know that you wish that I should translate his writings of all 
kinds. I have before mentioned the reason why this is impossible; but I promise, you this, that if, through your 
prayers, Jesus gives me back my health, I intend to translate, I will not say all, for that would be rash, but 
very many of them; on this condition, however, which I have often set you, that I should provide the words 
and you the secretary." 

14. Take, again, the Preface to the Song of Songs: 

"To the most holy Pope Damasus. Origen in his other books has surpassed all' other men: in the Song of 
Songs he has surpassed himself. The work consists of eleven complete volumes, and reaches a length of 
nearly twenty thousand lines. In these he discusses first the version of the Septuagint; then those of Aquila, 
Symmachus, and Theodotion, and last of all a Fifth Version which he states that he discovered on the coast 
of Actium, and this he does so grandly and so freely that it seems to me as if the words were fulfilled in him 
which say,[1]"The king has brought me into his bedchamber." It would require a vast amount of thee, of 
labour, and of money to translate a work so great and of so much merit into the Latin language. I therefore 
leave it unattempted; and have merely translated, and that without elegance, but correctly, these two Tracts 
which he composed in ordinary language for babes and sucklings. I give you a mere taste of his opinions, 
not a full meal; but enough to make you realize what is the worth of his greater works, when the smaller give 
you so much pleasure." 

15. Also in the Preface of his Commentary on Micah, which was written to Paula and Eustochium, he says, 
after some few remarks: 

"As to what they say, that it is not right for me to rifle the works of Origen, and thereby to defile the writings of 
the ancients, they think this a telling piece of abuse; but it is, in my opinion, the highest praise, since I am 
seeking to imitate those who are approved not only by us, but by all thoughtful men." 

16. Again, in the Preface to his book on the meaning of Hebrew names, he says, some way down: 

"For fear that, when the edifice has been completed, the last touch, so to speak, should be wanting, I have 
explained the words and names of the New Testament, partly through a wish to follow the step's of Origen, 
whom all but the ignorant acknowledge to have been the greatest teacher of the churches next to the 
Apostles. Among the rest of the illustrious monuments of his genius is the labour which he has bestowed 
upon this, desiring to complete as a Christian what Philo as a Jew had left undone," 

17. Once more, in his letter to Marcella he says:[1] 

"Ambrose, who supplied the paper, the money and the secretaries by the aid of which our Adamantius[2] 
and Chalcenterus[3] completed his innumerable books, in a certain letter written to the same person from 
Athens, declares that he never had a meal, when Origen was present, without something being read, and 
that he never went to bed without having some brother read aloud from the holy Scriptures. This he said he 
continued day and night, so that prayer waited upon reading and reading upon prayer." 

18. Lastly, take the following from another letter to Marcella: 

"The blessed Martyr Pamphilus, whose life Eusebius the Bishop of Caesarea set forth in some three 

volumes, wished to rival Demetrius Phalereus and Pisistratus, in his zeal to establish a library of sacred 
books: he sought out all through the world representative works of great minds, which are their true and 
everlasting monuments; but most of all he acquired at great expense all the books written by Origen, and 
gave them to the church at Caesarea. This library was afterwards partly destroyed; but Acatius and later on 
Euzoius, Bishops of that church, endeavoured to reestablish it in parchment volumes. The last of these 
recovered a great many works, and left us an inventory of them, but he shews that he could not find the 
Commentary on the hundred and twenty-sixth Psalm and the Tract on the Hebrew letter Pe, by the fact that 
he does not mention it. Not that so great a man as Adamantius passed over anything, but that, through the 
negligence of his successors it did not remain to times within our memory." 

19. But perhaps you will say to me: "Why do you fill your paper with this superfluous matter? Does even my 
friend say that it is a crime to name Origen, or to give him praise for his talents? If Origen is proclaimed as 
'such and so great a man,' this makes us the more anxious to be told whether he is in other passages 
spoken of as 'an apostolic man,' or 'a teacher of the churches,' or by any similar expressions which appear 
to commend not only his talents but his faith." This then shall be done. It was indeed for this purpose that I 
produced the passage where he speaks of him as 'such and so great a man,' because it was, if I am not 
mistaken, in the Preface this laudatory expression is used about him that he also claims the right of Origen 
to be called an Apostle or a Prophet, and to be praised even to the heavens. And in the same way, if there 
are passages in which I happen to have praised Origen's learning, all my praise is just of this kind. This 
man rouses all this alarm in you because of such expressions of mine; but he maintains that it is unjust to 
bring up similar expressions against him when they occur in his own writings. But, since he does not choose 
to stand on equal terms with us before the tribunal of opinion, but condemns us on mere suspicion, while he 
himself does not hold himself bound even by his own handwriting; since he, I say, does not think it 
necessary in such a matter to observe the rule of holy Scripture which demands that each man should be 
judged without respect of persons; I will make answer for myself, not according to the demands of justice, 
but according to his wishes. He says to me: "If you have translated Origen, you are to be blamed; but I even 
if I have said the very things for which I blame him, have done well, and these ought to be read and held as 
true. If you have praised his talents or his knowledge, you have committed a crime; if I have praised his 
talents, it goes for nothing." 

20. Well then; he says, "Give mean instance in which I have so praised him as to defend his system of 
belief." You have no right to ask this, I reply; yet I will follow where you lead. There is a certain writing of his[1] 
in which he gives a short catalogue of the works which Varro wrote for the Latins, and of those which Origen 
wrote in Greek for the Christians. In this be says: 

Antiquity marvels at Marcus Terentius Varro because of the countless books which he wrote for Latin 

readers; and Greek writers are extravagant in their praise of their man of brass, because he has written 

more works than one of us could so much as copy. But since Latin ears would find a list of Greek writers 

tiresome, I shall confine myself to the Latin Varro. I shall try to shew that we of to-day are sleeping the sleep 

of Epimenides and devoting to the amassing of riches the energy which our predecessors gave to sound if 

secular learning. 

Varro's writings include forty-five books of antiquities, four concerning the life of the Roman people. 

But why, you ask me, have I thus mentioned Varro and the man of brass? Simply to bring to your notice our 

Christian man of brass, or, rather, man of adamant-Origen, I mean-whose zeal for the study of Scripture has 

fairly' earned for him this latter name. Would you learn what monuments of his genius he has left us? The 

following list exhibits them. His writings comprise thirteen books on Genesis, two books of Mystical 

Homilies, notes on Exodus, notes on Leviticus . . . also single books, four books on First Principles, two 

books on the Resurrection, two dialogues on the same subject. 

And, after enumerating all his works as if making an exact index, he added what follows: 

So you see the labours of this one man have surpassed those of all previous writers both Greek and Latin. 

Who has ever managed to read all that he has written? Yet what reward have his exertions brought him? He 

stands condemned by his bishop, Demetrius, only the bishops of Palestine, Arabia, Phoenicia, and Achaia 

dissenting. Imperial Rome consents to his condemnation, and even convenes a senate to censure him, 

not-as the rabid hounds who now pursue him cry-because of the novelty or heterodoxy of his doctrines, but 

because men could not tolerate the incomparable eloquence and knowledge, which, when once he 

opened his lips, made others seem dumb. 

I have written the above quickly and incautiously, by the light of a poor lantern. You will see why, if you think 

of those who to-day represent Epicurus and Aristippus. 

21 . Now suppose that while you were writing this, as you tell us you did, quickly not cautiously, by the poor 
glimmering light of a lantern, some Prophet had stood by you and had cried out: "O writer, suppress those 
words, restrain your pen; for the thee is coming and is not far off when you will make a schism and separate 
yourself from the church; and, in order that you may find a colorable excuse for this schism, you will begin to 
defame these very books which you now make out to be so admirable. You will -then say that the man 

whom you call your own Brazen-heart,[1] and whose name you are just about to write down as Adamantine 
because of the merit of his praise-worthy labours, did not write books for the edification of the soul but 
venomous heresies. This man, further, whom you rightly describe as not having been condemned by 
Demetrius on the ground of his belief, who you say was not accused of bringing in strange doctrines, you will 
then pronounce worthy of execration because of his strange doctrines; as to what you are writing about mad 
dogs bringing feigned charges against him, you will yourself feign the same: and the Senate of Rome as 
you call it, you will then stir up against him as you complain that they now do by your letters of admonition, 
your vehement attestations, and satellites flying in all directions. This is the return that you will make to your 
admirable Brazen-heart for all his labours. Therefore beware how you write now, for, if you write as you are 
doing and afterwards act as I have said, you will with more justice be condemned by your own judgment 
than he by that of others." Would you, do you think, have given credit to that prophet? Would you not have 
thought it more likely that he was mad than that you would ever come to such a pass? The fact is that in 
controversies of this kind there is no thought of sparing a friend if only an enemy can be injured. But you go 
beyond even this point: you do not spare yourself in your attempt to ruin not your enemies but your friends. 

22. In the Preface to his book on Hebrew Questions, after many other remarks, he says: 

"I say nothing of Origen. His name (if I may compare small things to great) is even more than my own the 
object of ill will, because though following the common version in his Homilies which were spoken to 
common people, yet in his Tomes, that is, in his fuller discussion of Scripture, he yields to the Hebrew as the 
truth, and though surrounded by his own forces occasionally seeks the foreign tongue as his ally. I will only 
say this about him, that I should gladly have his knowledge of the Scriptures even if accompanied with all 
the ill-will which clings to his name, and that I do not care a straw for these shades and spectral ghosts 
whose nature is said to be to chatter in dark corners and be a terror to babies." 

I really can no longer wonder or complain of his unfriendly dealings with me since he has not spared 'such 
men, such great men.' For another man whom he tears to pieces is Ambrose that Bishop of sacred memory. 
In what manner, and with what disparagement be attacks him, I will show in a similar way from one of his 
Prefaces, in which, nevertheless, he praises Origen. It is the Preface to Origen's homilies on Luke 
addressed to Paula and Eustochium. 

A few days ago you told me that you had read some commentaries on Matthew and Luke, of which one was 
equally dull in perception and expression, the other frivolous in expression, sleepy in sense. Accordingly, 
you requested me to translate without such trifling, our Adamantius' 39 homilies on Luke, just as they are 
found in the original Greek: I replied that it was an irksome task and a mental torment to write, as Cicero 
phrases it, with another man's heart, not one's own: but vet I will undertake it as your requests reach no 
higher than this. The demand which the sainted Blaesia once made at Rome, that I should' translate into our 
language his twenty-five volumes on Matthew, five on Luke and thirty-two on John is beyond my powers, my 
leisure and my energy. You see what weight your influence and wishes have with me. I have laid aside for a 
thee my books on Hebrew Questions to use my energies which your judgment holds fruitful in translating 
these commentaries which, good or bad, are his work, and not mine: especially as I hear on the left of me 
the raven-that ominous bird-croaking and mocking in an extraordinary way at the colours of all the other 
birds, because of his own utter blackness. And so, before he change his note, I confess that these treatises 
are Origen's recreation no less than dice are a boy's: very different are the serious pursuits of his manhood 
and of his old age. If my proposal meet with your approbation, if I am still able to undertake the task, and if 
the Lord grant me opportunity to translate them into Latin so that I may complete the work I have now 
deferred, you will then be able to see, aye, and all who speak Latin will learn through you, the mass of 
valuable knowledge of which they have hitherto been ignorant, but which they have now begun to acquire. 
Besides this I have arranged to send you shortly the commentaries on Matthew of that eloquent man 
Hilarius, and of the blessed martyr Victorians, which, different as their style may be, one spirit has enabled 
them to write: these will give you some idea of the study which our Latins also have in former days bestowed 
upon the Holy Scriptures. 

23. You see by this what his opinions are about Origen and also about Ambrose. If he should deny that his 
strictures apply to Ambrose, which every one knows, he will be convicted in the first place by the fact that 
there is a Commentary of his on Luke which is current among the Latins, and none by any other hand. But 
secondly he knows that I possess a letter of his in which, while he discharges others, he makes his strictures 
fall upon Ambrose. But, since that letter contains certain more secret matters, I do not wish to see it 
published before the right thee; and therefore I will corroborate what I say by other proofs similar to it. In the 
meantime let this be counted as demonstrated by what I have said above, that he extols Origen's writings 
as in every way admirable, and declares that 'if he translates them, the Roman tongue will then recognize 
what a store of good it had hitherto been ignorant of and now has begun to understand,' that is the twenty six 
books on Matthew, the five on Luke, and the thirty two on John. These are the books to which he gives the 
highest honour; and in these absolutely everything is to be found which is contained in the books on 
<greek>Peri</greek> A<greek>rkpn</greek> the groundwork of his charges against me, only set forth with 

greater I breadth and fulness. If then he promises that he will translate these, why does he condemn me for a 
similar course? But now I have undertaken to prove how violently he attacks a man who is worthy of all 
admiration, Ambrose, Bishop of Milan, who was not to that church alone bat to all the churches like a column 
or an impregnable fortress. I will therefore set forth a Preface of his by which you may see in what foul and 
unworthy terms he assails even a man of such eminence, and also how he praises Didymus to the sky, 
though he has since cast him down even to the infernal region; and further how he speaks of the city of 
Rome, which now through the grace of God is reckoned by Christians as their capital, words which were only 
applicable when its inhabitants were a nation who were heathens and princes who were persecutors. 

24. The Preface is that for the treatise of Didymus on the Holy Spirit. It is addressed to Paulinianus, and is as 
follows. 

"While I was an inhabitant of Babylon, a settler in the land of the purple harlot, and lived under the law of the 
Quirites, I attempted to write some poor stuff about the Holy Spirit and dedicated the work to the Pontiff of that 
city. When on a sudden that pot which Jeremiah saw after the almond rod began to seethe from the face of 
the North; and the whole senate of the Pharisees raised a clamour and no mere imaginary scribe but the 
whole faction of the ignorant as if had declared war against them, laid their heads together against me. I 
therefore returned with all speed to Jerusalem, like a man going back to his home, and, after having lived in 
sight of the cottage of Romulus and the Lupercal[2] with its naked games, I am now in sight of Mary's inn and 
the Saviour's cave. And so, Paulinianus my dear brother, since the aforenamed Pontiff Damasus, who had 
impelled me to undertake this work, now sleeps in the Lord, it is here in Judea that I warble the song which I 
could not sing in a strange land, provoked thereto by you and by Paula and Eustochium those handmaids 
of Christ whom I revere, and aided by your prayers; for this land which bore the Saviour is more august to 
me than that which bore the man who slew his brother.[3] I have in the title ascribed the work to its true 
authors for I preferred to be known, as the translator of another man's work than to. imitate certain people 
and, like the ungainly jackdaw, deck myself in another bird's plumage. I read some thee ago the treatise of 
a certain person, on the Holy Spirit, and I recognized then, according to the sentence of Terence, [4] bad 
things in Latin taken from good things in Greek. There is nothing in it of close reasoning, nothing downright 
and manly, such as draws us into assent even against our will, but all is flaccid and soft, sleek and pretty, 
picked out with the rarest colours. But Didymus, [5] my own Didymus, who has the eyes of the bride in the 
Song of Songs, those eyes which Jesus bade us lift up upon the whitening fields, looks afar into the depths, 
and has once more given us cause to call him, as is our wont, the Seer' Prophet. Whoever reads the work 
will recognize, the plagiarisms of the Latins, and will despise the derivative streams, as soon as he begins 
to drink at the fountain head, He is rude in speech, yet not in knowledge;[6] his very style marks him as one 
like the apostle as well by the grandeur of the sense as by the simplicity of the words." 

25. You observe bow he treats Ambrose. First, he calls him a crow and says that he is black all over; then he 
calls him a jackdaw who decks himself in other birds' showy feathers; and then he rends him with his foul 
abuse, and declares that there is nothing manly in a man whom God has singled out to be the glory of the 
churches of Christ who has[1] spoken of the testimonies of the Lord even in the sight of persecuting kings 
and has not been alarmed. The saintly Ambrose wrote his book on the Holy Spirit not in words only but with 
his own blood; for he offered his life-blood to his persecutors and shed it within himself, although God 
preserved his life for future labours. Suppose that he did follow some of the Greek writers belonging to our 
Catholic body, and borrowed something from their writings, it should hardly have been the first thought in 
your mind, (still less the object of such zealous efforts as to make you set to work to translate the work of 
Didymus on the Holy Spirit,) to blaze abroad what you call his plagiarisms, which were very possibly the 
result of a literary necessity when he had to reply at once to some ravings of the heretics. Is this the fairness 
of a Christian? Is it thus that we are to observe the injunction of the Apostle, [2] "Do nothing through faction or 
through vain glory"? But I might turn the tables on you and ask,[3] Thou that sayest that a man should not 
steal dost thou steal? I might quote a fact I have already mentioned, namely, that, a little before you wrote 
your commentary on Micah, you had been accused of plagiarizing from Origen. And you did not deny it, but 
said: "What they bring against me in violent abuse I accept as the highest praise; for I wish to imitate the 
man whom we and all who are wise admire." Your plagiarisms redound to your highest praise; those of 
others make them crows and jackdaws in your estimation. If yon act rightly in imitating Origen whom you call 
second only to the Apostles, why do you sharply attack another for following Didymus, whom nevertheless 
you point to by name as a Prophet and an apostolic man? For myself I must not complain, since you abuse 
us all alike. First you do not spare Ambrose, great and highly esteemed as he was; then the man of whom 
you write that he was second only to the Apostles, and that all the wise admire him, and whom you have 
praised up to the skies a thousand times over, not as you say in two, but in innumerable places, this man 
who was before an Apostle, you now turn round and make a heretic. Thirdly, this very Didymus whom you 
designate the Seer-Prophet, who has the eye of the bride in the Sung of Songs, and whom you call 
according to the meaning of his name[1] an Apostolic man, you now on the other hand criminate as a 
perverse teacher, and separate him off with what you call your censor's rod, into the communion of heretics. 

I do not know whence you received this rod. I know that Christ once gave the keys to Peter: but what spirit it 
is who now dispenses these censors' rods, it is for you to say. However, if you condemn all those I have 
mentioned with the same mouth with which you once praised them, I who in comparison of them am but like 
a flea, must not complain, I repeat, if now you tear me to pieces, though once you praised me, and in your 
Chronicle[2] equalled me to Florentius and Bonosus for the nobleness, as you said, of my life. 

26. There is also an astonishing action of his in relation to Melania, which I must not pass by in silence 
because of the shame which those who hear it may feel. She was the granddaughter of the Consul 
Marcellinus; and in these very Chronicles a he had narrated how she was the first lady of the Roman nobility 
to visit Jerusalem; how she had left her son, then a little child, behind her at Rome, and how the name of 
Thecla was given her on account of her signal merit and virtue. But afterwards, when he found that some of 
his deeds were disapproved by this lady through the stricter discipline of her life, he erased her name from 
all the copies of his work. 

It has been necessary for me to bring together the large number of passages which I have adduced from 
his works, so as to put to the test the truth of his statement,[4] that it is only in two short prefaces that he has 
made mention of Origen with praise, and that not because of his faith but his talent; that he has praised in him 
the commentator not the doctrinal teacher. I have actually brought forward ten. 

27. But there is danger of expanding my treatise too far and becoming burdensome to the reader; it is 
sufficient that in the passages I have cited he speaks of Origen as almost an Apostle and a teacher of the 
churches, and says that it is not because of his novel doctrines as the mad dogs pretend that the senate of 
Rome is excited against him; that he follows him because be himself and all the wise approve him; and all 
the other testimonies, adduced from his prefaces which are inserted above. But, however these matters 
may stand, and whatever your relations may be to these writers whether ancient or modern, and whether 
you call them Apostles or mere wantons, [1] Prophets or perverse teachers, what is that to me? It is for you to 
do penance for all your changes of opinion, your violent words and the wounds you have inflicted on good 
men, whether you have vet done so or not. As for myself, what is the meaning of your saying "If they have 
followed me when I erred, let them follow me also in my amendment?" Get thee behind me! Far be such a 
thing from me. I never followed you or any other man in your errors, but in the strength of Christ I will follow, not 
you nor any other man, but the Catholic church. But you, who have written all these things who have followed 
those whom you knew to be in error, you who, as I have shewn, have written so unworthily of God, go you, I 
say, and do penance, if at least you have any hope that your crime of blasphemy can be pardoned. 

27 a. I ask whether you can produce anything which I have written, by which you may convict me of having 
fallen into heresy even in my youth,-anything of such a character as the heresies of which, though you will 
not confess it, you now stand convicted. I said that I had followed or imitated you in your system of 
translating, in that alone and in nothing else. Yet you say that by this I have done you all the injury which you 
complain of. I followed you in such things as I saw that you had done in the Homilies on the Gospel 
according to Luke. Take the passage: "My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God 
my Saviour." When you found that the Greek Commentary had something relating to the Son of God which 
was not right, you passed it over; whereas the words about the Spirit, which as you may remember, are 
expressed in the ordinary way, you not only did not pass over but added a few words of your own to make 
the expression more clear. And so in the note on the words, [2] "Behold, when the voice of thy salutation 
came into my ears, the babe leaped in my womb" you render: "Because this was not the beginning of his 
substance," and you add of your own the words "and nature," though both these and a thousand other things 
in your translations of these homilies or those on Isaiah or Jeremiah, but more particularly in those on 
Ezekiel, you have now withdrawn. But, in certain places where you found things relating to the faith, that is the 
Trinity, expressed in a strange manner, you left out words at your discretion. This mode of translation we 
have both of us observed, and if any one finds fault with it, it is you who ought to make answer, since you 
made use of it before me. But now the practice which you blame is undoubtedly one for which you may 
yourself incur blame. The practice of translating word for word you formerly pronounced to be both foolish 
and injurious. In this I followed you. You can hardly mean that I am to repent of this because you have now 
changed your opinion, and say that you have translated the present work with literal exactness. In previous 
cases you took out what was unedifying in matters of faith, though you did so in such a way as not to excise 
them wholly nor in all cases. For instance, in the Homilies on Isaiah, at the Vision of God[1] Origen refers the 
words to the Son and the Holy Spirit; and so you have translated, adding, however, words of your own which 
would make the passage have a more acceptable sense. It stands thus: "Who are then these two 
Seraphim? My Lord Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit:" but you add of your own, "And do not think that there is 
any difference in the nature of the Trinity, when the functions indicated by the several persons are 
'preserved." The same thing I have done in a great many cases, either cutting out words or bending them 
into a sounder meaning. For this you bid me do penance. I do not think that you are of this opinion as 
regards yourself. If then on this ground no penitence is due from either of us, what other things are there of 
which you invite me to repent? 

28. 1 repeat that there are no writings of mine in which there is any error to be corrected. There are many of 
yours which, as I have shewn, according to your present opinion, ought to be wholly condemned. You made 
an exception in favour of the Commentaries on the Ephesians, in which you Imagined that you had written 
more correctly, i But even you must have seen, as I have shewn, how like they are all through to Origen's 
views; and, indeed, how they contain something more extreme than the views of which you demand the 
condemnation. And, were it not that you had cut yourself off from the power of repentance by saying "Read 
over my Commentaries on the Ep. to the Ephesians, and you will acknowledge that I have opposed the 
doctrines of Origen;" possibly you might wish to turn round and do penance for those, and in this case, as in 
the rest, to condemn yourself. As far as I am concerned, I give you full leave to repent of these also; indeed, 
the best thing that you can do is to do penance for all that you have said and also for all that you are going 
to say; for it is certain that all that you have ever written is to be repented of. But if any one blame me for 
having translated anything at all of Origen's, then I say that I am the last of many who have done the deed, 
and the blame, if any, should begin with the first. But does any one ever punish a deed the doing of which he 
had not previously forbidden. We did what was permissible. If there is to be a new law, it holds good only for 
the future. But it may be said that the works themselves ought to be condemned and their author as well. If 
that be so, what is to happen to the other author who writes the same things, as I have shewn most fully 
above? He must receive a similar judgment. I do not ask for this nor press for it, although he acts a hostile 
part towards me. But I cannot but see that he is heaping up such a judgment for himself by his rash 
condemnation of others. 

29. But I must deal with you once more by quoting your own words. You say of me in that invective of 
yours[1] that I have by my translation shewn that Origen is a heretic while I was a Catholic. The words are: 
"That is to say, I am a Catholic, but he whom I was translating is a heretic." Yes you say it, I have read it. Well 
then, if, as you tell us, the result of my whole work is to show that I am a Catholic and Origen a heretic, what 
more do you want? Is not your whole object gained if Origen is proved a heretic and I a Catholic? If you bear 
witness that I have said this and have thus given you satisfaction by the whole of my work, what cause of 
accusation against me remains? What purpose was served by that Invective of yours against me? If I 
proved Origen to be a heretic and myself a Catholic, was I right or not? If I was, then why do you subject to 
blame and accusation what was rightly done? But, if it was not fight that Origen should be called a heretics 
why do you make a charge against me on that head? What need was there for you to translate in a worse 
sense what I had already translated according to your principles, though in a less elegant style? Especially 
what need was there for you to play your readers false, and, when they expected one thing, for you to do 
another? They imagine that you are acting in opposition to those who defend Origen as Catholic; but the 
person whom you combat and accuse is the man who you say has pronounced him a heretic. Perhaps it 
was for this that you invited me to do penance; and I had misunderstood you. But even of this I must say that 

I could not repent, if my repentance implied that I thought all things which are found in his works are catholic. 
Whether what is uncatholic is his own or, as I think, inserted by others, God only knows: at all events these 
things, when brought to the standard of the faith and of truth are wholly rejected by me. What then is it that you 
want me to say? That Origen is a heretic? That is what you say that I have done, and you blame it. That he is 
a catholic then? Again you make this a ground of accusation against me. Point out more clearly what you 
mean; possibly there is something which you can find out that lies between the two. This is all the wit that you 
have gathered from the acuteness of Alexander and Porphyry and Aristotle himself: This is the issue of all 
the boasting which you make of having from infancy to old age been versed and trained in the schools of 
rhetoric and philosophy, that you set forth with the intention of pronouncing sentence on Origen as a heretic, 
and in the very speech in which you are delivering judgment turn upon the man whom you are addressing 
and accuse him because he also has shown Origen to be a heretic. I beg all men to note that there is in all 
this no care for the faith or for truth, no earnest thought of religion and sound judgment; there is nothing but the 
practised lust of evil speaking and accusing the brethren which works in his tongue, nothing but rivalry with 
his fellow men in his heart, nothing but malice and envy in his mind. So much is this the case that, before any 
cause of ill feeling existed, and I spoke of you with praise as my brother and colleague, you nevertheless 
were angry at my advances. Forgive me for not knowing that you were what the Greeks call acatonomastos 
(<greek>akatotomastos</greek>), one whom no one dares to address by name. Still, I wonder that you 
should call upon me to condemn what you complain of me for branding as wrong. 

30. It seems needless to make any answer to that part of his indictment in which he says that the works of the 
Martyr Pamphilus, expressed as they are with so much faithfulness and piety, are either not to be 
considered genuine or if genuine, to be treated with contempt. Is there any one to whose authority he will 
bow? Is there any one whom he will refrain from abusing? All the old Greek writers of the church, according 
to him, have erred. As to the Latins, how he disparages them, how he attacks them one by one, both those of 
the old and those of modern times, any one who reads his various work knows well. Now even the Martyrs 
fail to gain any respect from him. "I do not believe," he says "that this is really the work of tim Martyr." If such 
an argument were admitted in the case of the works of any writer, how can we prove their genuineness in 

any particular case? If I were to say, It is not true that books of Miscellanies are Origen's as you maintain 
how can they be proved to be his? His answer is, From their likeness to the rest. But, just as, when a man 
wants to forge some one's signature, he imitates his handwriting, so he who wishes to introduce his own 
thoughts under another man's name, is sure to imitate the style of him whose name he has assumed. But, to 
pass over for brevity's sake all that might with great justice be said on this point, if you were determined to 
be so bold as to question the works of the Martyr, you ought to have brought out publicly the actual 
statements which seemed to you liable to question, and then every reader could have seen what was 
absurd in them and what was reasonable, what was unsuitable to or against the system of the Apostles; and 
especially the great impiety, whatever it may have been, in expiation of which you tell us that the Martyr shed 
his blood. A man who read those actual words would be able to say, not, as now, on your judgment but on 
his own, either that the martyr had gone wrong, or that a treatise which was so full of absurdity and unbelief 
had been composed by some one else. But, as it is, you know well that if the writings which you impugn are 
read by any one, the blame will be turned back upon him who has unjustly found fault; and therefore you do 
not cite the passages which you impugn, but with that 'censor's rod' of yours, and by your own arrogant 
authority, you make your decrees in this style: "Let this book be cast out. of the libraries, let that book be 
retained; and again, if today a book is accepted, tomorrow if any one but myself has praised it, let it be cast 
out, and with it the man who praised it. Let this one be counted as Catholic, even though he seems at times 
to have gone wrong; let that man have no pardon for his error, even though he has said the same things as 
myself, and let no man translate him nor read him, for fear he should recognize my plagiarisms. This man 
indeed was a heretic, but he was my master. And this other, though he is a Jew, and of the Synagogue of 
Satan, and is hired to sell words for gain, yet he is my master who must be preferred to all others, because it 
is among the Jews alone that the truth of the Scriptures dwells." If the universal Church had with one voice 
conferred on you this authority, and had demanded of you that you should be the judge of each and all, 
would it not have been your duty to refuse to allow so heavy and perilous a burden to be laid upon you? But 
now we have made such progress in the daily habit of disparaging others that we no longer spare even the 
martyrs. But let us suppose that the work is not that of the martyr Pamphilus, but of some other unknown 
member of the church; did he, whoever he may have been, employ his own words, I ask, so that we are 
called upon to defer to the merits of the writer? No. He sets out quotations from the works of Origen himself, 
and exhibits his opinion upon each question not in the words of the apologist but in those of the accused 
himself; and, just as in the present treatise what I have quoted from your writings carried much more force 
than what I have said myself, so also the defence of Origen lies not in the authority of his apologist, but in his 
own words. The question of authorship is superfluous, when the defence is so conducted as to dispense 
with the author's aid. 

31 . But I must come to that head of his inculpation of me which is most injurious and full of ill-will; nay, not of 
ill-will only but of malice. He says: Which of all the wise and holy men before us has dared to attempt the 
translation of these books which you have translated? I myself, he adds, though asked by many, to do it, 
have always refused. But the fact is, the excuse to be made for those holy men is easy enough; for it by no 
means follows because a man of Latin race is a holy and a wise man, that he has an adequate knowledge 
of the Greek language; it is no slur upon his holiness that he is wanting in the knowledge of a foreign tongue. 
And further, if he has the knowledge of the Greek language, it does not follow that he has the wish to make 
translations. Even if he has such a wish, we are not to find fault with him for not translating more than a few 
works, and for translating some rather than others. Every man has power to do as he likes in such matters 
according to his own free will or according to the wish of any one who asks him to make the translation. But 
he brings forward the case of the saintly men Hilary and Victorinus, the first of whom, though well-known as a 
commentator, translated nothing, I believe, from the Greek; while the other himself tells us that he employed 
a learned presbyter named Heliodorus to draw what he needed from the Greek sources, while he himself 
merely gave them their Latin form because he knew little or nothing of Greek. There is therefore a very good 
reason why these men should not have made this translation. That you should have acted in the same way 
is, I admit, a matter for wonder. For what further audacity, what larger amount of rashness, would have been 
required to translate those books of Origen, after you had put almost the whole of their contents into your 
other works, and, indeed, had already published in books bearing your own name all that is said in those, 
which you now declare worthy of blame? 

32. Perhaps it was a greater piece of audacity to alter the books of the divine Scriptures which had been 
delivered to the Churches of Christ by the Apostles to be a complete record of their faith by making a new 
translation under the influence of the Jews. Which of these two things appears to you to be the less 
legitimate? As to the sayings of Origen, if we agree with them, we agree with them as the sayings of a man; if 
we disagree, we can easily disregard them as those of a mere man. But how are we to regard those 
translations of yours which you are now sending about everywhere, through our churches and monasteries, 
through all our cities and walled towns? are they to be treated as human or divine? And what are we to do 
when we are told that the books which bear the names of the Hebrew Prophets and lawgivers are to be had 

from you in a truer form than that which was approved by the Apostles? How, I ask, is this mistake to be set 
right, or rather, how is this crime to be expiated? We hold it a thing worthy of condemnation that a man should 
have put forth some strange opinions in the interpretation of the law of God; but to pervert the law itself and 
make it different from that which the Apostles handed down to us,-how many times over must this be 
pronounced worthy of condemnation? To the daring temerity of this act we may much more justly apply your 
words: "Which of all the wise and holy men who have gone before you has dared to put his hand to that 
work?" Which of them would have presumed thus to profane the book of God, and the sacred words of the 
Holy Spirit? Who but you would have laid hands upon the divine gift and the inheritance of the Apostles? 

33. There has been from the first in the churches of God, and especially in that of Jerusalem, a plentiful 
supply of men who being born Jews have become Christians; and their perfect acquaintance with both 
languages and their sufficient knowledge of the law is shewn by their administration of the pontifical office. In 
all this abundance of learned men, has there been one who has dared to make havoc of the divine record 
handed down to the Churches by the Apostles and the deposit of the Holy Spirit? For what can we call it but 
havoc, when some parts of it are transformed, and this is called the correction of an error? For instance, the 
whole of the history of Susanna, which gave a lesson of chastity to the churches of God, has by him been cut 
out, thrown aside and dismissed. The hymn of the three children, which is regularly sung on festivals in the 
Church of God, he has wholly erased from the place where it stood. But why should I enumerate these cases 
one by one, when their number cannot be estimated? This, however, cannot be passed over. The seventy 
translators, each in their separate cells, produced a version couched in consonant and identical words, 
under the inspiration, as we cannot doubt, of the Holy Spirit; and this version must certainly be of more 
authority with us than a translation made by a single man under the inspiration of Barabbas. But, putting this 
aside I beg yon to listen, for example, to this as an instance of what we mean. Peter was for twenty-four 
years Bishop of the Church of Rome. We cannot doubt that, amongst other things necessary for the 
instruction of the church, he himself delivered to them the treasury of the sacred books, which, no doubt, had 
even then begun to be read under his presidency and teaching. What are we to say then? Did Peter the 
Apostle of Christ deceive the church and deliver to them books which were false and contained nothing of 
truth? Are we to believe that he knew that the Jews possessed what was true, and yet determined that the 
Christians should have what was false? But perhaps the answer will be made that Peter was illiterate, and 
that, though he knew that the books of the Jews were truer than those which existed in the church, yet he 
could not translate them into Latin because of his linguistic incapacity. What then! Was the tongue of fire 
given by the Holy Spirit from heaven of no avail to him? Did not the Apostles speak in all languages? 

34. But let us grant that the Apostle Peter was unable to do what out friend has lately done. Was Paul 
illiterate? we ask; He who was a Hebrew of the Hebrews, touching the law a Pharisees brought up at the feet 
of Gamaliel? Could not he when he was at Rome, have supplied any deficiencies of Peter? Is it conceivable 
that they, who prescribed to their disciples that they should give attention to reading,' did not give them 
correct and true reading? These men who bid us not attend to Jewish fables and genealogies, which 
minister questioning rather than edification; and who, again, bid us beware of, and specially watch, those of 
the circumcision; is it conceivable that they could not foresee through the Spirit that a time would come, after 
nearly four hundred years, when the church would find out that the Apostles had not delivered to them the 
truth of the old Testament, and would send an embassy to those whom the apostles spoke of as the 
circumcision, begging and beseeching them to dole out to them some small portion of the truth which was in 
their possession: and that the Church would through this embassy confess that she had been for all those 
four hundred years in error; that she had indeed been called tile Apostles from among the Gentiles to be the 
bride of Christ, but that they had not decked her with a necklace of genuine I jewels; that she had fondly 
thought that they were precious stones, but now had found out that those were not true gems which the 
Apostles had put upon her, so that she felt ashamed to go forth in public decked in false instead of true 
jewels; and that she therefore begged that they would send her Barabbas, even him whom she had once 
rejected to be married to Christ, so that in conjunction with one man chosen from among her own people, he 
might restore to her the true ornaments with which the Apostles had failed to furnish her. 

35. What wonder is there then that he should tear me to pieces, being as I am of no account; or that he 
should wound Ambrose, or find fault with Hilary, Lactantius and Didymus? I must not greatly grieve over any 
injury of my own in the fact that be has attempted to do my work of translating over again, when he is only 
treating me with the same contempt with which he has treated the Seventy translators. But this emendation of 
the Seventy, what are we to think of it? Is it not evident, bow greatly the grounds for the heathens' unbelief 
have been increased by this proceeding? For they take notice of what is going on amongst us. They know 
that our law has been amended, or at least changed; and do you suppose they do not say among 
themselves, "These people are wandering at random, they have no fixed truth among them, for you see 
how they make amendments and corrections in their laws whenever they please," and indeed it is evident 
that there must havebeen I previous error where amendment has supervened, and that things which 
undergo change at the hand of man cannot possibly be divine. 

This has been the present which you have made us with your excess of wisdom, that we are all judged even 
by the heathen as lacking in wisdom. I reject the wisdom which Peter and Paul did not teach. I will have 
nothing to do with a truth which the Apostles have not approved. These are your own words:[1] "The ears of 
simple men among the Latins ought not after four hundred years to be molested by the sound of new 
doctrines." Now you are yourself saying: "Every one has been under a mistake who thought that Susanna 
had afforded an example of chastity to both the married and the unmarried. It is not true. And every One who 
thought that the boy Daniel was filled with the Holy Spirit and convicted the adulterous old men, was under a 
mistake. That also was not true. And every congregation throughout the universe, whether of those who are 
in the body or of those who have departed to be with the Lord, even though they were holy martyrs or 
confessors, all who have sting the Hymn of the three children have bean in error, and have sung what is 
false. Now therefore after four hundred years the truth of the law comes forth for us i it has been bought with 
money from the Synagogue. When the world has grown old and all things are hastening to their end, let us 
change the inscriptions upon the tombs of the ancients, so that it may be known by those who had read the 
story otherwise, that it was not a gourd[2] but an ivy plant under whose shade Jonah rested; and that, when 
our legislator pleases, it will no longer be the shade of ivy but of some other plant. 

36. But Origen also, you will tell us, in composing his work called the Hexapla, adopted the asterisks, [3] 
taking them from the translation of Theodotion. How is this? Yon produce Origen sometimes for 
condemnation, sometimes for imitation, at your own caprice. But can it be admitted as right that you should 
bring in the same man as your advocate whom just now you were accusing? Can you take as an authority 
for your actions whom you yourself have previously condemned, and to the condemnation of whom you 
stirred up the Roman senate? You ought to have made provision for this beforehand. No man begins by 
cutting the trunk of a tree when he is intending to lean against it; and no man first impugns the faith of another 
and then invokes his faith in his own defence. Whether Origen did as you say or not, makes no difference to 
you. If you wish that his case should be a precedent for yours, read over your judgment upon him, and see 
what you have said. You used the expression: "This is not clearing yourself but only seeking abettors of 
your crime." Apply this to yourself; your business is not to seek abettors of your crime, but to find means of 
justification for your conduct. However, let us see whether anything of the kind was done by Origen whom 
you make both plaintiff and defendant. I do not find a single passage which he translated froth the Hebrew. 
How then can your action and his be said to be alike? What he did was this. He proved that apostates and 
Jews had translated the writings which the Jews specially read: and, since it would frequently happen in the 
course of discussion that they falsely asserted that some" things had been taken out and others put in in our 
copies of the Scriptures, Origen desired to shew to our people what reading obtained among the Jews. He 
therefore wrote out each of their versions in separate pages or columns, and pointed out by means of 
certain specified marks at the head of each line what had been added or Subtracted by them; and he 
merely put these marks of his in the work of others, not in his own; so that we might understand not what we 
ourselves but what the Jews believed to have been either removed or inserted. This was no more than what 
is done in the army when a list is made out containing the names of the soldiers. If the captain wishes to see 
how many of them have survived after an action, he sends a man to make inquiry; and he makes his own 
mark, a (<greek>q</greek>) (theta), for instance, as is commonly done, against the name of each soldier 
who has fallen, and puts some other mark of his own to designate the survivors. Do you suppose that he 
who makes one mark against the name of a dead man and another of his own against that of a survivor, will 
be thought to have done anything which causes the one to be dead and the other to be alive? He has only, 
as is well understood, marked the names of those who have been killed by others, so as to call attention to 
the fact. Just in the same way, Origen pointed out by certain marks of his own, namely, the signs of asterisks 
and obeli, [1] which words had been, so to speak, killed by other translators, and those which had been 
superfluously introduced. But he put in no single word of his own, nor did he make it appear that the certainty 
of our copies was in any point shaken; but those things which, as the actual words run, seemed wanting in 
plainness and clearness, he showed to be full of the mysteries of a spiritual meaning. What comfort then can 
the conduct of Origen give you in this matter, when your work is shown to be quite unlike his, and when all 
your labour is spent upon making one letter kill the next, whereas his endeavour, on the contrary, is to 
vindicate the Spirit which giveth life? 

37. This action is yours, my brother, yours alone. It is clear that no one in the church has been your 
companion or confederate in it, but only that Barabbas whom you mention so frequently. What other spirit 
than that of the Jews would dare to tamper with the records of the church which have been handed down 
from the Apostles? It is they, my brother, you who were most dear to me before you were taken captive by 
the Jews, it is they who are hurrying you into this abyss of evil. It is their doing that those books of yours are 
put forth in which you brand your Christian brethren, not sparing even the martyrs, and heap up accusations 
speakable and unspeakable against Christians of every degree, and mar our peace, and cause a scandal 
to the church. It is they who cause you to pass sentence upon yourself and your own writings as upon words 
which you once spoke as a Christian. We all of us have become worthless in your eyes, while they and their 

evil acts are all your delight. If you had but listened to Paul where he says in his Epistle:[2] " If any brother be 
overtaken in a fault ye who are spiritual restore such a one in the spirit of meekness," you would never have 
let your passions swell up so as altogether to break through the order of our spiritual discipline. 
Suppose that I had written something which was injurious to you; suppose that I had done some injustice to 
you a man of the highest eloquence, who were my brother and my brother presbyter, whom also I had 
pronounced worthy of imitation in your method of translation: even so, this was the first complaint which you 
had received of any injury on my part since friendship had been restored between us, and that with difficulty 
and much trouble. But suppose that you had reason to be offended at the fact that, in my translation of 
Origen, I passed over some things which appeared to me unedifying in point of doctrine-though in this I only 
did what you had done. Possibly I was deserving of blame and correction for this. You say that some of the 
brethren sent letters to you demanding that the faults of the translator should be pointed out. What then did 
you do, you who are a man of spiritual attainments? What a model, what an example of conduct in such 
matters is this which you have given! You not only blazen forth the shame of your brother's nakedness to 
those who are without, but you yourself tear away the covering of his nakedness. Suppose even that what I 
did was not done as you had done it, suppose that, through some access of drunkenness creeping 
unawares upon me, I had laid bare my own shame as the Patriarch did; would it have been a curse which 
you would have incurred if you had walked backward and made your reply like a soft cloak to cover my 
reproach, if the letter of the brother who was wide-awake had veiled the brother who lay exposed through his 
own drowsiness in writing? 

38. But you will say, It was impossible for me to reply otherwise than I did. The letter which I received was 
such that, if I had not replied and retranslated literally the books which you had translated paraphrastically, I 
should myself have been thought to be a follower of Origen. I will not at present say anything as to the 
character of that letter, except that it bears the name of a man of high rank, Pammachius: but I ask, would 
there have been anything uncourteous in such a reply as this: I " My brothers we ought not readily to judge of 
other men's works. You remember what you did when I had sent my books against Jovinian to Rome,[1] 
and when some persons understood them in a different sense from that in which, if my memory serves me, I 
bad composed them. They were read by a great many people, and almost every one I was offended by 
them, you yourself, as was believed, amongst them. Did you not on that occasion withdraw from circulation 
the copies which had been exposed to sate publicly in the forum, and send them, not to some one else, but 
to me, at the same thee pointing out the grounds on which you thought so many had been offended? And I, 
as you remember, wrote an Apology in new terms, so as to give a sounder meaning, as far as I could, to 
expressions to which a different sense had been attributed. Well, it is but fair that as we would that men 
should do to us so we should do to them: and therefore, as you sent me back my hooks for correction, so do 
now with these books: send them back to their author, and hint to him what you think blameable in them, so 
that, if in anything he has gone wrong, he may correct it. Besides, though I have exercised" my talents on 
man), subjects, and laboured out many works, this is almost the first work which he has attempted, and 
possibly even this he has done under compulsion, so that it is not strange if he has not gone quite straight at 
first. We should not seize upon opportunities for disparaging men who are Christians, but seek their 
advantage by correcting what they have done wrong." 

39. If your reply to him had been couched in terms like these, would you not have ministered grace and 
edification both to him, since he has been initiated into the fear of God, and to all your other readers, 
whereas these invectives of yours are the cause of sadness and confusion to all who fear God, since they 
see you a prey to this hideous lust of detraction, and the driven to the wretched necessity of recrimination. 
But, as I have said, this evidence was unnecessary. You yourself in the books you published against 
Jovinian, at one thee assert, as can be shewn, the same things which you blamed in him, while at another 
you fall into the opposite extreme, and declare marriage to be so disgraceful a state that its stain cannot 
even be washed away by the blood of martyrdom. But, if it appeared to you an easy thing for your friend to 
procure what amounts to a correction of the dogma of the Manichaeans as it was originally expressed in 
these books, and that when they were already published and placed in the hands of many persons to copy, 
what difficulty would there have been in my correcting a work which was not my own but a translation of that 
of another man, if any mistakes could be pointed out in it, I will not say by reason, but even by envy? 
especially when it was still in rough sheets, which I had not read over again or corrected, and which were not 
published when your friends took possession of them. Was it an impossibility to get these writings corrected 
which were then In an uncorrected state? But the sting does not proceed from that quarter; he would have 
found nothing to blame there It proceeds wholly from the fact that he was afraid that it might come to light 
what is the source of all that he says, and whence he gains the reputation of a learned man and a great 
expounder of the Scriptures. 

40. I explained the reasons which induced me to make the translation so that it should be seen that I acted, 
not in the spirit of contention and rivalry, in which he so often acts, but from the necessity which I have 
explained above; and I did it as an aid to a good and useful undertaking. [1] I hoped that it might impart 

something both of lucidity and of brightness to one who, though with little culture, was composing a serious 
work. Do we not know cases in which old houses have been of use in the construction of new ones? 
Sometimes a stone is taken from the parts of air old house which are remote and concealed, to decorate 
the portal of the new house and adorn its entrance. And at times an edifice of modern architecture is 
supported by the strength of a single ancient beam. Are we then to place ourselves in opposition to those 
who rightly use what is old in building up what is new? Are we to say, You are not allowed to transfer the 
materials of the old house to the new, unless you join each beam to its beam, each stone to its stone, unless 
you make a portico of what was a portico before, a chamber of what was a chamber; and this must further 
involve building up the most secret recesses from what were such before, and the sewers from the former 
sewers: for every large house must have such places. This is the process of translating word for word, which 
in former days you esteemed inadmissible, but which you now approve. But you claim that what is in itself 
unlawful is lawful for you, while for us even what is lawful you impute as a crime. You think it right that you 
should be praised for changing the words of the Sacred Books and Divine volumes; but if we, when we 
imitate you in translating a human work, pass over anything which seems to us not to be edifying, we are to 
have no pardon for this at your hands, though you yourself set us the example. 

41 . However, let him act in these matters as he himself thinks lawful or expedient. Let me recapitulate in the 
end of this book what I have said in a scattered way in my own defence. He had said of me that it seemed 
as if I could not be a heretic without him; I therefore set forth my belief and, in respect of the resurrection of the 
dead I proved that he rather than I was in error, since he spoke of the resurrection body as frail. I shewed 
also that he did away with the distinction of sex in the other world, saying that bodies would become souls 
women men. I next revealed the causes which had led to my translation-very proper causes in my opinion; I 
shewed that it was not because I was stimulated by contentiousness, nor because I was desirous of glory, 
but because I was incited by the fear of God, that I imported a store of old Greek material to be used in the 
new Latin construction, that I furbished up the old armour which had become enveloped in rust, not with a 
view to excite a civil war but to repel a hostile attack. I then introduced the chief matter on which they have 
laid their forgers' hands, the adulterous blasphemy against the Son of God and the Holy Spirit, a thing quite 
alien from me, but brought in by these men in their wickedness as I shewed by quotations. 
42. 1 then took up one by one the points in which he had blamed Origen, with the intention of striking at me 
and discrediting my work of translation. I shewed from those very Commentaries of his from which he had 
said that we might expect to learn and test his belief, that on three points, namely the previous state of the 
soul, the restitution of all things, and his views concerning the devil and apostate angels, he has himself 
written the same things which he blames in Origen. I convicted him of having said that the souls of men were 
held bound in this body as in a prison and I proved that he had asserted' in these very Commentaries that 
the whole rational creation of angels and of human souls formed but a single body. I next shewed that, as to 
an association for perjury, there was no one who had so much to do with it in its deepest mysteries as 
himself; and in accordance with this I proved that the doctrine that truth and the higher teaching ought not to 
be disclosed to all men was taught by him in these same Commentaries. I next took up the question of 
secular literature, as to which he had made this declaration to Christ as he sat on the judgment seat and 
ordered him to be beaten: "If ever I read or possess the books of the heathen, I have denied Thee;" and I 
shewed clearly that he not only reads and possesses these books now, but that he supports all the 
bragging of which his teaching is full on his knowledge of them; so much so that he boasts of having been 
introduced to the knowledge of logic through the Introduction of Porphyry the prince of unbelievers. And, 
while he says that it is a doctrine of the heathen, to speak in this or that manner both about the soul and 
about other creatures, I shewed that he had spoken of God in a more degrading manner than any of the 
heathen when he said that God had a mother-in-law. But further, whereas he had declared that he had only 
mentioned Origen in two short Prefaces, and then not as a man of apostolic rank but merely as a man of 
talent, I, though for brevity's sake only bringing forward ten of his Prefaces, established the fact that in each 
of them he had spoken of him not only as an apostolic man but as a teacher of the churches next after the 
apostles, and as one whose teaching was followed by himself and all wise men. 

43. Moreover, I pointed out clearly that it is habitual to him to disparage all good men, and that, if he can find 
something to blame in one man after another of those who are highly esteemed and have gained a name in 
literature, he thinks that he has added to his own reputation. I shewed also how shamefully some of 
Christ's[1] priests have been assailed by him; and how he has spared neither the monks nor the virgins, nor 
those who live in continency, whom he had praised before; how he has defamed in his lampoons every 
order and degree of Christians; how shamefully and foully he assailed even Ambrose, that saintly man, the 
memory of whose illustrious life still lives in the hearts of all men: how even Didymus, whom he had formerly 
ranked among the seer-prophets and Apostles, now he places among those whose teaching diverges from 
that of, the churches; how he brands with the marks of ignorance or of foil every single writer of ancient and of 
modern days; and finally does not spare even the martyrs. All these things I have brought to the proof of his 
own works and his own testimony, not to that of external witnesses. I have gone through each particular, and 

have brought out the evidence from those very books of his which he most commends, books which alone 
he excepted as containing nothing of which he needed to repent, while he says that he repents of all his 
other sayings and writings; not that his repentance is sincere, but that he is driven into such straits that he 
must choose either to feign penitence or to forfeit the vantage ground which enables him to bite and wound 
any one whom he pleases. I therefore preferred not to touch his other writings, so that his conviction might 
come out of those alone out of which he had himself closed the door of repentance. Last of all I have shown 
that be has altered the sacred books which the Apostles had committed to the churches as the trustworthy 
deposit of the Holy Spirit, and that he who calls out about the audacity shewn in translating mere human 
works himself commits the greater crime of subverting the divine oracles. 

44. It remains that every reader of this book should give his suffrage for one or the other of us, judging as he 
desires that he may himself be judged by God; and that he should not injure his own soul by favoring either 
party unjustly. Also, my beloved son Apronianus, go to Pammachius, that saintly man whose letter is put 
forward by our friend in this Invective or Bill of Indictment of his, and adjure him in Christ's name to incline in 
his judgment to the cause of innocence not that of party-spirit: it is the cause of truth that is at stake, and 
religion not party should be our guide. It is a precept of our Lord[1] to "judge not according to the 
appearance, but judge a righteous judgment," and, just as in each one of the least of his brethren it is Christ 
who is thirsty and hungry, who is clothed and fed; so in these who are unjustly judged it is He who is judged 
unrighteously. When some are hated without a cause, he will speak on their behalf and say:[2] "You have 
hated me without a cause." What judgment does he think will be formed of this cause and of his action in it 
before the tribunal of Christ? He remembers well no doubt how, when the men we are speaking of bad 
written and published his books against Jovinian, and men were already reading them and finding fault with 
i them, he withdrew them from the hands of the readers, and stopped their remarks, and blamed them for 
their blame of his friend; and how, further, he sent the books back to the author, with the suggestion that he 
should either correct those passages which bad been found fault with, or in any way that he would set 
matters right. But when what I had written fell into his hands,-it was not then a book but merely a number of 
imperfect, uncorrected papers, which had been subtracted by fraud and theft by some scoundrel; he Bid not 
bring it to me and complain of it, though I was close at hand; he did not deign even to rebuke me or to 
convict me of wrong through some friend, as it might have been, or even some enemy; but sent my papers 
to the East, and set to work the tongue of that man who never vet knew how to control it. Would it have been 
against the precepts of our religion if he had met me face to face? Did he think me so utterly unworthy of 
holding controverse with him, that it was not worth while even to argue with me? Yet for us too Christ died, for 
our salvation also He shed his blood. We are sinners, I grant, but we belong to his flock and are numbered 
among his sheep. Pammachius, however, must be held in honour for his excellent deeds wrought through 
faith in Christ, which should be an example to all others; for he has counted his rank as nothing worth, and 
has made himself equal to the humble; consequently, I was unwilling to see him carried away by human 
partisanship and contention, lest his faith should suffer damage in any way. At all events we shall see how 
far he preserves a right judgment when he sees that that great master Jerome[1] taught, in the 
commentaries which he selected as satisfactory even after his repentance, the very things which he 
condemns in others as being alien to his own teaching. We shall think that his former action was a mistake 
due to ignorance if he recognizes it and sets it right. As for myself, though[2] under the compulsion of 
necessity, I have endeavoured to make answer to him who had attacked me with such great bitterness, yet 
for this also I ask for forgiveness if I have handled the matter too sharply; for God is my witness how truly I 
can say that I have kept silence on many more points than I have brought forward. I could not wholly keep 
silence in the presence of accusations which I know to be undeserved, when I heard from many that my 
silence would bring their own faith into peril. 

45. After this Apology had been written, one of the brethren who came to us from you at Rome and helped 
me in revising it, observed that one point in my defence had been passed over which he had heard 
adversely dwelt upon by my detractors there. The point turns upon a statement in my Preface, where I said 
of him who is now my persecutor and accuser that in the works or Origen which he translated there are found 
certain grounds of offence in the Greek, but that he has in his translation so cleared them away that the Latin 
reader will find nothing in them which is dissonant from our faith. On this sentence they remark: "You see how 
he has praised his method of translation and has borne his testimony that in the books he has translated no 
grounds of offence are to be found, and promised that he would himself follow the same method. Why then 
is not his own translation free from grounds of offence, as he bears witness is the case with the writings of the 
other? 

46. 1 suppose it is not to be wondered at that I am always blamed for the points in which I have praised him. It 
is quite right, no doubt. But to come to the matter itself. I said that when grounds of offence appeared in the 
Greek he had cleared them away in his Latin translation; and not wrongly; but he had done this just in the 
same sense as I have done it. For instance, in the Homilies on Isaiah, he explains the two Seraphim as 
meaning the Son and the Holy Ghost? and he adds this of his own: "Let no one think that there is a difference 

of nature in the Trinity when the offices of the Persons are distinguished"; and by this he thinks that he has 
been able to remedy the grounds of offence. I in a similar way occasionally removed, altered or added a 
few words, in the attempt to draw the meaning of the writer into better accordance with the straight path of the 
faith. What did I do in this which was different or contrary to our friend's system? what which was not identical 
with it? But the difference lies in this, that I was judging of his writings without ill-will or detraction, and therefore 
saw in them not what might lend itself to depreciation, but what the translator aimed at; whereas he is 
seeking for occasions for calumniating others, and therefore finds fault with those things in my writings which 
he himself has formerly written. And indeed he is right in blaming me, since I have pronounced what he has 
said to be right, whereas in his judgment it is reprehensible. This holds in reference to the doctrine he has 
expressed about the Trinity; namely, that the two Seraphim are the Son and the Holy Ghost, from which 
especially the charge of blasphemy is drawn, that is, if he is to be judged according to the system which he 
has adopted in dealing with me. But. according to the system which I have adopted in judging of his writings, 
apart from the matter of calumny, he is not to be held guilty because of what he has added on his own 
account to explain the author's meaning. 

47. As regards the resurrection of the flesh, I think that my translation contains the same doctrines which are 
preached in the churches. As to the other points which relate to the various orders of created beings, I have 
already said that they have nothing to do with our faith in the Deity. But if he appeals to these for the sake of 
calumniating others, though they have hitherto presented no ground of offence, I do not deny his right to do 
so, if he thinks well to revoke my judgment by which he might have been absolved, and to enforce his own, 
by which he ought to be condemned. It is not my judgment on him which is blameable, but his own, which 
takes others to task for doing what he approves in himself. But this iS a new method of judgment according 
to which I am defending my own accuser, and he considers that he has at last gained the victory over me 
when he has brought himself in guilty. But suppose that a Synod of Bishops should accept the sentences 
you have pronounced, and should demand that all the books which contain the impugned doctrines, 
together with their authors, should be condemned; then these books must be condemned first as they stand 
in the Greek; and then what is condemned in Greek must undoubtedly be condemned in the Latin. Then will 
come the turn of your own books; they will be found to contain the same things, even according to your Own 
judgment. And as it has been of no advantage to Origen that yon have praised him, so it will be of no profit to 
you that I have pleaded in your behalf. I shall then be bound to follow the judgment of the Catholic Church 
whether it is given against the books of Origen or against yours. 

JEROME'S APOLOGY FOR HIMSELF AGAINST THE 
BOOKS OF RUFINUS, BOOK I 

JEROME'S APOLOGY FOR HIMSELF AGAINST THE BOOKS OF RUFINUS. 

Addressed to Pammachius and Ma reel la from Bethlehem, A.D. 402. 

BOOK I. 

The documents which Jerome had before him when he wrote his Apology were (I) Rufinus' Translation of 
Pamphilus' Apology with the Preface prefixed to it and the book on the Falsification of the Books of Origen, 
(2) the Translation of the <greek>Peri</greek> A<greek>rkpn</greek> and Rufinus' Preface, (3) The 
Apology of Rufinus addressed to Anastasius (see p. 430), and (4) Anastasius' letter to John of Jerusalem (p. 
432 Apol. ii, 14, iii, 20). He had also other letters of Anastasius like that addressed to the Bishop of Milan 
(Jerome Letter 95. See also Apol. iii, 21). But he had not the full text of Rufinus' Apology (c. 4, 15). He 
received letters from Pammachius and Marcella, at the beginning of the Spring of 402, when the Apology 
written at Aquileia at the end of 400 had become known to Rufinus' friends for some thee. They had been 
unable to obtain a full copy, but had sent the chief heads of it, and had strongly urged Jerome to reply. At the 
same thee his brother Paulinianus who had been some three years in the West, returned to Palestine by 
way of Rome, and there heard and saw portions of Rufinus' Apology, which he committed to memory (Apol. 
i, 21 , 28) and repeated at Bethlehem. To these documents Jerome replies. 
The heads of the First Book are as follows. 

1 . It is hard that an old friend with whom I had been reconciled should attack me in a book secretly circulated 
among his disciples. 

2. Others have translated Origen. Why does he single me out? 

3. He gave me fictitious praise in his Preface to the <greek>Peri</greek> A<greek>rkpn</greek> Now, 
since I defend myself, he writes 3 books against me as an enemy. 

4. 5. He spoke of me as united in faith with him; but what is his faith? Why are his books kept secret? I can 
meet any attack. 

6. I translated the <greek>Peri</greek> A<greek>rkpn</greek> because you demanded it, and because 
his translation slurred over Origen's heresies. 

7. My translation put away ambiguities, and showed the real character of the book, and of the previous 
translation. 

8. My translation of Origen's Commentaries created no excitement; his first translation, of Pamphilus' 
Apology, roused all Rome to indignation. 

9. But the work was really Eusebius's, who tells us that Pamphilus wrote nothing. 

10. After the condemnation of Origen by Theophilus and Anastasius, it would be wise in Rufinus to give up 
this pretended defence. 

11.1 had praised Eusebius as well as Origen only as writers; and was forced to condemn them as heretics. 

Why should this be taken amiss? 

12. 1 wrote a friendly letter to Rufinus, which my friends kept back. 

13. There is nothing to blame in my getting the help of a Jew in translating from the Hebrew. 

14. There is nothing strange in my praising Origen before I knew the <greek>Peri</greek> 
A<greek>rkpn</greek> 

15. The accusations seem inconsistent, but I knew them only by report. 

16. The office of a commentator. 

17. We must distinguish methods of writing, and not expect a vulgar simplicity in the various compositions of 
cultured men. 

18. My assertion was true, that Origen permitted the use of falsehood. 

19. The accusation about a mistranslation of Ps. ii is easily explained. 

20. In the difficulties of the translator and the commentator we must get help where we can. 

21. In the Commentary on Ephesians I acted straightforwardly in giving the views of Origen and others. 

22. As to the passage "He hath chosen us before the foundation of the world." 

23. As to the passage "Far above all rule and authority &c." 

24. As to the passage "That in the ages to come &c." 

25. As to "Paul the prisoner of Jesus Christ." 

26. As to "The body fitly framed &c." 

27. 1 quoted Origen's views as, "According to another heresy." 
28, 29. As to "Men loving their wives as their own bodies." 

30. To the charge of reading secular books I reply that I remember what I learned in youth. 

31 . Also, a promise given in a dream must not be pressed. Why should such things be raked up by old 
friends against one another? 

32. 1 am right in my contention that all sins are remitted in baptism. 

I have learned not only from your letter but froth those of many others that cavils are raised against me in the 
school of Tyrannus,[1] "by the tongue of my dogs from the enemies by himself [2] because I have 
translated the books <greek>Pr</greek><s210<greek>i</greek> A<greek>rkpn</greek> into Latin. What 
unprecedented shamelessness is this! They accuse the physician for detecting the poison: and this in order 
to protect their vendor of drugs, not in obtaining the reward of innocence but in his partnership with the 
criminal; as if the number of the offenders diminished the crime, or as if the accusation depended on our 
personal feelings not on the facts. Pamphlets are written against me; they are forced on every one's 
attention; and yet they are not, openly published, so that the hearts of the simple are disturbed, and no 
opportunity is given me of answering. This is a new way of injuring a man, to make accusations which you 
are afraid of sending abroad, to write what you are obliged to hide. If what he writes is true why is he afraid of 
the public? if it is false, why has he written it? We read when we were boys the words of Cicero: "I consider it 
a lack of self-control to write anything which you intend to keep hidden. "[3] I ask, What iS it of which they 
complain? Whence comes this heat, this madness of theirs? Is it because I have rejected a reigned 
laudation?[4] Because I refused the praise offered in insincere words? Because under the name of a friend I 
detected the snares of an enemy? I am called in this Preface brother and colleague, yet my supposed 
crimes are set forth openly, and it is proclaimed that I have written in favour of Origen, and have by my 
praises exalted him to the skies. The writer says that he has done this with a good intention. How then does 
it come to pass that he now casts in my teeth, as an open enemy, what he then praised as a friend? He 
declared that he had meant to follow me as his predecessor in his translation, and to borrow an authority for 
his work from some poor works of mine. If that was so, it would have been sufficient for him to have stated 
once for all that I had written. Where was the necessity for him to repeat the same things, and to force them 
on men's notice by iteration, and to turn over the same words again and again, as if no one would believe in 
his praises? A praise which is simple and genuine does not show all this anxiety about its credit with the 
reader. How is it that he is afraid that, unless he produces my own words as witnesses, no one will believe 
him when he praises me? You see that we perfectly understand his arts; he has evidently been to the 
theatrical school, and has learned up by constant practice the part of the mocking encomiast. It is of no use 
to put on a veil of simplicity, when the schemer is detected in his malicious purpose. To have made a 
mistake once, or, to stretch the point, even twice, may be an unlucky chancel but how is it that he makes the 
supposed mistake with his eyes open, and repeats it, and weaves this mistake into the whole tissue of his 
writings so as to make it impossible for me to deny the things for which he praises me? A true friend who 
knew what he was about would, after our previous misunderstanding and our reconciliation, have avoided 
all appearance of suspicious conduct, and would have taken care not to do through inadvertence what 
might seem to be done advisedly. Tully says in his book of pleadings for 'Galinius': "I have always felt that it 
was a religious duty of the highest kind to presence every friendship that I have formed; but most of all those 
in which kindness has been restored after some disagreement. In the case of friendships which have never 
been shaken, if some attention has not been paid, the excuse of forgetfulness, or at the worst of neglect is 
readily accepted; but after a return to friendship, if anything is done to cause offence, it is imputed not to 
neglect but to an unfriendly intention, it is no longer a question of thoughtlessness but of breach of faith. "So 
Horace writes in his Epistle to Florus 

1. "Kindness, ill-knit, cleaves not but flies apart." 

2. What good does it do me that he declares on his oath that it was through simplicity that he went wrong? 
His praises are, as you know, cast in my teeth, and the laudation of this most simple friend (which however 
has not much either of simplicity or of sincerity in it) is imputed to me as a crime. If he was seeking a 
foundation of authority for what he was doing, and wishing to shew who had gone before him in this path be 
had at band the Confessor Hilary, who translated the books of Origen upon Job and the Psalms consisting 
of forty thousand lines. He had Ambrose whose works are almost all of them, full of what Origen has written; 
and the martyr Victorinus, who acts really with 'simplicity,' and without setting snares for others. As to all 
these he keeps silence; he does not notice those who are like pillars of the church; but me, who am but like 
a flea and a man of no account, he hunts out from corner to corner. Perhaps the same simplicity which made 
him unconscious that he was attacking his friend will make him swear that he knew nothing of these writers. 
But who will believe that he does not know these men whose memory is quite recent, even though they were 

Latins, being as he is such a very learned man, and one who has so great a knowledge of the old writers, 
especially the Greeks, that, in his zeal for foreign knowledge he has almost lost his own language?[2] The 
truth is it is not so much that I have been praised by him as that those writers have not been attacked. But 
whether what he has written is praise (as he tries to make simpletons believe) or an attack, (as I feel it to be 
from the pain which his wounds give me), he has taken care that I should have none of my contemporaries 
to bring me honor by a partnership in praise, nor consolation by a partnership in vituperation. 

3. I have in my hands your letter,[1] in which you tell me that I have been accused, and expect me to reply to 
my accuser lest silence should be taken as an acknowledgment of his charges. I confess that I sent the 
reply; but, though I felt hurt, I observed the laws of friendship, and defended myself without accusing my 
accuser. I put it as if the objections which one friend had raised at Rome were being bruited about by many 
enemies in all parts of the world, so that every one should think that I was replying to the charges, not to the 
man. Will you tell me that another course was open to me, that I was bound by the law of friendship to keep 
silence under accusation, and, though I felt my face, so to say, covered with dirt and bespattered with the filth 
of heresy, not even to wash it with simple water, for fear that an act of injustice might be imputed to him. This 
demand is not such as any man ought to make or such as any man ought to accept. You openly assail your 
friend, and set out charges against him under the mask of an admirer; and he is not even to be allowed to 
prove himself a catholic, or to reply that the supposed heresy on which this laudation is grounded arises not 
from any agreement with a heresy, but from admiration of a great genius. He thought it desirable to translate 
this book into Latin; or, as he prefers to have it thought he was compelled, though unwilling, to do it. But what 
need was there for him to bring me into the question, when I was in retirement, and separated from him by 
vast intervals of land and sea? Why need he expose me to the ill-will of the multitude, and do more harm to 
me by his praise than good to himself by putting me forward as his example? Now also, since I have 
repudiated his praise, and, by erasing what he had written, have shewn that I am not what my friend 
declared, I am told that be is in a fury, and has composed three books against me full of graceful Attic 
raillery, making those very things the object of attack which he had praised before, and turning into a ground 
of accusation against me the impious doctrines of Origen; although in that Preface in which he so landed 
me, he says of me: "I shall follow the rules of translation laid down by my predecessors, and particularly 
those acted on by the writer whom I have just mentioned. He has rendered into Latin more than seventy of 
Origen's homiletical treatises, and a few also of his commentaries on the Apostle; and in these, wherever 
the Greek text presents a stumbling block, he has smoothed it down in his version and has so emended the 
language used that a Latin writer can find no word that is at variance with our faith. In his steps, therefore, I 
propose to walk, if not displaying the same vigorous eloquence, at least observing the same rules." 

4. These words are his own, he cannot deny them. The very elegance of the style and the laboured mode of 
speech, and, surpassing all these, the Christian 'simplicity' which here appears, reveal the character of their 
author. But there is a different phase of the matter: Eusebius, it seems, has depraved these books; and now 
my friend who accuses Origen, and who is so careful of my reputation, declares that both Eusebius and I 
have gone wrong together, and then that we have held correct opinions together, and that in one and the 
same work. But he cannot now be my enemy and call me a heretic, when a moment before he has said that 
his belief was not dissonant from mine. Then, I must ask him what is the meaning of his balanced and 
doubtful way of speaking: "The Latin reader," he says, "will find nothing here discordant from our faith." What 
faith is this which he calls his? Is it the faith by which the Roman Church is • distinguished? or is it the faith 
which is contained in the works of Origen? If he answers "the Roman." then we are the Catholics, since we 
have adopted none of Origen's errors in our translations. But if Origen's blasphemy is his faith, then, though 
he tries to fix on me the charge of inconsistency, he proves himself to be a heretic. If the man who praises 
me is orthodox, he takes me, by his own confession as a sharer in his orthodoxy. If he is heterodox, he 
shews that he had praised me before my explanation because he thought me a sharer in his error. 
However, it will be time enough to reply to these books of his which whisper in corners and made their 
venomous attacks in secret, when they are published and come out from their dark places into the light, and 
when they have been able to reach me either through the zeal of my friends or the imprudence of my 
adversaries. We need not be much afraid or attacks which their author fears to publish and allows only his 
confenderates to read. Then and not till then will I either acknowledge the justice of his charges, or refute 
them, or retort upon the accuser the accusations he has made: and will shew that my silence has been the 
result not of a bad conscience but of forbearance. 

5. In the meantime, I desired to free myself from suspicion in the implicit judgment of the reader, and to refute 
the gravest of the charges in the eyes of my friends. I did not wish it to appear that I had been the first to 
strike, seeing that I have not, even when wounded: aimed a blow against my assailant, but have only sought 
to heal my own wound. I beg the reader to let the blame rest on him who struck the first blow, without respect 
of persons. He is not content with striking; but, as if he were dealing with a man whom he had reduced to 
silence and who would never speak again, he has written three elaborate books and has made out from my 
works a list of Contradictions" worthy of Marcion. Our minds are all on fire to know at once what his doctrine 

is and what is this madness of mine which we had not expected. Perhaps he has learnt (though the time for it 

has been short) all that is necessary to make him my teacher, and a sudden flow of eloquence will reveal 

what no one imagined that he knew. 

2 "Grant it, O Father; mighty Jesus, grant. Let him begin the engagement hand to hand." 

Though he may brandish the spear of his accusations and hurl them against us with all his might, we trust in 

tim Lord our Saviour that his truth will encompass us as with a shield, and we shall be able to sing with the 

Psalmist:[3] "Their blows have become as the arrows of the little ones," and[4] "Though an host should 

encamp against me, my heart shall not fear; though war should rise against me, even then will I he 

confident." But of this at another time. Let us now return to the point where we began. 

6. His followers object to me, (and [5] "Weary of work they ply the arms of Ceres,") that I have translated into 
the Latin tongue the books of Origen A<greek>rkpn</greek>, which are pernicious and repugnant to the faith 
of the Church. My answer to them is brief and succinct: "Your letters, my brother Pammachius, and those of 
your friends, have compelled me. You declared that these books had been falsely translated by another, 
and that not a few things had been interpolated or added or altered. And, lest your letters should fail to carry 
conviction, you sent a copy of tiffs translation, together with the Preface in which I was praised. As soon as I 
had run my eye over these documents, I at once noticed that the impious doctrine enunciated by Origen 
about the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, to which the ears of Romans could not bear to listen, had been 
changed by the translator so as to give a more orthodox meaning. His other doctrines, on the fall of the 
angels, the lapse of human souls, his prevarications about the resurrection, his ideas about the world, or 
rather Epicurus's middle-spaces, [1] on the restitution of all to a state of equality, and others much worse than 
these, which it would take too long to recount, I found that he had either translated as they stood in the Greek, 
or had stated them in a stronger and exaggerated manner in words taken from the books of Didymus, who 
is the most open champion of Origen. The effect of all this is that the reader, finding that the book expressed 
the catholic doctrine on the Trinity, would take in these heretical views without warning. 

7. One who was not his friend would probably say to him: Either change everything which is bad, or else 
make known everything which you think thoroughly good. If for the sake of simple Christians you cut out 
everything which is pernicious and do not choose to put into a foreign language the things that you say have 
been added by heretics; tell us everything which is pernicious. But, if you mean to make a veracious and 
faithful translation, why do yon change some things and leave others untouched? You make an open 
profession in the prologue that you have amended what is bad and have left all that is best: and therefore, if 
anything in the work is proved to be heretical, you cannot enjoy the license given to a translator but must 
accept the authority of a writer: and you will be openly convicted of the criminal intent of besmearing with 
honey the poisoned cup so that the sweetness which meets the sense may hide the deadly venom. These 
things, and things ranch harder than these, an enemy would say; and he would draw you before the tribunal 
of the church, not as the translator of a bad work but as one who assents to its doctrines. But I am satisfied 
with having simply defended myself. I expressed in Latin just what I found in the Greek text of the books 
<greek>Peri</greek> A<greek>rkpn</greek>, not wishing the reader to believe what was in my translation, 
but wishing him not to believe what was in yours. I looked for a double advantage as the result of my work, 
first to unveil the heresy of the author and secondly to convict the untrustworthiness of the translator. And, that 
no one might think that I assented to the doctrine which I bad translated, I asserted in the Preface how I had 
been compelled to make this version and pointed out what the reader ought not to believe. The first 
translation makes for the glory of the author, the second for his shame. The one summons the reader to 
believe its doctrines, the other moves him to disbelieve them. In that I am claimed against my will as 
praising the author; in this I not only do not praise him, but am compelled to accuse the man who does 
praise him. The same task has been accomplished by each, but with a different intention: the same journey 
has had two different issues. Our friend has taken away words which existed, alleging that the books had 
been depraved by heretics: and he has put in those which did not exist, alleging that the assertions had 
been made by the author in other places; but of this he will never convince us unless he can point out the 
actual places whence he says that he has taken them. My endeavour was to change nothing from what was 
actually there; for my object in translating the work was to expose the false doctrines which I translated. Do 
you look upon me as merely a translator? I was more. I turned informer. I informed against a heretic, to clear 
the church of heresy. The reasons which led me formerly to praise Origen in certain particulars are set forth 
in the treatise prefixed to this work. The sole cause which led to my translation is now before the reader. No 
one has a right to charge me with the author's impiety, for I did it with a pious intention, that of betraying the 
impiety which had been commended as piety to the churches. 

8. 1 had given Latin versions, as my friend tauntingly says, of seventy books of Origen, and of some parts of 
his Tomes, but no question was ever raised about my work; no commotion was felt on the subject in Rome. 
What need was there to commit to the ears of the Latins what Greece denounces and the whole world 
blames? I, though translating many of Origen's work in the course of many years, never created a scandal: 
but you, though unknown before, have by your first and only work become notorious for your rash 

proceeding. Your Preface tells us that you have also translated the work of Pamphilus the martyr in defence 
of Origen; and you strive with all your might to prevent the church from condemning a man whose faith the 
martyr attests. The real fact is[1] that Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea, as I have already said before, who was 
in his day the standard bearer of the Arian faction, wrote a large and elaborate work in six books in defence 
of Origen, showing by many testimonies that Origen was in his sense a catholic, that is, in our sense, an 
Arian. The first of these six books you have translated and assigned it to the martyr. I must not wonder, 
therefore, that yon wish to make me, a shall man and of no account, appear as an admirer of Origen, when 
you bring the same calumny against the martyr. You change a few statements about the Son of God and the 
holy Spirit, which yon knew would offend the Romans, and let the rest go unchanged from beginning to end; 
you did, in fact, in the case of this Apology of Pamphilus as you call it, just what you did in the translation of 
Origen's <greek>Peri</greek> A<greek>rkpn</greek>. If that book is Pamphilus's, which of the six books is 
Eusebius's first? In the very volume which you pretend to be Pamphilus's, mention is made of the later 
books. Also, in the second and following books. Eusebius says that he had said such and such things in the 
first book and excuses himself for repeating them. If the whole work is Pamphilus's, why do you not translate 
the remaining books? If it is the work of the other, why do you change the name? You cannot answer; but the 
facts make answer of themselves: You thought that men would believe the martyr, though they would have 
turned in abhorrence from the chief of the Arians. 

9. Am I to say plainly what your intention was, my most simple-minded friend? Do you think that we can 
believe that you unwittingly gave the name of the martyr to the book of a man who was a heretic; and thus 
made the ignorant, through their trust in Christ's witness, become the defenders of Origen? Considering the 
erudition for which yon are renowned, for which you are praised throughout the West; as an illustrious 
litterateur,[2] so that the men of your party all speak of you as their Coryphaeus, I will not suppose that you 
are ignorant of Eusebius'[3] Catalogue, which states the fact that the martyr Pamphilus never wrote a single 
book.[1] Eusebius himself, the lover and companion of Pamphilus, and the herald of his praises, wrote three 
books in elegant language containing the life of Pamphilus. In these he extols other traits of his character 
with extraordinary encomiums, and praises to the sky his humility; but on his literary interests he writes as 
follows in the third book: "What lover of books was there who did not find a friend in Pamphilus? If he knew of 
any of them being in want of the necessaries of life, he helped them to the full extent of his power. He would 
not only lend them copies of the Holy Scriptures to read, but would give them most readily, and that not only 
to men, but to women also if he saw that they were given to reading. He therefore kept a store of 
manuscripts, so theft he might be able to give them to those who wished for them whenever occasion 
demanded. He himself however, wrote nothing whatever of his own, except private letters which he sent to 
his friends, so humble was his estimate of himself. But the treatises of the old writers he studied with the 
greatest diligence, and was constantly occupied in meditation upon them." 

1 0. The champion of Origen, you see, the encomiast of Pamphilus, declares that Pamphilus wrote nothing 
whatever, that he composed no single treatise of his own. And you cannot take refuge in the hypothesis that 
Pamphilus wrote this book after Eusebius's publication, since Eusebius wrote after Pamphilus had attained 
the crown of martyrdom. What then can you now do? The consciences of a great many persons have been 
wounded by the book which yon have published under the name of the martyr; they give no heed to the 
authority of the bishops who condemn Origen, since they think that a martyr has praised him. Of what use are 
the letters of the bishop Theophilus or of the pope Anastasius, who follow out the heretic in every part of the 
world, when your book passing under the name of Pamphilus is there to oppose their letters, and the 
testimony of the martyr can be set against the authority of the Bishops? I think you had better do with this 
mistitled volume what you did with the books '<greek>Peri</greek> A<greek>rkpn</greek>. Take my 
advice as a friend, and do not be distrustful the power of your art; say either that yon never wrote it, or else 
that it has been depraved by the presbyter Eusebius. [1] It will be impossible to prove against you that the 
book was translated by you. Your handwriting is not forthcoming to shew it; your eloquence is not so great 
as that no one can imitate your style. Or, in the last resort, if the matter comes to the proof, and your effrontery 
is overborne by the multitude of testimonies, sing a palinode after the manner of Stesichnus. It is better that 
you should repent of what you have done than that a martyr should remain under calumny, and those who 
have been deceived under error. And you need not feel ashamed of changing your opinion; you are not of 
such fame or authority as to feel disgraced by the confession of an error. Take me for your example, whom 
you love so much, and without whom you can neither live nor die, and say what I said when you had praised 
me and 12 defended myself. 

1 1 . Eusebius the Bishop of Caesarea, of whom I have made mention above, in the sixth book of his Apology 
for Origen makes the same complaint against Methodius the bishop and martyr, which you make against 
me in your praises of me. He says: How could Methodius dare to write now against Origen, after having said 
this thing and that of his doctrines? This is not the place in which to speak of the martyr; one cannot discuss 
every thing in all places alike. Let it suffice for the present to mention that one who was an Arian complains of 
the same things in a most eminent and eloquent man, and a martyr, which you first make a subject of praise 

as a friend and afterwards, when offended turn into an accusation. I have given you an opportunity of 
constructing a calumny against me if you choose, in the present passage. "How is it", you may ask, "that I 
now depreciate Eusebius, after having in other places praised him?" The name Eusebius indeed is 
different from Origen; but the ground of complaint is in both cases identical. I praised Eusebius for his 
Ecclesiastical History, for his Chronicle, for his description of the holy land; and these works[2] of his I gave 
to the men of the same language as myself by translating them into Latin. Am I to be called an Arian 
because Eusebius, the author of those books, is an Arian? If you should dare to call me a heretic, call to 
mind your Preface to the <greek>Peri</greek> A<greek>rkpn</greek>, in which you bear me witness that I 
am of the same faith with yourself: and I at the same time entreat you to hear patiently the expostulation of 
one who was formerly your friend. You enter into a warm dispute with others, and bandy mutual reproaches 
with men of your own order; whether you are right or wrong in this is for you to say. But as against a brother 
even a true accusation is repugnant to me. I do not say this to blame others; I only say that I would not myself 
do it. We are separated from one another by a vast interval of space. What sin had I committed against 
you? What is my offence? Is it that I answered that I was not an Origenist? Are you to be held to be accused 
because I defend myself? If you say you are not an Origenist and have never been one, I believe your 
solemn affirmation of this: if you once were one, I accept your repentance. Why do you complain if I am what 
you say that you are? Or is my offence this that I dared to translate the <greek>Peri</greek> 
A<greek>rkpn</greek> after yon had done it, and that my translation is supposed to detract from your work? 
But what was I to do? Your laudation of me, or accusation against me, was sent to me. Your 'praise' was so 
strong and so long that, if I had acquiesced in it, every one would have thought me a heretic. Look at what is 
said in the end of the letter which I received from Rome:[1] "Clear yourself from the suspicions which men 
have imbibed against you, and convict your accuser of speaking falsely; for if you leave him unnoticed, you 
will be held to assent to his charges." When I was pressed by such conditions, I determined to translate 
these books, and I ask your attention to the answer which I made. It was this:[2] "This is the position which 
my friends have made for me, (observe that I did not say 'my friend,' for fear of seeming to aim at you); if I 
keep silence I am to be accounted guilty: if I answer, I am accounted an enemy. Both these conditions are 
hard; but of the two I will choose the easier: for a quarrel can be healed but blasphemy admits of no 
forgiveness." You observe that I felt this as a burden laid upon me; that I was unwilling and recalcitrating; that 
I could only quiet my presentiment of the quarrel which would ensue from this undertaking by the plea of 
necessity. If you had translated the books <greek>Peri</greek> A<greek>rkpn</greek> without alluding to 
me, you would have a right to complain that I had afterwards translated them to your prejudice. But now you 
have no right to complain, since my work was only an answer to the attack you bad made on me under the 
guise of praise; for what you call praise all understand as accusation. Let it be understood between us that 
you accused me, and then you will not be indignant at my having replied. But now suppose that you wrote 
with a good intention, that you were not merely innocent but a most faithful friend, out of whose mouth no 
untruth ever proceeded, and that it was quite unconsciously that you wounded me. What is that to me who 
felt the wound Am I not to take remedies for my wound because you inflicted it without evil intention? I am 
stricken down and stricken through, with a wound in the breast which will not be appeased; my limbs which 
were white before are stained with gore; and you say to me: "Pray leave your wound untouched, for fear that 
I may be thought to have wounded you." And vet the translation in question is a reproof to Origen rather than 
to you. You altered for the better the passages which you considered to have been Put in by the heretics. I 
brought to light what the whole Greek world with one voice attributes to him. Which of our two views is the 
truer it is not for me nor for you to judge; let each of them be touched by the censor's rod of the reader. The 
whole of that letter in which I make answer for myself is directed against the heretics and against my 
accusers. How does it touch you who profess to be both an orthodox person and my admirer, if I am a little 
too sharp upon heretics, and expose their tricks before the public? You should rejoice in my invectives: 
otherwise, if you are vexed at them, you may be thought to be yourself a heretic. When anything is written 
against some particular vice, but without the mention of any name, if a man grows angry he accuses himself. 
It would have been the part of a wise man, even if he felt hurt, to dissemble his consciousness of wrong, and 
by the serenity of his countenance to dissipate the cloud that lay upon his heart. 
12. Otherwise, if everything which goes against Origen and his followers is supposed to be said by me 
against you, we must suppose that the letters of the popes Theophilus and Epiphanius and the rest of the 
bishops which at their desire I lately translated(l) are meant to attack you and tear you to pieces; we must 
suppose too that the rescripts of the Emperors which order that the Origenists should be banished from 
Alexandria and from Egypt have been written at my dictation. The abhorrence shown by the Pontiff of the city 
of Rome against these men was nothing but a scheme of mine. The outburst of hatred which immediately 
after your translation blazed up through the whole world against Origen who before had been read without 
prejudice was the work of my pen. If I have got all this power, I wonder that you are not afraid of me. But I 
really acted with extreme moderation. In my public letter(1) I took every precaution to prevent your 
supposing that anything in it was directed against you; but I wrote at the same time a short letter(2) to you, 

expostulating with you on the subject of your 'praises.' This letter my friends did not think it right to send you, 
because you were not at Rome, and because, as they tell me, you and your companions were scattering 
accusations of things unworthy of the Christian profession about my manner of life. But I have subjoined a 
copy of it to this book, so that you may understand what pain you gave me and with what brotherly 
self-restraint I bore it. 

13. 1 am told, further, that you touch with some critical sharpness upon some points of my letter, and, with the 
well-known wrinkles rising on your forehead and your eyebrows knitted, make sport of me with a wit worthy 
of Plautus, for having said that I had a Jew named Barabbas for my teacher. I do not wonder at your writing 
Barabbas for Baranina, the letters of the names being somewhat similar, when you allow yourself such a 
license in changing the names themselves, as to turn Eusebius into Pamphilus, and a heretic into a martyr. 
One must be cautious of such a man as you, and give you a wide berth; otherwise I may find my own name 
turned in a trice, and without my knowing it, from Jerome to Sardanapalus. Listen, then, O pillar of wisdom, 
and type of Catonian severity. I never spoke of him as my master; I merely wished to illustrate my method of 
studying the Holy Scriptures by saying that I had read Origen just in the same way as I had taken lessons 
from this Jew. Did I do you an injury because I attended the lectures of Apollinarius and Didymus rather than 
yours? Was there anything to prevent my naming in my letter that most eloquent man Gregory?(3) a Which 
of all the Latins is his equal? I may well glory and exult in him. But I only mentioned those who were subject to 
censure, so as to show that I only read Origen as I had listened to them, that is, not on account of his 
soundness in the faith hut on account of the excellence of his learning. Origen himself, and Clement and 
Eusebius, and many others, when they are discussing scriptural points, and wish to have Jewish authority 
for what they say, write: "A Hebrew stated this to me," or "I heard from a Hebrew," or, "That is the opinion of 
the Hebrews." Origen certainly speaks of the Patriarch Huillus who was his contemporary, and in the 
conclusion of his thirtieth Tome on Isaiah (that in the end of which he explains the words(1) "Woe to Ariel 
which David took by storm") uses his exposition of the words, and confesses that he had adopted through 
his teaching a truer opinion than that which he had previously held. He also takes as written by Moses not 
only the eighty-ninth Psalm(2) which is entitled "A prayer of Moses the Man of God," but also the eleven 
following Psalms which have no title according to Huillus's opinion; and he makes no scruple of inserting in 
his commentaries on the Hebrew Scriptures the views of the Hebrew teachers. 

14. It is said that on a recent occasion where the letters of Theophilus exposing the errors of Origen were 
read, our friend stopped his ears, and along with all present pronounced a distinct condemnation upon the 
author of so much evil; and that he said that up to that moment he had never known that Origen had written 
anything so wrong. I say nothing against this: I do not make the observation which perhaps another might 
make, that it was impossible for him to be ignorant of that which he had himself translated, and an apology 
for which by a heretic he had published under the name of a martyr, whose defence also be had undertaken 
in his own book; as to which I shall have some adverse remarks to make later on if I have time to write them. 

I only make one observation which does not admit of contradiction. If it is possible that he should have 
misunderstood what he translated, why is it not possible that I should have been ignorant of the book 
<greek>Peri</greek> A<greek>rkpn</greek> which I had not before read, and that I should have only read 
those Homilies which I translated, and in which he himself testifies that there is nothing wrong? But if, contrary 
to his expressed opinion, he now finds fault with me for those things for which he before had given me 
praise, he will be in a strait between two; either he praised me, believing me to be a heretic but confessing 
that he shared my opinion; or else, if he praised me before as orthodox, his present accusations come to 
nothing, and are due to sheer malice. But perhaps it was only as my friend that he formerly was silent about 
my errors, and now that he is angry with me brings to light what he had concealed. 

15. This abandonment of friendship gives no claim to my confidence; and open enmity brings with it the 
suspicion of falsehood. Still I will be bold enough to go to meet him, and to ask what heretical doctrine I have 
expressed, so that I may either, like him, express my regret and swear that I never knew the bad doctrines of 
Origen, and that his infidelity has now for the first time been made known to me by the Pope Theophilus; or 
that I may at least prove that my opinions were sound and that he, as his habit is, had not understood them. It 
is impossible that in my Commentaries on the Ephesians which I bear he makes the ground of his 
accusation, I should have spoken both rightly and wrongly; that from the same fountain should have 
proceeded both sweet water and bitter; and that whereas throughout the work I condemned those who 
believe that souls have been created out of angels, I should suddenly have forgotten myself and have 
defended the opinion which I condemned before. He can hardly raise an objection to me on the score of 
folly, since he has proclaimed me in his works as a man of the highest culture and eloquence; otherwise 
such silly verbosity as he imputes is the part, one would think, of a pettifogger and a babbler rather than of 
an eloquent man. What is the point of his written accusations I do not know, for it is only report of them, not the 
writings, which has reached me; and, as the Apostle tells us it is a foolish thing to beat the air. However, I 
must answer in the uncertainty till the certainty reaches me: and I will begin by teaching my rival in my old 
age a lesson which I learned in youth, that there are many forms of speech, and that, according to the 

subject matter not only the sentences but the words also of writings vary. 

16. For instance, Chrysippus and Antipater occupy themselves with thorny questions: Demosthenes and 
AEschines speak with the voice of thunder against each other; Lysias and Isocrates have an easy and 
pleasing style. There is a wonderful difference in these writers, though each of them is perfect in his own line. 
Again: read the book of Tully To Herennius; read his Rhetoricians; or, since he tells us that these books fell 
from his hands in a merely inchoate and unfinished condition, look through his three books On the orator, in 
which he introduces a discussion between Crassus and Antony, the most eloquent orators of that day; and a 
fourth book called The Orator which he wrote to Brutus when already an old man; and you will realize that 
History, Oratory, Dialogue, Epistolary writing, and Commentaries, have, each of them, their special style. 
We have to do now with Commentaries. In those which I wrote upon the Ephesians I only followed Origen 
and Didymus and Apollinarius, (whose doctrines are very different one from another) so far as was 
consistent with the sincerity of my faith: for what is the function of a Commentary? It is to interpret another 
man's words, to put into plain language what he has expressed obscurely. Consequently, it enumerates the 
opinions of many persons, and says, Some interpret the passage in this sense, some in that; the one try to 
support their opinion and understanding of it by such and such evidence or reasons: so that the wise reader, 
after reading these different explanations, and having many brought before his mind for acceptance or 
rejection, may judge which is the truest , and, like a good banker, may reject the money of spurious mintage. 
Is the commentator to be held responsible for all these different interpretations, and all these mutually 
contradicting opinions because he puts down the expositions given by many in the single work on which he 
is commenting? I suppose that when you were a boy you read the commentaries of Asper upon Virgil and 
Sallust, those of Vulcatius upon Cicero's Orations, of Victorinus upon his Dialogues and upon the Comedies 
of Terence, and also those of my master Donatus on Virgil, and of others on other writers such as Plautus, 
Lucretius, Flaccus, Persius and Lucan. Will you find fault with those who have commented on these writers 
because they have not held to a single explanation, but enumerate their own views and those of others on 
the same passage? 

17. 1 say nothing of the Greeks, since you boast of your knowledge of them, even to the extent of saying that, 
in attaching yourself to foreign literature, you have forgotten your own language. I am afraid that, according 
to the old proverbs, I might be like the pig teaching Minerva, and the man carrying fagots into the wood. I 
only wonder that, being as you are the Aristarchus(l) of our time, you should have shewn ignorance of these 
matters which every boy knows. It is, no doubt, from your mind being fixed on the meaning of what you write, 
but partly also from your being so sharp-sighted for the manufacture of calumnies against me, that you 
despise the precepts of Grammarians and orators, that you make no attempt to set straight words which 
have got transposed when the sentence has become complicated, or to avoid some harsh collocation of 
consonants, or to escape from a style full of gaps. It would be ridiculous to point to one or two wounds when 
the whole body is enfeebled and broken. I will not select portions for criticism; it is for him to select any 
portion which is free from faults. He mast have been ignorant even of the Socratic saying: "Know thyself." 
To steer the ship the untaught landsman fears; 
The untrained attendant dares not give the sick 
The drastic southernwood. The healing drug 
The leech alone prescribes. The artificer 
Alone the tools can wield. But poetry 
Trained or untrain'd we all at random write. (1) 

Possibly he will swear that he has never learned to read and write; I can easily believe that without an oath. 
Or perhaps he will take refuge in what the Apostle says of himself: "Though I be rude in speech, yet not in 
knowledge." But his reason for saying this is plain. He had been trained in Hebrew learning and brought up 
at the feet of Gamaliel, whom, though he had attained apostolic rank, he was not ashamed to call his master; 
and he thought Greek eloquence of no account, or at all events, in his humility, he would not parade his 
knowledge of it. So that(2) 'his preaching should stand not in the persuasive wisdom of words but in the 
power of the things signified.' He despised other men's riches since he was rich in his own. Still it was not to 
an illiterate man who stumbled in every sentence that Festus cried, as he stood before his judgment seat: 
"Paul thou art beside thyself; much learning doth make thee mad." You who can hardly do more than mutter 
in Latin, and who rather creep like a tortoise than walk, ought either to write in Greek, so that among those 
who are ignorant of Greek you may pass for one who knows a foreign tongue; or else, if you attempt to write 
Latin, you should first have a grammar-master, and flinch from the ferule, and begin again as an old scholar 
among children to learn the art of speaking. Even if a man is bursting with the wealth of Croesus and Darius, 
letters will not follow the money-bag. They are the companions of toil and of labour, the associates of the 
fasting not of the full-fed, of self-mastery not of self-indulgence. (4) It is told of Demosthenes that he 
consumed more oil than wine, and that no workman ever shortened his nights as he did. He for the sake of 
enunciating the single letter Rho was willing to take a dog as his teacher; and yet you make it a crime in me 
that I took a man to teach me the Hebrew letters. This is the sort of wisdom which makes men remain 

unlearned: they do not choose to learn what they do not know. They forget the words of Horace: Why 
through false shame do I choose ignorance, Rather than seek to learn? 

That Book of Wisdom also which is read to us as the work of Solomon says:(1) "Into a malicious soul 
wisdom shall not enter, nor dwell in the body that is subject to sin. For the Holy Spirit of discipline^) will flee 
deceit and remove from thoughts which are without understanding." The case is different with those who only 
wish to be read by the vulgar, and do not care how they may offend the ears of the learned; and they 
despise the utterance of the poet which brands the forwardness of noisy ignorance. It was you, I think, whose 
ignorance in the streets Murdered the wretched strain with creaking reed. 

If you want such things, there are plenty of curly-pated fellows in every school who will sing you snatches of 
doggrel from Miletus; or you may go to the exhibition of the Bessi(3) and see people shaking with laughter at 
the Pig's Testament, or at any jesters' entertainment where silly things of this kind are run after. There is not 
a day but you may see the dressed-up clown in the streets whacking the buttocks of some blockhead, or 
half-pulling out people's teeth with the scorpion which he twists round for them to bite. We need not wonder if 
the books of know-nothings find plenty of readers. 

1 8. Our friends take it amiss that I have spoken of the Origenists as confederated together by orgies of false 
oaths. I named the book in which I had found it written, that is, the sixth book of Origen's Miscellanies, in 
which he tries to adapt our Christian doctrine to the opinions of Plato. The words of Plato in the third book of 
the Republic(4) are as follows: "Truth, said Socrates, is to be specially cultivated. If, however, as I was 
saying just now, falsehood is disgraceful and useless to God, to men it is sometimes useful, if only it is used 
as a stimulant(3) or a medicine; for no one can doubt that some such latitude of statement must be allowed 
to physicians, though it must be taken out of the hands of those who are unskilled. That is quite true, it was 
replied; and if one admits that any person may do this, it must be the duty of the rulers of states at times to 
tell lies, either to baffle the enemy or to benefit their country and the citizens. On the other hand to those who 
do not know how to make a good rise of falsehood, the practice should be altogether prohibited." Now take 
the words of Origen: "When we consider the precept(1) 'Speak truth every man with his neighbour,' we need 
not ask, Who is my neighbour? but we should weigh well the cautious remarks of the philosopher. He says, 
that to God falsehood is shameful and useless, but to men it is occasionally useful. We must not suppose 
that God ever lies, even in the way of economy;(2) only, if the good of the hearer requires it, he speaks in 
ambiguous language, and reveals what he wills in enigmas, taking care at once that the dignity of truth 
should be preserved and yet that what would be hurtful if produced nakedly before the crowd should be 
enveloped in a veil and thus disclosed. But a man on whom necessity imposes the responsibility of lying is 
bound to use very great care, and to use falsehood as he would a stimulant or a medicine, and strictly to 
preserve its measure, and not go beyond the bounds observed by Judith in her dealings with Holofernes, 
whom she overcame by the wisdom with which she dissembled her words. He should act like Esther who 
changed the purpose of Artaxerxes by having so long concealed the truth as to her race; and still more the 
patriarch Jacob who, as we read, obtained the blessing of his father by artifice and falsehood. From all this it 
is evident that if we speak falsely with any other object than that of obtaining by it some great good, we shall 
be judged as the enemies of him who said, I am the truth." This Origen wrote, and none of us can deny it. 
And he wrote it in the book which he addressed to the 'perfect,' his own disciples. His teaching is that the 
master may lie, but the disciple must not. The inference from this is that the man who is a good liar, and 
without hesitation sets before his brethren any fabrication which rises into his mouth, shows himself to be an 
excellent teacher. 

19. 1 am told that he also carps at me for the translation I have given of a phrase in the Second Psalm. In the 
Latin it stands: "Learn discipline," in the Hebrew it is written Nescu Bar; and I have given it in my 
commentary, Adore the Son; and then, when I translated the whole Psalter into the Latin language, as if I had 
forgotten my previous explanation, I put "Worship purely." No one can deny, of course, that these 
interpretations are contrary to each other; and we must pardon him for being ignorant of the Hebrew writing 
when he is so often at a loss even in Latin. Nescu, translated literally, is Kiss. I wished not to give a 
distasteful rendering, and preferring to follow the sense, gave the word Worship; for those who worship are 
apt to kiss their hands and to bare their heads, as is to be seen in the case of Job who declares that he has 
never done either of these things, (1) and says(2) "If I beheld the sun when it shined or the moon walking in 
brightness, and my heart rejoiced in secret and I kissed my hand with my mouth, which is a very great 
iniquity, and a lie to the most high God." The Hebrews, according to the peculiarity of their language use this 
word Kiss for adoration; and therefore I translated according to the use of those whose language I was 
dealing with. The word Bar, however in Hebrew has several meanings. It means Son, as in the words 
Barjona (son of a dove) Bartholomew (son of Tholomaeus), Bartimaeus, Barjesus, Barabbas. It also means 
Wheat, and A sheaf of corn, and Elect and Pure. What sin have I committed, then, when a word is thus 
uncertain in its meaning, if I have rendered it differently in different places? and if, after taking the sense 
"Worship the Son" in my Commentary, where there is more freedom of discussion, I said "Worship purely" 
or "electively" in my version Of the Bible itself, so that I should not be thought to translate capriciously or give 

grounds for cavil on the part of the Jews. This last rendering, moreover, is that of Aquila and Symmachus: 
and I cannot see that the faith of the church is injured by the reader being shewn in how many different ways 
a verse is translated by the Jews. 

20. YourOrigen allows himself to treat of the transmigration of souls, to introduce the belief in an infinite 
number of worlds, to clothe rational creatures in one body after another, to say that Christ has often suffered, 
and will often suffer again, it being always profitable to undertake what has once been profitable. You also 
yourself assume such an authority as to turn a heretic into a martyr, and to invent a heretical falsification of 
the books of Origen. Why may not I then discuss about words, and in doing the work of a commentator teach 
the Latins what I learn from the Hebrews? If it were not a long process and one which savours of boasting, I 
should like even now to shew you how much profit there is in waiting at the doors of great teachers, and in 
learning an art from a real artificer. If I could do this, you would see what a tangled forest of ambiguous 
names and words is presented by the Hebrew. It is this which gives such a field for various renderings: for, 
the sense being uncertain, each man takes the translation which seems to him the most consistent. Why 
should I take you to any outlandish writers? Go over Aristotle once more and Alexander the commentator on 
Aristotle; you will recognize from reading these what a plentiful crop of uncertainties exists; and you may 
then cease to find fault with your friend in reference to things which you have never had brought to your mind 
even in your dreams. 

21 . My brother Paulinian tells me that our friend has impugned certain things in my commentary on the 
Ephesians: some of these criticisms he committed to memory, and has indicated the actual passages 
impugned. I must not therefore refuse to meet his statements, and I beg the reader, if I am somewhat prolix in 
the statement and the refutation of his charges, to allow for the necessary conditions of the discussion. I am 
not accusing another but endeavouring to defend myself and to refute the false accusation of heresy which 
is thrown in my teeth. On the Epistle to the Ephesians Origen wrote three books. Didymus and Apollinarius 
also composed works of their own. These I partly translated, partly adapted; my method is described in the 
following passage of my prologue: "This also I wish to state in my Preface. Origen, you must know, wrote 
three books upon this Epistle, and I have partly followed him. Apollinarius also and Didymus published 
certain commentaries on it, from which I have culled some things, though but few; and, as seemed to me 
right, I put in or took out others; but I have done this in such a way that the careful reader may from the very 
first see how far the work is due to me, how far to others." Whatever fault there is detected in the exposition 
given of this Epistle, if I am unable to shew that it exists in the Greek books from which I have stated it to have 
been translated into Latin, I will acknowledge that the fault is mine and not another's. However, that I should 
not be thought to be raising quibbles, and by this artifice of self-excuse to be escaping from boldly meeting 
him, I will set out the actual passages which are adduced as evidences of my fault. 

22. To begin. In the first book I take the words of Paul:(1) "As he hath chosen us before the foundation of the 
world, that we might be holy and unspotted before him." This I have interpreted as referring not, according to 
Origen's opinion, to an election of those who had existed in a previous state, but to the foreknowledge of 
God; and I close the discussion with these words: 

"His assertion that we have been chosen before the foundation of the world that we should be holy and 
without blemish before him, that is, before God, belongs to the foreknowledge of God, to whom all things 
which are to be are already made, and are known before they come into being. Thus Paul was 
predestinated in the womb of his mother: and Jeremiah before his birth is sanctified, chosen, confirmed, 
and, as a type of Christ, sent as a prophet to the Gentiles." 

There is no crime surely in this exposition of the passage. Origen explained it in a heterodox sense, but I 
followed that of the church. And, since it is the duty of a commentator to record the opinions expressed by 
many others, and I had promised in the Preface that I would do this, I set down Origen's interpretation, 
though without mentioning his name which excites ill will. 

"Another," I said, "who wishes to vindicate the justice of God, and to shew that he does not choose men 
according to a prejudgment and foreknowledge of his own but according to the deserts of the elect, thinks 
that before the visible creation of sky, earth, sea and till that is in them, there existed the invisible creation, 
part of which consisted of souls, which, for certain causes known to God alone, were cast down into this 
valley of tears, this scene of our affliction and our pilgrimage; and that it is to this that we may apply the 
Psalmist's prayer, he being in this low condition and longing to return to his former dwelling place:(2) "Woe 
is me that my sojourn is prolonged; I have inhabited the habitations of Kedar, my soul hath had a long 
pilgrimage." And also the words of the Apostle:(3) "O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the 
body of this death?" and(4) "It is better to return and to be with Christ;" and(5) "Before I was brought low, I 
sinned." He adds much more of the same kind." 

Now observe that I said "Another who wishes to vindicate," I did not say "who succeeds in vindicating." But if 
you find a stumbling block in the fact that I condensed a very long discussion of Origen's into a brief 
statement so as to give the reader a glimpse of his meaning; if you declare me to be a secret adherent of 
his because I have not left out anything which he has said, I would ask you whether it was not necessary for 

me to do this, so as to avoid your cavils. Would you not otherwise have declared that I had kept silence on 
matters on which he had spoken boldly, and that in the Greek text his assertions were much stronger than I 
represented? I therefore put down all time I found in the Greek text, though in a shorter form, so that his 
disciples should have nothing which they could force upon the ears of the Latins as a new thing; for it is 
easier for us to make light of things which we know well than of things which take us unprepared. But after I 
had shewn Origen's interpretations of the passage, I concluded this section with words to which I beg your 
attention: 

"The Apostle does not say 'He chose us before the foundation of the world because we were then holy and 
without blemish;' but 'He chose us that we might be holy and without blemish,' that is, that we who before 
were not holy and without blemish might afterwards become such. This expression will apply even to 
sinners who turn to better things; and thus the words remain true, 'In thy sight shall no man living be justified,' 
that is, no one in his whole life, in the whole of the time that he has existed in the world. If the passage be thus 
understood, it makes against the opinion that before the foundation of the world certain souls were elected 
because of their holiness, and that they had none of the corruption of sinners. It is evident that Paul and 
those like him were not elected because they were holy and without blemish, but they were elected and 
predestinated so that in their after life, by means of their works and their virtues, they should become holy 
and without blemish." 

Does any one dare, then, after this statement of my opinion, to accuse me of assent to the heresy of Origen? 
It is now almost eighteen years since I composed those books, at a time when the name of Origen was 
highly esteemed in the world, and when as yet his work the <greek>Peri</greek> A<greek>rkpn</greek> 
had not reached the ears of the Latins: and yet I distinctly stated my belief and pointed out what I did not 
agree with. Hence, even if my opponent could have pointed out anything heretical in other places, I should 
be held guilty only of the fault of carelessness, not of the perverse doctrines which both in this place and in 
my other works I have condemned. 

23. 1 will deal shortly with the second passage which my brother tells me has been marked for blame, 
because the complaint is exceedingly frivolous, and bears on its face its calumnious character. The 
passage(1) is that in which Paul declares that God "made him to sit at his right hand in the heavenly places, 
far above all rule and authority and power and dominion, and every, name that is named, not only in this 
world but also in that which is to come." After stating various expositions which have been given, I came to 
the offices of the ministers of God, and spoke of the principalities and powers, the virtues and dominions: 
and I add: 

"They must assuredly have others who are subject to them, who are under their power and serve them, and 
are fortified by their authority: and this distribution of offices will exist not only in the present world but in the 
world to come, so that each individual will rise or fall from one step of advancement and honour to another, 
some ascending and some descending, and will come successively under each of thesepowers, virtues, 
principalities, and dominions." 

I then went on to describe the various divine offices and ministries after the similitude of the palace of an 
earthly king, which I fully described; and I added: 

"Can we suppose that God the Lord of lords and King of kings, is content with a single order of servants? We 
speak of an archangel because there are other angels of whom he is chief: and so there would be nothing 
said of Principalities, Powers and Dominions unless it were implied that there were others of inferior rank." 
But, if he thinks that I became a follower of Origen because I mentioned in my exposition these 
advancements and honours, these ascents and descents, increasings and diminishings; I must point out 
that to say, as Origen does, that Angels and Cherubim and Seraphim are turned into demons and men, is a 
very different thing from saying that the Angels themselves have various offices allotted to them, -a doctrine 
which is not repugnant to that of the church. Just as among men there are various degrees of dignity 
distinguished by the different kinds of work, as the bishop, the presbyter and the other Ecclesiastical grades 
have each their own order, while yet all are men; so we may believe that, while they all retain the dignity of 
Angels, there are various degrees of eminence among them, without imagining that angels are changed 
into men, and that men are new-made into angels. 

24. A third passage with which he finds fault is that in which I gave a threefold interpretation of the Apostle's 
words:(1) "That in the ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches of his grace in kindness towards us 
in Christ Jesus." The first was my own opinion, the second the opposite opinion held by Origen, the third the 
simple explanation given by Apollinarius. As to the fact that I did not give their names, I must ask for pardon 
on the ground that it was done through modesty. I did not wish to disparage men whom I was partly following, 
and whose opinions I was translating into the Latin tongue. But, I said, the diligent reader will at once search 
into these things and form his own opinion. And I repeated at the end: Another turns to a different sense the 
words 'That in the ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches of his grace.' "Ah," you will say, "I see 
that in the character of the diligent reader you have unfolded the opinions of Origen." I confess that I was 
wrong. I ought to have said not The diligent but The blasphemous reader. If I had anticipated that you would 

adopt measures of this kind I might have done this, and so have avoided your calumnious speeches. It is, I 
suppose, a great crime to have called Origen a diligent reader, especially when I had translated seventy 
books of his and had praised him up to the sky, -for doing which I had to defend myself in a short treatise(1) 
two years ago in answer to your trumpeting of my praises. In those 'praises' which you gave me you laid it to 
my charge that I had spoken of Origen as a teacher of the churches, and now that you speak in the 
character of an enemy you think that I shall be afraid because you accuse me of calling him a diligent 
reader. Why, even shopkeepers who are particularly frugal, and slaves who are not wasteful, and the 
care-takers who made our childhood a burden to us and even thieves when they are particularly clever, we 
speak of as diligent; and so the conduct of the unjust steward in the Gospel is spoken of as wise. 
Moreover(2) "The children of this world are wiser than the children of light," and(3) "The serpent was wiser 
than all the beasts which the Lord had made on the earth." 

25. The fourth ground of his censure is in the beginning of my Second Book, in which I expounded the 
statement which St. Paul makes "For this cause I Paul, the prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles." The 
passage in itself is perfectly plain; and I give, therefore, only that part of the comment on it which lends itself 
to malevolent remark: 

"The words which describe Paul as the prisoner of Jesus Christ for the Gentiles may be understood of his 
martyrdom, since it was when he was thrown into chains at Rome that he wrote this Epistle, at the same time 
with those to Philemon and the Colossians and the Philippians, as we have formerly shewn. Certainly we 
might adopt another sense, namely, that, since we find this body in several places called the chain of the 
soul, in which it is held as in a close prison, Paul may speak of himself as confined in the chains of the body, 
and so that he could not return and be with Christ; and that thus he might perfectly fulfil his office of preaching 
to the Gentiles. Some commentators, however, introduce another idea namely, that Paul, having been 
predestinated and consecrated from his mother's womb, and before he was born, to be a preacher to the 
Gentiles afterwards took on the chains of the flesh." 

Here also, as before, I gave a three fold exposition of the passage: in the first my own view, in the second 
the one supported by Origen, and the third the opinion of Apollinarius going contrary to his doctrine. Read 
over the Greek commentaries. If you do not find the fact to be as I state it, I will confess that I was wrong. 
What is my fault in this passage? The same, I presume, as that to which I made answer before, namely, that I 
did not name those whose views I quoted. But it was needless at each separate statement of the Apostle to 
give the names of the writers whose works I had declared in the Preface that I meant to translate. Besides, it 
is not an absurd way of understanding the passage, to say that the soul is bound in the body until Christ 
returns and, in the glory of the resurrection, changes our corruptible and mortal body for incorruption and 
immortality: for it is in this sense that the Apostle uses the expression, "O wretched man that I am; who shall 
deliver me from the body of this death?" calling it the body of death because it is subject to vices and 
diseases, to disorders and to death; until it rises with Christ in glory, and, having been nothing but fragile clay 
before, becomes baked by the heat of the holy Spirit into a jar of solid consistency, thus changing its grade 
of glory, though not its nature. 

26. The fifth passage selected by him for blame is the most important, that in which I explain the statement of 
the Apostle. (1) "From whom all the body fitly framed anti knit together through every juncture of ministration, 
according to the working in due measure of every several part, maketh the increase of the body unto the 
building up of itself in love." Here I summed up in a short sentence Origen's exposition which is very long 
and goes over the same ideas in various words; yet so as to leave out none of his illustrations or his 
assertions. And when I had come to the end, I added: 

"And so in the restitution of sit things, when Jesus Christ the true physician comes to restore to health the 
whole body of the Church, which now lies scattered and rent, every one will receive his proper place 
according to the measure of his faith and his recognition of the Son of God (the word 'recognize' implies that 
he had formerly known him and afterwards had ceased to know him), and shall then begin to be what he 
once had been; yet not in such a way as that, as held by another heresy, all should be placed in one rank, 
and, by a renovating process, all become angels; but that each member, according to its own measure and 
office shall become perfect: for instance, that the apostate angel shall begin to be that which he was by his 
creation, and that man who had been cast out of paradise shall be restored again to the cultivation of 
paradise;" and so on. 

27. I wonder that you with your consummate wisdom have not understood my method of exposition. When I 
say, 'But not in such a way that, as held by another heresy, all should be placed in one rank, that is, all by a 
reforming process become angels, 'I clearly shew that the things which I put forward for discussion are 
heretical, and that one heresy differs from the other. Which (do you ask?) are the two heresies? The one is 
that which says that all reasonable creatures will by a reforming process become angels; the other, that 
which asserts that in the restitution of the world each thing will become what it was originally created; as for 
instance that devils will again become angels, and that the souls of men will become such as they were 
originally formed; that is, by the reforming process will become not angels but that which God originally 

made them, so that the just and the sinners will be on an equality. Finally, to shew you that it was not my own 

opinion which I was developing but two heresies which I was comparing with one another, both of which I 

had found stated in the Greek, I completed my discussion with this ending: 

"These things, as I have said before, are more obscure in our tongue because they are put in a 

metaphorical form in Greek; and in every metaphor, when a translation is made word for word from one 

language into another, the budding sense of the word is choked as it were with brambles." 

If you do not find in the Greek the very thought which I have expressed, I give you leave to treat all that I say 

as my own. 

28. The sixth and last point which I am told that he brings against me (that is if my brother has not left anything 
unreported) is that, in the interpretation of the Apostle's words, (1) "He that loveth his wife loveth himself, for 
no one ever hated his own flesh, but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as Christ also the church," after my 
own simple explanation I propounded the question raised by Origen, speaking his views though without 
mentioning his name, and saying: 

"I may be met by the objection that the statement of the Apostle is not true when he says that no man hates 
his own flesh, since those who labour under the jaundice or consumption or cancer Or abscesses, prefer 
death to life, and hate their own bodies;" and my own opinion follows immediately: "The words, therefore, 
may be more properly taken in a metaphorical sense." 

When I say metaphorical, I mean to shew that what is said is not actually the case, but that the truth is 
shadowed forth through a mist of allegory. However, I will set out the actual words which are found in 
Origen's third book: "We may say that the soul loves that flesh which is to see the salvation of God, that it 
nourishes and cherishes it, and trains it by discipline and satisfies it with the bread of heaven, and gives it to 
drink of the blood of Christ: so that it may become we through wholesome food, and may follow husband 
freely, without being weighed down by any weakness. It is by a beautiful image that the soul is said to 
nourish and cherish the body as Christ nourishes and cherishes the church, since it was he who said to 
Jerusalem:(2) 

"How often would I have gathered thy children together as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings 
and thou wouldst not;" and that thus this corruptible may put on incorruption, and that being poised lightly, as 
upon wings, may rise more easily into the air. Let us men then cherish our wives, and let our souls cherish 
our bodies in a way as that wives may be turned into men and bodies into spirits, and that there may be no 
difference of sex, but that, as among the angels there is neither male nor female, so we, who are to be the 
Angels, may begin to be here what it is promised that we shall be in heaven." 

29. The simple explanation of my own opinion in reference to the passage I stated before in these words: 
"Taking the simple sense of the words, we have a command, following on the precept of mutual kindness 
between man and wife, that we should nourish and cherish our wives: that is, that we should supply them with 
the food and clothing which are necessary." 

This is my own understanding of the passage. Consequently, my words imply that all that follows after and 
might be brought up against me must be understood as spoken not as my own view but that of my 
opponents. But it might be thought that my resolution of the difficulty of the passage is too short and 
peremptory, and that it wraps the true sense, according to what has been said above, in the darkness of 
allegory, so as to bring it clown from its true meaning to one less rue. I will therefore come nearer to the 
matter, and ask what there is in the other interpretation with which you need disagree. It is this I suppose, that 
I said that souls should cherish their bodies as men cherish their wives, so that this corruptible may put on 
incorruption, and that, being lightly poised as upon wings, it may rise more easily into the air. When I say that 
this corruptible must put on incorruption, I do not change the nature of the body, but give it a higher rank in the 
scale of being. And so as regards what follows, that, being lightly poised as upon wings, it may more easily 
rise into the air: He who gets wings, that is, immortality, so that he may fly more lightly up to heaven, does not 
cease to be what he had been. But you may say, I am staggered by what follows: 

"Let us men then cherish cur wives, and let our souls cherish our bodies, in such away as that wives may be 
turned into men and bodies into spirits, and that there may be no difference of sex, but that, as among the 
angels there is neither male nor female, so we, who are to be like the angels, may begin to be on earth what 
it is promised that we shall be in heaven." 

You might justly be staggered, if I had not after what goes before, said "We may begin to be what it is 
promised that we shall be in heaven." When I say, "We shall begin to be on earth," I do not take away the 
difference of sex; I only take away lust, and sexual intercourse, as the Apostle does when he says, "The 
time is short; it remaineth therefore that those who have wives be as though they had none;" and as the Lord 
implied when, in reply to the question of which of the seven brothers the woman would be the wife, he 
answered:(1) "Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God; for in the resurrection they shall 
neither marry nor be given in marriage: but they shall be as the angels of God." And, indeed, when chastity 
is observed between man and woman, it begins to be true that there is neither male nor female; but, though 
living in the body, they are being changed into angels, among whom there is neither male nor female. The 

same is said by the same Apostle in another place:(1) "As many of you as were baptized into Christ did put 
on Christ. There can be neither Jew nor Greek, there can be neither bond nor free, there can be no male and 
female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus." 

30. But now, since my pleading has steered its course out of these rough and broken places, and I have 
refuted the charge of heresy which bad been urged against me by looking my accuser freely in the face, I 
will pass on to the other articles of charge with which he tries to assail me. The first is that I am a scurrilous 
person, a detractor of every one; that I am always snarling and biting at my predecessors. I ask him to name 
a single person whose reputation I have disparaged, or whom, according to an art practised by my 
opponent. I have galled by pretended praise. But, if I speak against ill-disposed persons, and wound with 
the point of my pen some Luscius Lanuvinus(2) or an Asinius Pollio of the race of the Cornelii,(3) if I repel the 
attacks of a man of boastful and curious spirit, and aim all my shafts at a single butt, why does he divide with 
others the wounds meant for him alone? And why is he so unwise as to shew, by the irritation of his answer to 
my attack, his consciousness that it is he alone whom the cap fits? 

He brings against me the charge of perjury and sacrilege together, because, in a book written for the 
instruction of one of Christ's virgins, I describe the promise which I once made when I dreamed that I was 
before the tribunal of the Judge, that I would never again pay attention to secular literature, and that 
nevertheless I have sometimes made mention of the learning which I then condemned. I think that I have 
here lighted on the man who, under the name of Sallustianus Calpurnius, and through the letter written to me 
by the orator Magnus, raised a not very(4) great question. My answer on the general subject is contained in 
the short treatise which I then wrote to him. (5) But at the present moment I must make answer as to the 
sacrilege and perjury of my dream. I said that I would thenceforward read no secular books: it was a 
promise for the future, not the abolition of my memory of the past. How, you may ask me, can you retain what 
you have been so long without reading? I must give my answer by recurring to one of these old books:(1) 
'Tis much to be inured in tender youth. 

But by this mode of denial I criminate myself; for bringing Virgil as my witness I am accused by my own 
defender. I suppose I must weave a long web of words to prove what each man is conscious of. Which of us 
does not remember his infancy? I shall make you laugh though you are a man of such extreme gravity; and 
you will have at last to do as Crassus did, who, Lucilius tells us, laughed but once in his life, if I recount the 
memories of my childhood: how I ran about among the offices where the slaves worked; how I spent the 
holidays in play; or bow I had to be dragged like a captive from my grandmother's lap to the lessons of my 
enraged Orbilius.(2) You may still more be astonished if I say that, even now that my head is gray and bald, I 
often seem in my dreams to be standing, a curly youth, dressed in my toga, to declaim a controversial 
thesis before the master of rhetoric; and, when I wake, I congratulate myself on escaping the peril of making 
a speech. Believe me, our infancy brings back to us many things most accurately. If you had had a literary 
education, your mind would retain what it was originally imbued with as a wine cask retains its scent. The 
purple dye on the wool cannot be washed out with water. Even asses and other brutes know the inns they 
have stopped at before, however long the journey may have been. Are you astonished that I have not 
forgotten my Latin books when you learnt Greek without a master? I learned the seven forms of Syllogisms 
in the Elements of logic; I learned the meaning of an Axiom, or as it might be called in Latin a Determination; I 
learned how every sentence must have in it a verb and a noun; how to heap up the steps of the Sorites, (3) 
how to detect the clever turns of the Pseudomenos(4) and the frauds of the stock sophisms. I can swear that 
I never read any of these things after I left school. I suppose that, to escape from having what I learned 
made into a crime, I must, according to the fables of the poets, go and drink of the river Lethe. I summon you, 
who accuse me for my scanty knowledge, and who think yourself a literateur and a Rabbi, tell me how was it 
that you dared to write some of the things you have written, and to translate Gregory, (1) that most eloquent 
man, with a splendour of eloquence like Iris own? Whence have you obtained that flow of words, that lucidity 
of statement, that variety of translations,-you who in youth had hardly more than a first taste of rhetoric? I 
must be very much mistaken if you do not study Cicero in secret. I suspect that, being yourself so cultivated 
a person, you forbid me trader penalties the reading of Cicero, so that you may be left alone among our 
church writers to boast of your flow of eloquence. I must say, however, that you, seem rather to follow the 
philosophers, for your style is akin to that of the thorny sentences of Cleanthes(2) and the contortions of 
Chrysippus,(3) not from any art, for of that you say you are ignorant, but from the sympathy of genius. The 
Stoics claim Logic as their own, a science which you despise as a piece of fatuity; on this side, therefore, 
you are an Epicurean, and the principle of your eloquence is, not style but matter. For, indeed, what does it 
matter that no one else understands what you wish to say, when you write for your own friends alone, not for 
all? I must confess that I myself do not always understand what you write, and think that I am reading(4) 
Heraclitus; however I do not complain, nor lament for my sluggishness; for the trouble of reading what you 
write is not more than the trouble you must have in writing it. 

31 . I might well reply as I have done even if it were a question of a promise made with full consciousness. 
But this is a new and shameless thing; he throws in my teeth a mere dream. How am I to answer? I have no 

time for thinking of anything outside my own sphere. I wish that I were not prevented from reading even the 
Holy Scriptures by the throngs that beset this place, and the gathering of Christians from all parts of the 
world. Still, when a man makes a dream into a crime, I can quote to him the words of the Prophets, who say 
that we are not to believe dreams; for even to dream of adultery does not condemn us to hell, and to dream 
of the crown of martyrdom does not raise us to heaven. Often I have seen myself in dreams dead and 
placed in the grave: often I have flown over the earth and been carried as if swimming through the air, over 
mountains and seas. My accuser might, therefore, demand that I should cease to live, or that I should have 
wings on my shoulders, because my mind has often been mocked in sleep by vague fancies of this kind. 
How many people are rich while asleep and wake to find themselves beggars! or are drinking water to cool 
their thirst, and wake up with their throats parched and burning! You exact from me the fulfilment of a promise 
given in a dream. I will meet you with a truer and closer question: Have you done all that you promised in 
your baptism? Have you or I fulfilled all that the profession of a monk demands? I beg you, think whether you 
are not looking at the mote in my eye through the beam in your own. I say this against my will; it is by sorrow 
that my reluctant tongue is forced into words. As to you, it is not enough for you to make up charges about 
my waking deeds, but you must accuse me for my dreams. You have such an interest in my actions that you 
must discuss what I have said or done in my sleep. I will not dwell on the way in which, in your zeal to speak 
against me, you have besmirched your own profession, and have done all you can by word and deed for 
the dishonouring of the whole body of Christians. But I give you fair warning, and will repeat it again and 
again. You are attacking a creature who has horns: and, if it were not that I lay to heart the words of the 
Apostle(1) "The evil speakers(2) shall not inherit the kingdom of God," and(3) "By hating one another you 
have been consumed one of another," I would make you feel what a vast discord you have stirred up after a 
slight and pretended reconciliation. What advantage is it to you to heap up slanders against me both 
among friends and strangers? Is it because I am not an Origenist, anti do not believe that I sinned in heaven, 
that I am accused as a sinner upon earth? And was the result of our renewal of friendship to be, that I was not 
to speak against heretics for fear that my notice of them should be taken for an assault upon you? So long 
as I did not refuse to be belauded by you, you followed me as a master, you called me friend and brother, 
and acknowledged me as a catholic in every respect. But when I asked to be spared your praises, and 
judged myself unworthy to have such a great man for my trumpeter, you immediately ran your pen through 
what you had written, and began to abuse all that you had praised before, and to pour forth from the same 
mouth both sweet and bitter words. I wish you could understand what self-repression I am exerting in not 
suiting my words to the boiling heat of my breast; and how I pray, like the Psalmist:(1) "Set a watch, O Lord, 
before my mouth, keep the door of my lips. Incline not my heart to the words of malice;" and, as he says 
elsewhere:(2) "While the wicked stood before me I was dumb and was humbled and kept silence even from 
good words;" and again:(3) "I became as a man that heareth not and in whose mouth are no reproofs." But 
for me the Lord the Avenger will reply, as he says through the Prophet:(4) "Vengeance is mine, I will repay, 
saith the Lord": and in another place:(5) "Thou safest and spakest against thy brother, and hast slandered 
thy mother's son. These things bast thou done, and I kept silence; thou thoughtest indeed by that I should be 
such an one as thyself; but I will reprove thee, and set them before thine eyes;" so that you may see yourself 
brought in guilty of those things which you falsely lay to another's charge. 

32. 1 am told, to take another point, that one of his followers, Chrysogonus, finds fault with me for having said 
that in baptism all sins are put away, (6) and, in the case of the man who was twice married, that he had died 
and risen up a new man in Christ; and further that there were several such persons who were Bishops in the 
churches. I will make him a short answer. He and his friends have in their hands my letter, for which they take 
me to task. Let him give an answer to it, let him overthrow its reasoning by reasoning of his own, and prove 
my writings false by his writings. Why should he knit his brow and draw in and wrinkle up his nostrils, and 
weigh out his hollow words, and simulate among the common crowd a sanctity which his conduct belies? Let 
me proclaim my principles once more in his ears: That the old Adam dies completely in the layer of 
baptism, and a new man uses then with Christ; that the man that is earthly perishes and the man from heaven 
is raised up. I say this not because I myself have a special interest in this question, through the mercy of 
Christ; but that I made answer to my brethren when they i asked me for my opinion, not intending to prescribe 
for others what they may think right to believe, nor to overturn their resolution by my opinion. For we who lie 
hid in our cells do not covet the Bishop's office. We are not like some, who, despising all humility, are eager 
to buy the episcopate with gold; nor do we wish, with the minds of rebels, to suppress the Pontiff chosen by 
God;(1) nor do we, by favouring heretics, show that we are heretics ourselves. As for money, we neither 
have it nor desire to have it.(2) " Having food and clothing, we are therewith content;" and meanwhile we 
constantly chant the words describing the man who shall ascend to the hill of the Lord:(3) "He that putteth not 
out his money to usury, nor taketh reward against the innocent; be who doeth these things shall not be 
moved eternally." We may add that he who does the opposite to these will fall eternally. 
Almost every sentence in this last chapter is an insidious allusion to Rufinus. His "wrinkled-up brow" and 
"turned-up nose," his weighing out his words, his supposed wealth, are all alluded to in other places and 

especially in the satirical description of him given after his death in Jerome's letter (cxxv. c. 18) to Rusticus. 

JEROME'S APOLOGY FOR HIMSELF AGAINST THE 
BOOKS OF RUFINUS, BOOK II 

JEROME'S APOLOGY AGAINST RUFINUS-BOOK II 

SUMMARY OF THE CHAPTERS. 

1-3. A criticism on Rufinus' Apology to Anastasius. His excuses for not coming to Rome are absurd. His 
parents are dead and the journey is easy. No one ever heard before of his being imprisoned or exiled for 
the faith. 

4-8. His confession of faith is unsatisfactory. No one asked him about the Trinity, but about Origen's 
doctrines of the Resurrection, the origin of souls, and the salvability of Satan.As to the Resurrection and to 
Satan he is ambiguous. As to souls he professes ignorance. 

9. What Latin! The poor souls must be tormented by his barbarisms. 

10. It is not permitted to you to be ignorant of such a matter which all the churches know. 

1 1 . As to translating the <greek>Peri</greek> A<greek>rkpn</greek>, it is not a question, but a charge that 
you unjustifiably altered the book. 

12. 13. Origen asserts Christ to be a creature, and maintains universal restitution. Where has he contradicted 
this? 

14. The question is, as Anastasius says to John of Jerusalem, with what motive you translated the 
<greek>Peri</greek> A<greek>rkpn</greek> 

15. You pretend not to be Origen's defender, but you publish and enlarge the Apology for him and allege 
the heretics' falsification of his works. 

16. Your defence gains no support from Eusebius or Didymus, who, each for his own reason, defend the 
<greek>Peri</greek> A<greek>rkpn</greek> as it stands. 

17. If we may allege falsification at every turn we make a chaos of all past literature. 

18. The object of Origen's letter, of which he translates only a part, is not to shew the falsification of his 
writings but to vituperate the Bishops who condemned him. 

19. It is only in reference to a particular point in his dispute with Candidus that Origen alleges this falsification. 
The story of Hilary's being condemned through his writings having been falsified has no foundation. 

20. That which you tell about myself in Damasus' council is mere after-dinner gossip. 

21-2. The attack on Epiphanius as a plagiarist of Origen is an outrage on the Bishops generally. Origen 

never wrote 6000 books. 

23. 1 ascertained at the library at Caesarea that the Apology you quote as Pamphilus' is the work of 

Eusebius. 

24. The letter falsely circulated in Africa as mine, and expressing regret for my translation of the Old Test. 

from the Hebrew bears the mark of your hand. I have always honoured the Seventy Translators. 

25-32. In proof of this, I bring forward the prefaces to my Translation of the Books from Genesis to Isaiah. 

33. As to Daniel, it was necessary to point out that Bel and the Dragon, and similar stories were not found in 
the Hebrew. 

34. A vindication of the importance of the Hebrew Text of Scripture. 

35. Though the LXX has been of great value, we should be grateful for fresh translations from the original. 

1 . Thus far I have made answer about my crimes, and indeed in defence of my crimes, which my crafty 
encomiast formerly urged against me, and which his disciples still constantly press. I have done so not as 
well as I ought but as I was able, putting a check upon my complaints, for my object has been not so much to 
accuse others as to defend myself. I will now come to his Apology, (1) by which he strives to justify himself to 
Anastasius, Bishop of the City of Rome, and, in order to defend himself, constructs a mass of calumnies 
against me. His love for me is like that which a man who has been carried away by the tempest and nearly 
drowned in deep water feels for the strong swimmer at whose foot he clutches: he is determined that I shall 
sink or swim with him. 

2. He professes in the first place to be replying to insinuations made at Rome against his orthodoxy, he 
being a man most fully approved in respect both of divine faith and of charity. He says that he would have 
wished to come himself, were it not that he had lately returned, after thirty years' absence, to his parents, and 
that it would have seemed harsh and inhuman to leave them after having been so long in coming to them; 

and also if he had not become somewhat less robust through his long and toilsome journey, and too infirm 
to begin his labours again. As he had not been able to come himself, he had sent his apology as a kind of 
literary cudgel which the bishop might hold in his hand and drive away the dogs who were raging against 
him. If he is a man approved for his divine faith and charity by all, and especially by the Bishop to whom he 
writes; how is it that at Rome he is assailed and reviled, and that the reports of the attacks upon his 
reputation grow thicker. Further, what sort of humility is this, that a man speaks of himself as approved for his 
divine faith and charity? The Apostles prayed, (1)" Lord increase our faith," and received for answer: "If ye 
had faith as a grain of mustard seed;" and even to Peter it is said:(1) "O thou of little faith, wherefore didst 
thou doubt?" Why should I speak of charity, which is greater than either faith or hope, and which Paul says 
he hopes for rather than assumes: without which even the blood shed in martyrdom and the body given up 
to the flames has no reward to crown it. Yet both of these our friend claims as his own: in such a way, 
however, that there still remain creatures who bark against him, and who will go on barking unless the 
illustrious Pontiff drives them away with his stick. But how absurd is this plea which he puts forward, of having 
returned to his parents after thirty years. Why, he has got neither father nor mother! He left them alive when 
he was a young man, and, now that he is old, he pines for them when they are dead. But perhaps, he means 
by "parents," what is meant in the talk of the soldiers and the common people, his kinsfolk and relations; 
well, he says he does not wish to be thought so harsh and inhuman as to desert them; and therefore he 
leaves his home(2) and goes to live at Aquileia. That most approved faith of his is in great peril at Rome, 
and yet he lies on his back, being a bit tired after thirty years, and cannot make that very easy journey m a 
carnage along that Flaminian Way. He puts forward his lassitude after his long journey, as if he had done 
nothing but move about for thirty years, or as if, after resting at Aquileia for two years, he was still worn out 
with the labour of his past travels. 

3. 1 will touch upon the other points, and set down the actual words of his letter: 

" Although my faith was proved, at the time of the persecution by the heretics, when I was living in the holy 
church of Alexandria, by imprisonments and exiles, to which I was subjected because of the faith." 
I only wonder that he did not add(3) "The prisoner of Jesus Christ," or "I was delivered from the jaw of the 
lion," or "I fought with beasts at Alexandria," or "I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. Henceforth 
there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness." What exiles, what imprisonments are these which he 
describes? I blush for this open falsehood. As if imprisonment and exile would be inflicted without judicial 
sentences! I should like to have a list of these imprisonments and of the various provinces to which he tells 
us that he was forced into exile. Next there appear to have been numerous imprisonments and an infinite 
number of exiles; so that he might at least name one of them all. Let us have the acts of his confessorship 
produced, for hitherto we have been in ignorance of them; and so let us have the satisfaction of reciting his 
deeds with those of the other martyrs of Alexandria, and that he may be able to meet the people who bark 
against him with the words:(1) "From henceforth let no man trouble me, for I bear in my body the marks of our 
Lord Jesus Christ." 

4. He goes on: 

"Still, since there may be some persons, who may wish to prove my faith, or to hear and learn what it is. I will 
declare that I thus think of the Trinity;"and so on. At first you said that you entrusted your faith to the Bishop as 
a stick with which he might fortify himself on your behalf against those barking dogs. Now you speak a little 
less confidently, "There may be some persons who wish to prove my faith." You begin to hesitate when the 
barking which reach your ears are so numerous. I will not stop to discuss the forms of diction which you use, 
for these you look down upon and condemn: I will answer according to the meaning alone. You are asked 
about one thing, and you give account for yourself upon another. As to the doctrines of Arius, you contended 
against them at Alexandria a long time ago, by imprisonment and exile, not with words but with blood. But the 
question now relates to the heresy of Origen, and the feeling aroused against you on the subject. I should 
be sorry that you should trouble yourself to cure wounds which are already healed. You confess a Trinity in 
one Godhead. The whole world now confesses this, and I think that even the devils confess that the Son of 
God was born of the Virgin Mary, and took upon him the flesh and the soul belonging to human nature. But I 
must beg you not to think me a contentious man if I examine you a little more strictly. You say that the Son of 
God took the flesh and soul belonging to human nature. Well then, I would ask you not to be vexed with me 
but to answer this question. That soul which Jesus took upon him, did it exist before it was born of Mary ? 
Was it created together with the body in that original Virgin nature which was begotten by the Holy Spirit? or, 
when the body was already formed within the womb, was it made all at once, and sent down from heaven? I 
wish to know which one of these you choose as your opinion. If it existed before it was born from Mary, then it 
was not yet the soul of Jesus; and it was employed in some way, and, for a reward of its virtues, it was made 
his soul. If it arose by traduction, (1) then human souls, which we believe to be eternal, are subject to the 
same condition as those of the brutes, which perish with the body. But if it is created and sent into the body 
after the body has been formed, tell us so simply, and free us from anxiety. 

5. None of these answers will you give us. You turn to other things, and by your tricks and shew of words 

prevent us from paying close attention to the question. What! you will say, was not the question about the 
resurrection of the flesh and the punishment of the devil? True; and therefore I ask for a brief and sincere 
answer. I raise no question as to your declaration that it is this very flesh in which we live which rises again, 
without the loss of a single member, and without any part of the body being cut off (for these are your own 
words). Butt I want to know whether you hold, what Origen denies, that the bodies rise with the same sex with 
which they died; and that Mary will still be Mary and John be John; or whether the sexes will be so mixed and 
confused that there will be neither man nor woman, but something which is both or neither; and also whether 
you hold that the bodies remain uncorrupt and immortal, and, as you acutely suggest after the Apostle, 
spiritual bodies forever; and not only the bodies, but the actual flesh, with blood infused into it, and passing 
by channels through the veins and bones,-such flesh as Thomas touched; or that little by little they are 
dissolved into nothing, and reduced into the four elements of which they were compounded. This you ought 
either to confess or deny, and not to say what Origen also says, but insincerely, as if he were playing upon 
the weakness of fools and children, "without the loss of a single member or the cutting off of any part of the 
body." Do you suppose that what we feared was that we might rise without noses and ears, that we should 
find that our genital organs would be cut off or maimed and that a city of eunuchs was built up in the new 
Jerusalem? 

6. Of the devil he thus frames his opinion: 

"We affirm also a judgment to come, in which judgment every man is to receive the due meed of his bodily 
life according to that which be has done, whether good or evil. And, if in the case of men the reward is 
according to their works how much more will it be so in the case of the devil who is the universal cause of 
sin. Of the devil himself our belief is that which is written in the Gospel, namely that both he and all his angels 
will receive as their portion the eternal fire, and with him those who do his works, that is, who become the 
accusers of their brethren. If then any one denies that the devil is to be subjected to eternal fires, may he 
have his part with him in the eternal fire, so that he may know by experience the fact which he now denies." 
I will repeat the words one by one. "We affirm also a judgment to come, in which judgment &c." I had 
determined to say nothing about verbal faults. But, since his disciples admire the eloquence of their master, 
I will make one or two strictures upon it. He had already said "a future judgment;" but, being a cautious man, 
he was afraid of saving simply "in which," and therefore wrote "in which judgment;" for fear that, if he had not 
said "judgment" a second time, we, forgetting what had gone before, might have supplied the word "ass." 
That which he brings in afterwards "those who become the accusers of their brethren will with him have their 
portion in the eternal fire," is in a style of equal beauty. Who ever heard of 'possessing' the flames'? It would 
be like 'enjoying tortures.' I suppose that, being now a Greek, he had tried to translate himself, and that for 
the word <greek>klhronomhsonin</greek>.(2) which can be rendered in Latin by the single word 
Haereditabunt, he said H in Latin by Haereditate potientur(3) supposing it to be something more elaborate 
and ornate. With such trifles and such improprieties of speech his whole discourse is teeming. But to return 
to the meaning of his words. 

7. To proceed: 

"This is a great spear with which the devil is pierced, he, ' who is the universal cause of sin.' if he is to render 
account of his works, like a man, and 'with his angels possess the inheritance of eternal fires.' This, no 
doubt, was what was lacking to him, that, having brought mankind into torment, he should himself 'possess 
the eternal fires' which he bad all the while been longing for." 

You seem to me here to speak a little too hardly of the devil, and to assail the accuser of all with false 
accusations. You say 'he is the universal cause of sin ;' and, while you make him the author of all crimes, 
you tree men from fault, and take away the freedom of the will. Our Lord says that(1) 'from our heart come 
forth evil thoughts, murders adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witnesses, railings,' and of Judas we read in 
the Gospel;(2) "After the sop Satan entered into him," that is, because he had before the sop sinned 
voluntarily, and had not been brought to repentance either by humbling himself or by the forbearance of the 
Saviour. So also the Apostle says;(3) "Such men I delivered to Satan, that they might be taught not to 
blaspheme." He delivered to Satan as to a torturer, with a view to their punishment those who, before they 
had been delivered to him learned to blaspheme by their own will. David also draws the distinction in a few 
words between the faults due to his own will and the incentives of vice when he says(4) "Cleanse thou me 
from my secret faults, and keep back thy servant from alien sins." We read also in Ecclesiastes(5) "If the 
spirit of a ruler rise up against thee, leave not thy place;" from which we may clearly see that we commit sin if 
we give opportunity to the power which rises up, and if we fail to hurl down headlong the enemy who is 
scaling our walls. As to your threatening your brothers, that is, those who accuse you, with eternal fire in 
company with the devil, it seems to me that you do not so much drag your brethren down as raise the devil 
up, since he, according to you, is to be punished only with the same fires as Christian men. But you well 
know, I think, what eternal fires mean according to the ideas of Origen, namely, the sinners' conscience, and 
the remorse which galls their hearts within. These ideas he thinks are intended in the words of lsaiah:(6) 
"Their worm shall not die neither shall their fire be quenched." And in the words addressed to Babylon:(7) 

"Thou hast coals of fire, thou shall sit upon them, these shall be thy help." So also in the Psalm it is said to 
the penitent;(8) "What shall be given to thee, or what shall be done more for thee against thee false tongue? 
Sharp arrows of the mighty, with desolating coals;" which means (according to him) that the arrows of God's 
precepts (concerning which the Prophet says in another place, (9) "I lived in misery while a thorn pierces 
me") should wound and strike through the crafty tongue, and make an end of sins in it. He also interprets the 
place where the Lord testifies saying:(1) "I came to send fire on the earth, and how I wish that it may burn" as 
meaning "I wish that all may repent, and burn out through the Holy spirit their vices and their sins; for I am he 
of whom it is written, (2) "Our God is a consuming fire;" it is no great thing then to say this of the devil, since it is 
prepared also for men." You ought rather to have said, if you wished to avoid the suspicion of believing in 
the salvation of the devil;(3) "Thou hast become perdition and shall not be for ever;" and as the Lord speaks 
to Job concerning the devil(4) "Behold his hone shall fail him and in the sight of all shall he be cast down. I 
will not arouse him as one that is cruel, for who can resist my countenance? Who has first given to me that I 
may return it to him? for all things beneath the heaven are mine. I will not spare him and his words that are 
powerful and fashioned to turn away wrath." Hence, these things may pass as the work of a plain man. Their 
bearing is evident enough to those who understand these matters; but to the unlearned they may wear the 
appearance of innocence. 

8. But what follows about the condition of souls can by no means be excused. He says: 

"I am next informed that some stir has been made on the question of the nature of the soul. Whether 
complaints on a matter of this kind ought to be entertained instead of being put aside, you mast yourself 
decide. If, however, you desire to know my opinion upon this subject, I will state it frankly. I have read a great 
many writers on this question, and I find that they express divers opinions. Some of these whom I have read 
hold that the soul is infused together with the material body through the channel of the human seed, and of 
this they give such proofs as they can. I think that this was the opinion of Tertullian or Lactantius among the 
Latins, perhaps also of a few others. Others assert that God is every day making new souls and infusing 
them into the bodies which have been framed in the womb; while others again believe that the souls were all 
made long ago, when God made all things of nothing, and that all that he now does is to send out each soul 
to be born in its body as it seems good to him. This is the opinion of Origen, and of some others among the 
Greeks. For myself, I declare in the presence of God that, after reading each of these opinions, I am unable 
to hold any of them as certain and absolute: the determination of the truth in this question I leave to God and 
to any to whom it shall please him to reveal it. My profession on this point is, therefore, first, that these 
several opinions are those which I have found in books, but, secondly, that I as yet remain in ignorance on 
the subject, except so far as this, that the Church delivers it as an article of faith that God is the creator of 
souls as well as of bodies." 

9. Before I enter upon the subject matter of this passage, I must stand in admiration of words worthy of 
Theophrastus: 

"I am informed, he says, that some stir has been made on the question of the nature of the soul. Whether 
complaints on a matter of this kind ought to be entertained instead of being put aside, you must yourself 
decide." 

If these questions as to the origin of the soul have been stirred at Rome, what is the meaning of this 
complaint and murmuring on the question whether they ought to be entertained or not, a question which 
belongs entirely to the discretion of bishops? But perhaps he thinks that question and complaint mean the 
same thing, because he finds this form of speech in the Commentaries of Caper. Then be writes: "Some of 
those whom I have read hold that the soul is infused together with the material body through the channel of 
the human seed; and of these they give such proofs as they can." What license have we here in the forms of 
speech! What mixing of the moods and tenses!(1) "I have read some sayings-they confirmed them with 
what assertions they could." And in what follows: "Others assert that God is every day making new souls 
and infusing them into the bodies which have been framed in the womb; while others again believe that the 
souls were all made long ago when God made all things of nothing, and that all that he now does is to send 
out each soul to be born in its body as seems good to him." Here also we have a most beautiful 
arrangement. Some, he says, assert this and that; some declare that the souls were made long ago, that is, 
when God made all things of nothing, and that He now sends them forth to be born in their own body as it 
pleases him. He speaks so distastefully and so confusedly that I have more trouble in correcting his 
mistakes than he in writing them. At the end he says: "I, however, though I have read these things;" and, while 
the sentence still hangs unfinished, he adds, as if he had brought forward something flesh: "I, however, do 
not deny that I have both read each of these things, and as yet confess that I am ignorant." 

10. Unhappy souls! stricken through with all these barbarisms as with so many lances! I doubt whether they 
had so much trouble when, according to the erroneous theory of Origen, they tell from heaven to earth, and 
were clothed in these gross bodies, as they have now in being knocked about on all sides by these strange 
words and sentences: not to mention that word of ill omen which says that they are infused through the 
channel of the human seed. I know that it is not usual in Christian writings to criticise mere faults of style; but I 

thought it well to shew by a few examples how rash it is to teach what you are ignorant of, to write what you 
do not know: so that, when we come to the subject-matter, we may be prepared to find the same amount of 
wisdom. He sends a letter, which he calls a very strong stick, as a weapon for the Bishop of Rome; and on 
the very subject about which the dogs are barking at him he professes entire ignorance of the question. If he 
is ignorant on the subject for which ill-reports are current against him, what need was there for him to send an 
Apology, which contains no defence of himself, but only a confession of his ignorance? This course is 
calculated to sow a crop of suspicious, not to calm them. He gives us three opinions about the origin of 
souls; and his conclusion at the end is: "I do not deny that I have read each of them, and I confess that I still 
am ignorant." You would suppose him to be Arcesilaus(l) or Carneades(2) who declare that there is no 
certainty; though be surpasses even them in his cautiousness; for they were driven by the intolerable ill-will 
which they aroused among philosophers for taking all truth out of human life, to invent the doctrines of 
probability, so that by making their probable assertions they might temper their agnosticism; but he merely 
says that he is uncertain, and does not know which of these opinions is true. If this was all the answer he had 
to make, what could have induced him to invoke so great a Pontiff as the witness of his lack of theological 
culture. I presume this is the lassitude about which he tells us that he is exhausted with his thirty-years' 
journey and cannot come to Rome. There are a great many things of which we are all ignorant; but we do 
not ask for witnesses of our ignorance. As to the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, as to the nativity of our Lord 
and Saviour, about which Isaiah cries, (3) "Who shall declare his generation?" he speaks boldly, and a 
mystery of which all past ages knew nothing he claims as quite within his knowledge: this alone he does not 
know, the ignorance of which causes men to stumble. As to how a virgin became the mother of God, he has 
full knowledge; as to how he himself was born he knows nothing. He confesses that God is the maker of 
souls and bodies, whether souls existed before bodies or whether they came into being with the germs of 
bodies, or are sent into them when they are already formed in the womb. In any case we recognize God as 
their author. The question at issue is not whether the souls were made by God or by another, but which of the 
three opinions which he states is true. Of this he professes ignorance. Take care! You may find people 
saying that the reason for your confession of your ignorance of the three is that you do not wish to be 
compelled to condemn one. You spare Tertullian and Lactantius so as not to condemn Origen with them. As 
far as I remember (though I may he mistaken) I am not aware of having read that Lactantius spoke of the 
soul as planted at the same time as the body.(1) But, as you say that you have read it, please to tell me in 
what book it is to be found, so that you may not be thought to have calumniated him in his death as you have 
me in my slumber. But even here you walk with a cautious and hesitating step. You say: "I think that, among 
the Latins, Tertullian or Lactantius held this opinion, perhaps also some others. You not only are in doubt 
about the origin of souls, but you have only 'thoughts' as to the opinion which each writer holds: yet the 
matter is of some importance. On the question of the soul, however, you openly proclaim your ignorance, 
and confess your untaught condition: as to the authors, your knowledge amounts only to 'thinking,' hardly to 
'presuming.' But as to Origen alone you are quite clear. "This is Origen's opinion," you say. But, let me ask 
you: Is the opinion sound or not? Your reply is, "I do not know." Then why do you send me messengers and 
letter-carriers, who are constantly coming, merely to teach me that you are ignorant? To prevent the 
possibility of my doubting whether your incapacity is as great as you say, and thinking it possible that you 
are cunningly concealing all you know, you take an oath in the presence of God that up to the present 
moment yon hold nothing for certain and definite on this subject, and that you leave it to God to know what is 
true, and to any one to whom it may please Him to reveal it. What! Through all these ages does it seem to 
you that there has been no one worthy of having this revealed to him? Neither patriarch, nor prophet, nor 
apostle, nor martyr? Were not these mysteries made clear even to yourself when you dwelt amidst princes 
and exiles? The Lord says in the Gospel:(1) "Father, I have revealed thy name to men." Did he who 
revealed the Father keep silence on the origin of souls? And are you astonished if your brethren are 
scandalized when you swear that you know nothing of a thing which the churches of Christ profess I to 
know?(2) 

1 1 . After the exposition of his faith, or rather his lack of knowledge, he passes on to another matter; and tries 
to make excuses for having turned the books <greek>Peri</greek> A<greek>rkpn</greek> into Latin. I will 
put down his words literally: 

"I am told that objections have been raised against me because, forsooth, at the request of some of my 
brethren, I translated certain works Of Origen from Greek into Latin. I suppose that every one sees that it is 
only through ill-will that this is made a matter of blame. For, if there is any offensive statement in the author, 
why is this to be twisted into a fault of the translator? I was asked to exhibit in Latin what stands written in the 
Greek text; and I did nothing more than fit Latin words to Greek ideas. If, therefore, there is anything to praise 
in these ideas, the praise does not belong to me: and similarly as to anything to which blame may attach." 
"I hear," he says, "that thence dispute has arisen. "(3) How clever this is, to speak of it as a dispute, when it is 
really an accusation against him. "That I have, at the request of my brethren, translated certain things of 
Origen's into Latin." Yes, but what are these "certain things"? Have they no name? Are you silent? Then the 

bills of charge brought by the accusers will speak for you. "I suppose," he says, "that every one 
understands that it is only through envy that these things are made matters of blame." What envy? Are 
people envious of your eloquence? Or have you done what no other man has ever been able to do? Here 
am I, who have translated many works of Origen's; yet, except you, no one shews envy towards me or 
calumniates me for it. "If there is any offensive statement in the author, why is it to be twisted into a fault of the 
translator? I was asked to exhibit in Latin what stands written in the Greek text; and I did nothing more than fit 
Latin words to Greek ideas. If, therefore, there is anything to praise in these ideas, the praise does not 
belong to me, and similarly as to anything to which blame may attach." Can you be astonished that men 
think ill of you when you say of open blasphemies nothing more than, "If there are any offensive statements 
in the author"? What is said in those books is offensive to all men; and you stand alone in your doubt and ill 
your complaint that this is "twisted into a fault of the translator," when you have praised it in your Preface. 
'You were asked to turn it into Latin as it stood in the Greek text.' I wish you had done what you pretend you 
were asked. You would not then be the object of any ill will. If you had kept faith as a translator, it would not 
have been necessary for me to counteract your false translation by my true one. You know in your own 
conscience what you added, what you subtracted, and what you altered on one side or the other at your 
discretion; and after this you have the audacity to tell us that what is good or evil is not to be attributed to you 
but to the author. You shew your sense of the ill will aroused against you by again toning down your words: 
and as if you were walking with your steps in the air or on the tops of the ears of corn, you say, "Whether 
there is praise or blame in these opinions." You dare not defend him, but you do not choose to condemn 
him. Choose which of the two you please; the option is yours; if this which you have translated is good, 
praise it, if bad, condemn it. But he makes excuses, and weaves another artifice, He says: 
"I admit that I put something of my own into the work: as I stated in my Preface, I used my own discretion in 
cutting out not a few passages; but only those as to which I had come to suspect that the thing had not been 
so stated by Origen himself, and the statement appeared to me in these cases to have been inserted by 
others, because in other places I had found the author state the same matter in a catholic sense. "(1) 
What wonderful eloquence! Varied, too, with flowers of the Attic style. "Moreover also!"(2) and "Things which 
came to me into suspicion!" I marvel that lie should have dared to send such literary portents to Rome. One 
would think that the man's tongue was in fetters, and bound with cords that cannot be disentangled, so that it 
could hardly break forth into human speech. However, I will return to the matter in hand. 
1 1 (a). I wish to know who gave you permission to cut out a number of passages from the work you were 
translating? You were asked to turn a Greek book into Latin, not to correct it; to draw out another man's 
words, not to write a book of your own. You confess, by the fact of pruning away so much, that you did not do 
what you were asked. And I wish that what you curtailed had all been the bad parts, and that you had not put 
in many things of your own which go to support what is bad. I will take an example, from which men may 
judge of the rest. In the first book of the ll<greek>eri</greek> A<greek>rkpn</greek> where Origen had 
uttered that impious blasphemy, that the Son does not see the Father, you supply the reasons for this, as if in 
the name of the writer, and translate the note of Didymus, in which he makes a fruitless effort to defend 
another man's error, trying to prove that Origen spoke rightly; but we, poor simple men, like the tame 
creatures spoken of by Ennius, can understand neither his wisdom nor that of his translator. Your Preface, 
which you allege in explanation, in which you flatter and praise me so highly shows you to be guilty of the 
most serious faults of translation. You say that you have cut out many things from the Greek, but you noticing 
of what you have put in. Were the parts cut out good or bad? Bad, I suppose. Was what you kept good or 
bad? Good, presume; for you could not translate the bad. Then I suppose you cut off what was bad and left 
what was good? Of course. But what you have translated can be shewn to be almost wholly bad. Whatever 
therefore in your translation I can shew to be must be laid to your account, since you translated it as being 
good. It is a strange thing if you are to act like an unjust censor, who is himself guilty of the crime, and are 
allowed at your will to expel some from the Senate and keep others in it. But you say: "It was impossible to 
change everything only thought I might cut away what had been added by the heretics." Very good. Then if 
you cut away all that you thought had been added by the heretics, all that you left belongs to the work which 
you were translating. Answer me then, are these good or bad? You could not translate what was had, since 
once for all you had cut away what had been added by the heretics, that is, unless you thought it your duty to 
cut away the bad parts due to the heretics, while translating the errors of Origen himself unaltered into Latin. 
Tell me then, why you turned Origen's heresies into Latin. Was it to expose the author of the evil, or to praise 
him? If your object is to expose him, why do you praise him in the Preface? If you praise him you are 
convicted of being a heretic. The only remaining hypothesis is that you published these things as being 
good. But if they are proved to be bad, then author and translator are involved in the same crime, and the 
Psalmist's word is fulfilled:(1) "When thou sawest a thief, thou consentedst unto him and hast been partaker 
with the adulterers." It is needless to make a plain matter doubtful by arguing about it. As to what follows, let 
him answer whence this suspicion arose in his mind of these additions by heretics. "It was," he says, 
"because I found the same things treated by this author in other places in a catholic sense." 

12. We must consider the fact, which comes first, and so in order reach the inference, which comes after. 
Now I find among many bad things written by Origen the following most distinctly heretical: that the Son of 
God is a creature, that the Holy Spirit is a servant: that there are innumerable worlds, succeeding one 
another in eternal ages: that angels have been turned into human souls; that the soul of the Saviour existed 
before it was born of Mary, and that it is this soul which "being in the form of God thought it not robbery to be 
equal with God, but emptied itself and took the form of a servant;"(2) that the resurrection of our bodies will 
be such that we shall not have the same members, since, when the functions of the members cease they will 
become superfluous: and that our bodies themselves will grow aerial and spirit-like, and gradually vanish 
and disperse into thin air and into nothing: that in the restitution of all things, when the fulness of forgiveness 
will have been reached, Cherubim and Seraphim, Thrones, Principalities, Dominions, Virtues, Powers, 
Archangels and Angels, the devil, the demons and the souls of men whether Christians Jews or Heathen, 
will be of one condition and degree; and when they have come to their trite form and weight, and the new 
army of the whole race returning from the exile of the world presents a mass of rational creatures with all their 
dregs left behind, then will begin a new world from a new origin, and other bodies in which the souls who fall 
from heaven will be clothed; so that we may have to fear that we who are now men may afterwards be born 
women, and one who is now a virgin may chance then to be a prostitute. These things I point out as heresies 
in the books of Origen. It is for you to point out in which of his books you have found them contradicted. 

13. Do not tell me that "you have found the same things treated by the same author in other places in a 
catholic sense," and thus send me to search through the six thousand books of Origen which you charge the 
most reverend Bishop Epiphanius with having read; but mention the passages with exactness: nor will this 
suffice; you must produce the sentences word for word. Origen is no fool, as I well know; he cannot 
contradict himself. The net result arising from all this calculation is, then, that what you cut out was not due to 
the heretics, but to Origen himself, and that you translated the bad things he had written because you 
considered them good; and that both the good and the bad things in the book are to be set to your account, 
since you approved his writings in the Prologue. 

14. The next passage in this apology is as follows: 

"I am neither a champion nor a defender of Origen, nor am I the first who has translated his works. Others 
before me have done the same thing: and I did it, the last of many, at the request of my brethren. If an order 
is to be given that such translations are not to be made, such an order holds good for the future, not the past: 
but if those are to be blamed who have made these translations before any such order was given, the 
blame must begin with those who took the first step." 

Here at last he has vomited forth what he wanted to say, and all his inflamed mind has broken oat into this 
malicious accusation against me. When he translates the ll<greek>eri</greek> A<greek>rkpn</greek> he 
declares that he is following me. When he is accused for having done it, he gives me as his example: 
whether he is in danger or out of danger, he cannot live without me. Let me tell him, therefore, what he 
professes not to know. No one reproaches you because you translated Origen, otherwise Hilary and 
Ambrose would be condemned: but because you translated a heretical work, and tried to gain support for it 
by praising me in the Preface. I myself, whom you criminate, translated seventy homilies of Origen, and 
parts of his Tomes, in order that by translating his best works I might withdraw the worst from notice: and I 
also have openly translated the ll<greek>eri</greek> A<greek>rkpn</greek> to prove the falsity of your 
translation, so as to show the reader what to avoid. If you wish to translate Origen into Latin, you have at 
hand many homilies and Tomes of his, in which some topic of morality is handled or some obscure 
passage of Scripture is opened. Translate these give these to those who ask them of you. Why should your 
first labour begin with what is infamous? And why, when you were about to translate a heretical work, did you 
preface and support it by the supposed book of a martyr, and force upon the ears of Romans a book the 
translation of which threw the world into panic? At all events, if you translate such a work with the view of 
exhibiting the author as a heretic, change nothing from the Greek text, and make this clear in the Preface. It is 
this which the Pope Anastasius most wisely embodies in the letter which he has addressed to the Bishop 
John against you; he frees me who have done this froth all blame, but condemns you who would not do it. 
You will perhaps deny the existence of this letter; I have therefore subjoined a copy of it; so that, if you will 
not listen to your brother when he advises, you may listen to the Bishop when he condemns. 

15. You say that you are not the defender or the champion of Origen; but I will at once confront you with your 
own book of which you spoke in that notorious preface to your renowned work in these terms: 

"The cause of this diversity I have set forth more fully for you in the Apology which Pamphilus wrote among 
his treatises, adding a very short document of my own, in which I have shewn by what appear to me evident 
proofs, that his works have been depraved in many places by heretics and ill-disposed persons, and 
especially those which I am now translating, the ll<greek>eri</greek> A<greek>rkrn</greek>." 
The defence made by Eusebius, or if you will have it so, by Pamphilus, was not sufficient for you, but you 
must add something from your superior wisdom and learning to supply what you thought insufficient in what 
they had said. It would be a long business if I were to insert the whole of your book into the present treatise, 

and, after setting out each paragraph, to reply to each in turn, and shew what vices there are in the style, 
what falsehoods in the assertions, what inconsistency in the actual tissue of the language. And therefore, to 
avoid a redundant discussion which is distasteful to me, I will compress the verbal matter into a narrow 
compass, and reply to the meaning alone. As soon as he leaves the harbour he runs his ship upon a rock. 
He recalls the words of the Apology of the Martyr Pamphilus (which however, I have proved to be the work 
of Eusebius the Chief of the Arians) of which he had said, "I translated it into the Latin tongue as best I was 
able and as the matter demanded;" he then adds: "It is this as to which I wish to give you a charge, 
Macarius, man of desires, (1) that you may feel sure that this rule of faith which I have above set forth out of 
his books, is such as ought to be embraced and held fast: it is clearly shewn that there is a catholic meaning 
in them all." Although he took away many things from the book of Eusebius, and tried to alter in a good 
sense the expressions about the Son and the Holy Spirit, still there are found in it many causes of offence, 
and even open blasphemies, which our friend cannot refuse to accept since he pronounces them to be 
catholic. Eusebius (or, if you please, Pamphilus) says in that book that the Son is the Servant of the Father, 
the Holy Spirit is not of the same substance with the Father and the Son; that the souls of men have fallen 
from heaven; and, inasmuch as we have been changed from the state of Angels, that in the restitution of all 
things angels and devils and men will all be equal; and many other things so impious and atrocious that it 
would be a crime even to repeat them. The champion of Origen and translator of Pamphilus is in a strange 
position. If there is so much blasphemy in these parts which he has corrected, what sacrilegious things must 
there be in the parts which, as he pretends, have been falsified by heretics! What makes him hold this 
opinion, as he says, is that a man who is neither a feel nor a madman could not have said things mutually 
repugnant; and, that we may not suppose that he had written different things at different times, and that he put 
forth contrary views according to the time of writing, he has added: 

"What are we to say when sometimes in the same place, and, so to speak, almost in the following 
paragraph, a sentence with an opposite meaning is found inserted? Can we believe that, in the same work 
and in the same book, and sometimes, as I have said in the sentence immediately following, he can have 
forgotten his own words? For example, could he who had before said, we can find no passage throughout 
the Scriptures in which the Holy Spirit is said to be created or made, immediately add that the Holy Spirit 
was made among the rest of the creatures? or again, could he who defined the Father and the Son to be of 
one substance, that namely which is called in Greek Homoousion, say in the following portions that he was 
of another substance, and that he was created, when but a little before he had declared him to be born from 
the nature of God the Father?" 

16. These are his own words, he cannot deny them. Now I do not want to be put off with such expressions as 
"since he said above" but I want to have the name of the book in which he first spoke rightly and then 
wrongly: in which he first says that the Holy Spirit and the Son are of the substance of God, and in what 
immediately follows declares that they are creatures. Do you not know that I possess the whole of Origen's 
works and have read a vast number of them? "Your trappings to the mob! I know you well; What lies within 
and on the skin I see."(1) 

Eusebius who was a very learned man, (observe I say learned not catholic: you must not, according to your 
wont make this a ground for calumniating me) takes up six volumes with nothing else but the attempt to shew 
that Origen is of his way of believing, that is of the Arian perfidy. He brings out many test-passages, and 
effectually proves his point. In what dream m an Alexandrian prison was the revelation given to you on the 
strength of which you make out these passages to be falsified which he accepts as true? But possibly he 
being an Arian, took in these additions of the heretics to support his own error, so that he should not be 
thought to be the only one who had held false opinions contrary to the Church. What answer will you make, 
then, as to Didymus, who certainly is catholic as regards the Trinity? You know that I translated his book on 
the Holy Spirit into Latin. He surely could not have assented to the passages in Origen's works which were 
added by heretics; yet he wrote some short commentaries on the ll<greek>eri</greek> 
A<greek>rkrn</greek> which you have translated; in these he never denies that what is there written was 
written by Origen, but only tries to persuade us simple people that we do not understand his meaning and 
how these passages ought to be taken in a good sense. So much on the Son and the Holy Spirit alone. But 
in reference to the rest of Origen's doctrines, both Eusebius and Didymus adhere to his views, and defend, 
as said in a catholic and Christian sense, what all the churches reprobate. 

17. But let us consider what are the arguments by which he tries to prove that Origen's writings have been 
corrupted by the heretics. 

"Clement," he says, "who was the disciple of the Apostles, and who succeeded the apostles both in the 
episcopate and in martyrdom, wrote the books which go by the name of Anagnorismus; that is, 
Recognitions. In these, though, speaking generally, the doctrine which is set forth in the name of the Apostle 
Peter is genuinely apostolical, yet in certain passages the doctrine of Eunomius is brought in such a way as 
that you would suppose Eunomius himself to be conducting the argument and asserting his view that the 
Son was created out of nothing." 

And, after a passage too long to reproduce, he adds: 

"What then are we to think of these facts? Must we believe that an Apostolic man wrote heresy? or is it not 
more likely that men of perverse mind, wishing to gain support for their own doctrines, and win easier credit 
for them, introduced under the names of holy men views which they cannot be believed either to have held 
or to have written down?" 

He tells us that Clement the presbyter of Alexandria also, who was a catholic man, writes at times in his 
works that the Son of God is created; and that Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, a most learned man, in the 
four books in which he controverted the doctrines of Sabellius, lapses into the dogma of Arius. What he 
aims at by quoting these instances is not to shew that Churchmen and catholics have erred, but that their 
writings have been corrupted by heretics, and he closes the discussion with these words: 
"And when we find in Origen a certain diversity of doctrine, just as we have found it in those of whom we have 
spoken above, will it not be sufficient for us to believe the same in his case which we believe or understand 
in the case of the catholic men whom we have passed in review? Will not the same defence hold good 
when the case is the same?" 

If, I reply, we admit that everything in a book which is offensive is corruptly inserted by others, nothing will 
remain belonging to the author under whose name the book passes, but everything can be assigned to 
those by whom it is supposed to have been corrupted. But then it will not belong to them either, since we do 
not know who they were: and the result will be that every book belongs to everybody and nothing to any one 
in particular. In this confusion which this method of defence introduces, it will be impossible to convict 
Marcion of error, or Manichus or Arius or Eunomius; because, as soon as we point out a statement of their 
unbelief, their disciples will answer that was not what the master wrote, but was corruptly inserted by his 
opponents. According to this principle, this very book of yours will not be yours nor mine. And as to this very 
book in which I am making reply to your accusations, whatever you find fault with in it will be held not be 
written by me but by you who now find fault with it. And further, while you assign everything to the heretics, 
there will be nothing left which you can assign to churchmen as their own. 

But you may ask, How is it then that in their books some false views occur? Well, if I answer that I do not 
know the parties whence these false views came, I must not be thought to have said that they are heretics. It 
is possible that they may have fallen into error unawares, or that the words bore a different meaning, or that 
they may have been gradually corrupted by unskilful copyists It must be admitted that, before Arius arose in 
Alexandria as a demon of the south, things were said incautiously which cannot be defended against a 
malevolent criticism. But when glaring faults are exposed in Origen, you do not defend him but accuse 
others; you do not deny the faults, but summon up a host of criminals. If you were asked to name those who 
have been the companions of Origen in his heresies, it would be right enough to call in these others. But 
what you are now asked to tell us is whether those statements in the books of Origen are good or evil; and 
you say nothing, but bring in irrelevant matters, such as: This is what Clement says; this is an error of which 
Dionysius is found guilty; these are the words in which the bishop Athanasius defends the error of Dionysius; 
in a similar way the writings of the Apostle have been tampered with: and then, while the charge of heresy is 
fastened upon you, you say nothing in your own defence, but make confessions about me. I make no 
accusations, and am content with answering for myself. I am not what you try to prove me: whether you are 
what you are accused of being, is for you to consider. The fact that I am acquitted of blame does not prove 
me innocent nor the fact that you are accused prove you a criminal. 

18. After this preface as to the falsification by heretics of the apostles, of both the Clements, and of 
Dionysius, he at last comes to Origen; and these are his words: 

"I have shewn from his own words and writings how he himself complains of this and deplores it: He explains 
clearly in the letter which he wrote to some of his intimate friends at Alexandria what he suffered while living 
here in the flesh and in the full enjoyment of his senses, by the corruption of his books and treatises, or by 
spurious editions of them." 

He subjoins a copy of this letter; and he who implores to the heretics the falsification of Origen's writings 
himself begins by falsifying them, for he does not translate the letter as be finds it in the Greek, and does not 
convey to the Latins what Origen states in his letter. The object of the whole letter is to assail Demetrius the 
Pontiff of Alexandria, and to inveigh against the bishops throughout the world, and to tell them that their 
excommunication of him is invalid; he says further that he has no intention of retorting their evil speaking; 
indeed he is so much afraid of evil speaking that he does not dare to speak evil even of the devil; insomuch 
that he gave occasion to Candidus an adherent of the errors of Valentinian to represent him falsely as 
saying that the devil is of such a nature as could be saved. But our friend takes no notice of the real purport 
of the letter, and makes up for Origen an argument which he does not use. I have therefore translated a part 
of the letter, beginning a little way below what has been already spoken of, and have appended it to the part 
which has been translated by him in a curtailed and disingenuous manner, so that the reader may perceive 
the object with which be suppressed the earlier part. He is contending, then, against the Bishops of the 
church generally, because they had judged him unworthy of its communion; and he continues as follows: 

"Why need I speak of the language in which the prophets constantly threaten and reprove the pastors, 
elders, the priests and the princes? These things you can of yourselves without my aid draw out from the 
Holy Scriptures, and you may clearly see that it may well be the present time of which it is said(1)' Trust not 
in your friends, and do not hope in princes,' and that the prophecy is now gaining its fulfilment, (2) The 
leaders of my people have not known me; my sons are fools and not wise: they are wise to do evil, but know 
not to do good.' We ought to pity them, not to hate them, to pray for them, not to curse them. For we have 
been created for blessing, not for cursing. Therefore even Michael, (3) when he disputed against the devil 
concerning the body of Moses, did not dare to bring a railing accusation even for so great an evil, but said; 
'The Lord rebuke thee.' And we read something similar in Zachariah,(4) 'The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan; the 
Lord which hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee.' So also we desire that those who will not humbly accept 
the rebuke of their neighbours may be rebuked of the Lord. But, since Michael says, 'The Lord rebuke thee, 
O Satan,' and Zechariah says the same, the devil knows well whether the Lord rebukes him or not; and must 
acknowledge the manner of the rebuke." 
Then, after a passage too long to insert here, he adds: 

"We believe that not only those who have committed great sins will be cast out from the kingdom of heaven, 
such as fornicators and adulterers, and those who defile themselves with mankind, and thieves, but those 
also who have done evil of a less flagrant kind, since it is written;(5) 'Neither drunkards nor evil speakers 
shall inherit the kingdom of God;" and that the standard by which men will be judged is as much the 
goodness as the severity of God. Therefore we strive to act thoughtfully in all things, in drinking wine, and in 
moderation of language, so that we dare not speak evil of any man. Now, because, through the fear of God, 
we are careful not to utter maledictions against any one, remembering that the words 'He dared not bring 
against him a railing accusation,' are spoken of Michael in his dealing with the devil; as it is said also in 
another place, (1) 'They set at naught dominions and rail at dignities;' certain of these men who seek for 
matters of contention, ascribe to us and our teaching the blasphemy (as to which they have to lay to heart 
the words which apply to them, 'Neither drunkards nor evil speakers shall inherit the kingdom of God'), 
namely, that the father of wickedness find perdition of those who shall be cast out of the kingdom of God can 
be saved; a thing which not even a madman can say." 

The rest which comes in the same letter he has(2) set down instead of the later words of Origen which I have 
translated: "Now, because through the fear of God we are careful not to utter maledictions against any one," 
and so on; he fraudulently cuts off the earlier part, on which the later depends, and begins to translate the 
letter, as though the former part began with this statement, and says: 

"Some of those who delight in bringing complaints against their neighbours, ascribe to us and our teaching 
the crime of a blasphemy, which we have never spoken, (as to which they must consider whether they are 
willing to stand by the decree which says 'The evil speakers shall not inherit the kingdom of God,') for they 
say that I assert that the father of the wickedness and perdition of those who shall be east out of the kingdom 
of God, that is, the devil, will be saved; a thing which no man even though he had taken leave of his senses 
and was manifestly insane could say." 

19. Now compare the words of Origen, which I have translated word for word above, with these which by him 
have been turned into Latin, or rather overturned; and you will see clearly how great a discrepancy between 
them there is, not only of word but of meaning. I beg you not to consider my translation wearisome because 
it is longer; for the object I had in translating the whole passage was to exhibit the purpose which be had in 
suppressing the earlier part. There exists in Greek a dialogue between Origen and Candidus the defender 
of the heresy of Valentinian, in which I confess it seems to me when I read it that I am looking on at a fight 
between two Andabatian gladiators. Candidus maintains that the Son is of the substance of the Father, 
falling into the error of asserting a Probole or Production. (1) On the other side, Origen, like Arius and 
Eunomius, refuses to admit that He is produced or born, lest God the Father should thus be divided into 
parts; but he says that He was a sublime and most excellent creation who came into being by the will of the 
Father like other creatures. They then come to a second question. Candidus asserts that the devil is of a 
nature wholly evil which can never be saved. Against this Origen rightly asserts that he is not of perishable 
substance, but that it is by his own will that he felt and can be saved. This Candidus falsely turns into a 
reproach against Origen, as if he had said that the diabolical nature could be saved. What therefore 
Candidus had falsely accused him of, Origen refutes. But we see that in this Dialogue alone Origen accuses 
the heretics of having falsified his writings, not in the other books about which no question was ever raised. 
Otherwise, if we are to believe that all which is heretical is not due to Origen but to the heretics, while almost 
all his books are full of these errors, nothing of Origen's will remain, but everything must be the work of those 
of whose names we are ignorant. 

It is not enough for him to calumniate the Greeks and the men of old time, about whom the distance either of 
time or space gives him the power to tell any falsehood he pleases. He comes to the Latins, and first takes 
the case of Hilary the Confessor, whose book, he states, was falsified by the heretics after the Council of 
Ariminum. A question arose about him on this account in a council of bishops, and he then ordered the book 

to be brought from his own house. The book in its heretical shape was in his desk, though he did not know it; 
and when it was produced, the author of the book was condemned as a heretic and excommunicated, and 
left the council room. This is the story, a mere dream of his own, which he tells to his intimates; and he 
imagines his authority to be so great that no one will dare to contradict him when he says such things. I will 
ask him a few questions. In what city was the synod held by which Hilary was excommunicated? What were 
the names of the Bishops present? Who subscribed the sentence? Who were content, and who 
non-content? Who were the consuls of the year? and who was the emperor who ordered the assembly of 
the council? Were the Bishops present those of Gaul alone, or of Italy and Spain as well? and for what 
purpose was the council called together? You tell us none of these things; yet, in order to defend Origen, 
you treat as a criminal and as excommunicated a man of the highest eloquence, the very clarion of the Latin 
tongue against the Arians. But we are in the presence of a confessor, and even his calumnies must be 
borne with patience. He next passes to Cyprian the illustrious martyr, and he tells us that a book by 
Tertullian entitled "On the Trinity" is read as one of his works by the partisans of the Macedonian heresy at 
Constantinople. In this charge of his he tells two falsehoods. The book in question is not Tertullian's, nor 
does it pass under the name of Cyprian. It is by Novatian and is called by his name; the peculiarity of the 
style proves the authorship of the work. 

20. What nonsense is this out of which they fabricate a charge against me! It seems hardly worth while to 
notice it. It is a story of my own about the council held by Damasus Bishop of Rome, and I , under the name 
of a certain friend of his, am attacked for it. He bad given me some papers about church affairs to get 
copied; and the story describes a trick practised by the Apollinarians who borrowed one of these, a book of 
Athanasius' to read in which occur the words(1) 'Dominicus homo,' and falsified it by first scratching out the 
words, and then writing them in again on the erasure, so that it might appear, not that the book bad been 
falsified by them, but that the words had been added by me. I beg you, my dearest friend, that in these 
matters of serious interest to the church, where doctrinal truth is in question, and we are seeking for the 
authority of our predecessors for the well-being of our souls to put away silly stuff of this kind, and not take 
mere after-dinner stories as if they were arguments. For it is quite possible that, even after you have heard 
the true story from me, another who does not know it may declare that it is made up, and composed in 
elegant language by you like a mine of Philistion or a song of Lentulus or Marcellus. 

21 . To what point will not rashness reach when once the reins which check it are relaxed? After telling us of 
the excommunication of Hilary, the heretical book falsely bearing the name of Cyprian, the successive 
erasure and insertion in the work of Athanasius made while I was asleep, he as a last effort breaks forth into 
an attack upon the pope Epiphanius: the chagrin engendered in his heart because Epiphanius in the letter 
which he wrote to the bishop John had called him a heretic, he pours out in his apology for Origen, and 
comforts himself with these words: 

"The whole truth, which has been hidden, must here be laid bare. It is impossible that any man should 
exercise so unrighteous a judgment as to judge unequally where the cases are equal. But the fact is, the 
prompters of those who defame Origen are men who either make it a habit to discourse in the churches at 
great length or write books, the whole of which, both books and discourse are taken from Origen. To prevent 
men therefore from discovering their plagiarism, the crime of which can be concealed so long as they act 
ungratefully towards their master, they deter all simple persons from reading him. One of them, who 
considers himself to have a necessity laid upon him to speak evil of Origen through every nation and 
tongue, as if that were to preach the Gospel, once declared in the audience of a vast multitude of the 
brethren that he had read six thousand of his books. If he read them, as he is wont to declare, in order to 
know what harm there was in him, ten or twenty books, or at most thirty, would have been sufficient for that 
knowledge. To read six thousand books is not like one who wants to know the harm and the errors that are 
in him, but like one who consecrates almost his whole life to studies conducted under his tuition. How then 
can he claim to be listened to when he blames those who, for the sake of instruction, have read a small 
portion of his works, taking care to maintain whole their own system of belief anti their piety?" 

22. Who are these men who are wont to dispute at such great length in the churches, and to write books, and 
whose discourses and writings are taken wholly from Origen; these men who are afraid of their literary thefts 
becoming known, and shew ingratitude towards their master, and who therefore deter men of simple mind 
from reading him? You ought to mention them by name, and designate the men themselves. Are the 
reverend bishops(1) Anastasius and Theophilus, Venerius and Chromatius, and the whole council of the 
Catholics both in the East and in the West, who publicly denounce him as a heretic, to be esteemed to be 
plagiarists of his books? Are we to believe that, when they preach in the churches, they do not preach the 
mysteries of the Scriptures, but merely repeat what they have stolen from Origen? Is it not enough for you to 
disparage them all in general, but you must specially aim the spear of your pen against a reverend and 
eminent Bishop of the church? Who is this who considers that he has a necessity laid on him of reviling 
Origen, as the Gospel which he must preach among all nations and tongues? this man who proclaimed in 
the audience of a vast multitude of the brethren that he had read six thousand of his books? You yourself 

were in the very centre of that multitude and company of the brethren, when, as he complains in his letter,(1) 
the monstrous doctrines of Origen were enlarged upon by you. Is it to be imputed to him as a crime thai he 
knows the Greek, the Syrian, the Hebrew, the Egyptian, and in part also the Latin language? Then, I 
suppose, the Apostles and Apostolic men, who spoke with tongues, are to be condemned; and you who 
know two languages may deride me who know three. But as for the six thousand books which you pretend 
that be has read, who will believe that you are speaking the truth, or that he was capable of telling such a 
lie? If indeed Origen had written six thousand books, it is possible that a man of great learning, who had 
been trained from his infancy in sacred literature might have read books alien from his own convictions, 
because he had an inquiring spirit and a love of learning. But how could be read what Origen never wrote? 
Count up the index contained in the third volume of Eusebius, in which is his life of Pamphilus: you will not 
find, I do not say six thousand, but not a third of that number of books. I have by me the letter of the above 
named Pontiff, in which he gives his answer to this calumny of yours uttered when you were still in the East; 
and it confutes this most manifest falsehood with the open countenance of truth. 

23. After all this you dare to say ill your Apology, that you are not the defender nor the champion of Origen, 
though you think that Eusebius and Pamphilus said all too little in his defence. I shall try to write a reply to 
those works in another treatise if God grants me a sufficient span of life. For the present let it suffice that I 
have met your assertions, and that I have set the careful reader on his guard by stating that I never saw in 
writing the book which was known as the work of Pamphilus till I read it in your own manuscript. It was no 
great concern of mine to know what was written: in favour of a heretic, and therefore I always took it that the 
work of Pamphilus was different from that of Eusebius; but, after the question had been raised, I wished to 
reply to their works, and with this object I read what each of them had to say in Origen's behalf; and then I 
discerned clearly that the first of Eusebius' six books was the same which you had published both in Greek 
and Latin as the single book of Pamphilus, only altering the opinion shout the Son and the Holy Spirit, which 
bore on their face the mark of open blasphemy. It was thus that, when my friend, Dexter, who held the office 
of praetorian prefect, asked me, ten years ago, to make a list for him of the writers of our faith, (1) placed 
among the various treatises assigned to various authors this book as composed by Pamphilus, supposing 
the matter to be as it had been brought before the public by you and by your disciples. But, since Eusebius 
himself says that Pamphilus wrote nothing except some short letters to his friends, and the first of his six 
books contains the precise words which are fictitiously given by you under the name of Pamphilus, it is plain 
that your object in circulating this book was to introduce heresy under the authority of a martyr. I cannot allow 
you to make my mistake a cloak for your fraud, when you first pretend that the book is by Pamphilus and 
then pervert many of its passages so as to make them different in Latin from what they are in Greek. I 
believed the book to be by the writer whose name it bore, just as I did in reference to the 
<greek>Peri</greek>A<greek>rkpn</greek> and many other of the works of Origen and of other Greek 
writers, which I never read fill now, and am now compelled to read, because the question of heresy has 
been raised, and I wish to know what ought to be avoided and what opposed. In my youth, therefore, I 
translated only the homilies which he delivered in public, and in which there are fewer causes of offence; 
and this in ignorance and at the request of others: I did not try to prejudice men by means of the parts which 
they approved in favour of the acceptance of those which are evidently heretical. At all events, to cut short a 
long discussion, I can point out whence I received the <greek>Peri</greek>'A<greek>rkpn</greek>, 
namely, from those who copied it from your manuscript. We want in like manner to know whence your copy 
of it came; for if you are unable to name any one else as the source from which it was derived, you will 
yourself be convicted of falsifying it.(2) " A good man from the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth what 
is good." A tree of a good stock is known by the sweetness of its fruit. 

24. My brother Eusebius writes to me that, when he was at a meeting of African bishops which had been 
called for certain ecclesiastical affairs, he found there a letter purporting to be written by me, in which I 
professed penitence and confessed that it was through the influence of the press in my youth that I had been 
led to turn the Scriptures into Latin from the Hebrew; in all of which there is not a word of truth. When I heard 
this, I was stupefied. But one witness was not enough; even Cato was not believed on his unsupported 
evidence:(1) "In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established." Letters were soon 
brought me from many brethren in Rome asking about this very matter, whether the facts were as was 
stated: and they pointed in a way to make me weep to the person by whom the letter had been circulated 
among the people. He who dared to do this, what will he not dare to do? It is well that ill will has not a strength 
equal to its intentions. Innocence would be dead long ago if wickedness were always allied to power, and 
calumny could prevail in all that it seeks to accomplish. It was impossible for him, accomplished as he was, 
to copy any style and manner of writing, whatever their value may be; amidst all his tricks and his fraudulent 
assumption of another man's personality, it was evident who he was. It is this same man, then, who wrote this 
fictitious letter of retractation in my name, making out that my translation of the Hebrew books was bad, who, 
we now hear, accuses me of having translated the Holy Scriptures with a view to disparage the Septuagint. 
In any case, whether my translation is right or wrong, I am to be condemned: I must either confess that in my 

new work I was wrong, or else that by my new version I have aimed a blow at the old. I wonder that in this 
letter he did not make me out as guilty of homicide, or adultery or sacrilege or parricide or any of the vile 
things which the silent working of the mind can revolve within itself. Indeed I ought to be grateful to him for 
having imputed to me no more than one act of error or false dealing out of the whole forest of possible 
crimes. Am I likely to have said anything derogatory to the seventy translators, whose work I carefully 
purged from corruptions arid gave to Latin readers many years ago, and daily expound it at our conventual 
gatherings;(2) whose version of the Psalms has so long been the subject of my meditation and my song? 
Was I so foolish as to wish to forget in old age what I learned in youth? All my treatises have been woven out 
of statements warranted by their version. My commentaries on the twelve prophets are an explanation of 
their version as well as my own. How uncertain must the labours of men ever be! and how contrary at times 
to their own intentions are the results which men's studies reach. I thought that I deserved well of my 
countrymen the Latins by this version, and bad given them an incitement to learning; for it is not despised 
even by the Greeks now that it is retranslated into their language; yet it is now made the subject of a charge 
against me; and I find that the food pressed upon them turns upon the stomach. What is there in human life 
that can be safe if innocence is made the object of accusation? I am the householder' who finds that while 
he slept the enemy has sown tares among his wheat.(2) "The wild boar out of the wood has rooted up my 
vineyard, and the strange wild beast has devoured it." I keep silence, but a letter that is not mine speaks 
against me. I am ignorant of the crime laid against me, yet I am made to confess the crime all through the 
world. (3) "Woe is me, my mother, that thou hast borne me a man to be judged and condemned(4) in the 
whole earth." 

25. All my prefaces to the books of the Old Testament, some specimens of which I subjoin, are witnesses for 
me on this point; and it is needless to state the matter otherwise than it is stated in them. I will begin therefore 
with Genesis. The Prologue is as follows: 

I have received letters so long and eagerly desired from my dear Desiderius(5) who, as if the future had 
been foreseen, shares his name with Daniel, (6) entreating me to put our friends in possession of a 
translation of the Pentateuch from Hebrew into Latin. The work is certainly hazardous and it is exposed to 
the(7) attacks of my calumniators, who maintain that it is through contempt of the Seventy that I have set to 
work to forge a new version to take the place of the old. They thus test ability as they do wine; whereas I 
have again and again declared that I dutifully offer, in the Tabernacle of God what I can, and have pointed 
out that the great gifts which one man brings are not marred by the inferior gifts of another. But I was 
stimulated to undertake the task by the zeal of Origen, who blended with the old edition Theodotion's 
translation and used throughout the work as distinguishing marks the asterisk * and the obelus, that is the 
star and the spit, the first of which makes what had previously been defective to beam with light, while the 
other transfixes and slaughters all that was superfluous. But I was encouraged above all by the authoritative 
publications of the Evangelists and Apostles, in which we read much taken from the Old Testament which is 
not found in our manuscripts. For example, 'Out of Egypt have I called my Son' (Matt. ii. 15): ' For he shall be 
called a Nazarene' (Ibid. 23): and 'They shall look on him whom they pierced' (John xix. 37): and 'Rivers of 
living water shall flow out of his belly' (John vii. 38): and 'Things which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor 
have entered into the heart of man, which God hath prepared for them that love him ' (1 . Cor. ii. 9), and many 
other passages which lack their proper context. Let us ask our opponents then where these things are 
written, and when they are unable to tell, let us produce them from the Hebrew. The first passage is in 
Hosea, (xi. 1), the second in Isaiah (xi. 1), the third in Zechariah (xii. 10), the fourth in Proverbs (xviii. 4), the fifth 
also in Isaiah (Ixiv. 4). Being ignorant of all this many follow the ravings of the Apocrypha, and prefer to the 
inspired books the melancholy trash which comes to us from Spain. (1) It is not for me to explain the causes 
of the error. The Jews gay it was deliberately and wisely done to prevent (2)Ptolemy who was a monotheist 
from thinking the Hebrews acknowledged two deities. And that which chiefly influenced them in thus acting 
was the fact that the king appeared to be falling into Platonism. In a word, wherever Scripture evidenced 
some sacred truth respecting Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, they either translated the passage differently, or 
passed it over altogether in silence, so that they might both satisfy the king, and not divulge the secrets of 
the faith. I do not know whose false imagination led him to invent the story of the a seventy cells at 
Alexandria, in which, though separated from each other, the translators were said to have written the same 
words. Aristeas,(4) the champion of that same Ptolemy, and Josephus, long after, relate nothing of the kind; 
their account is that the Seventy assembled in one basilica consulted together, and did not prophesy. For it 
is one thing to be a prophet, another to be a translator. The former through the Spirit, foretells things to come; 
the latter must use his learning and facility in speech to translate what he understands. It can hardly be that 
we must suppose Tully was inspired with oratorical spirit when he translated Xenophon's OEconomics, 
Plato's Protagoras, and the oration of Demosthenes in defence of Ctesiphon. Otherwise the Holy Spirit must 
have quoted the same books in one sense through the Seventy Translators, in another through the 
Apostles, so that, whereas they said nothing of a given matter, these falsely affirm that it was so written. What 
then? Are we condemning our predecessors? By no means; but following the zealous labours of those who 

have preceded us we contribute such work as lies in our power in the name of the Lord. They translated 
before the Advent of Christ, and expressed in ambiguous terms that which they knew not. We after His 
Passion and Resurrection write not prophecy so much as history. For one style is suitable to what we hear, 
another to what we see. The better we understand a subject, the better we describe it. Hearken then, my 
rival: listen, my calumniator; I do not condemn, I do not censure the Seventy, but I am bold enough to prefer 
the Apostles to them all. It is the Apostle through whose mouth I hear the voice of Christ, and I read that in the 
classification of spiritual gifts they are placed before prophets (1 Cor. xii. 28; Eph. iv. 11), while interpreters 
occupy almost the lowest place. Why are you tormented with jealousy? Why do you inflame the minds of the 
ignorant against me? Wherever in translation I seem to you to go wrong, ask the Hebrews, consult their 
teachers in different towns. The words which exist in their Scriptures concerning Christ your copies do not 
contain. The case is different if they have(1) rejected passages which were afterward used against them by 
the Apostles, and the Latin texts are more correct than the Greek, the Greek than the Hebrew. 
[Chapters 26 to 32 are taken up with the quotation, almost in full, of the Preface to the Vulgate translation of 
the books of the Old Testament. It is unnecessary to give them here. They have all the same design as the 
Preface to Genesis already given, namely to meet the objections of those who represented the work as a 
reproach to the LXX which was then supposed to have almost the authority of inspiration. The same 
arguments, illustrations, and even words, are reiterated. Readers who may desire to go more fully into 
Jerome's statements will find these Prefaces translated at length in his works, Vol. VI of this Series.] 
33. In reference to Daniel my answer will be that I did not say that he was not a prophet; on the contrary, I 
confessed in the very beginning of the Preface that he was a prophet. But I wished to show what was the 
opinion upheld by the Jews; and what were the arguments on which they relied for its proof. I also told the 
reader that the version read in the Christian churches was not that of the Septuagint translators but that of 
Theodotion. It is true, I said that the Septuagint version was in this book very different from the original, and 
that it was condemned by the right judgment of the churches of Christ; but the fault was not mine who only 
stated the fact, but that of those who read the version. We have four versions to choose from: those of 
Aquila, Symmachus, the Seventy, and Theodotion. The churches choose to read Daniel in the version of 
Theodotion. What sin have I committed in following the judgment of the churches? But when I repeat what the 
Jews say against the Story of Susanna and the Hymn of the Three Children, and the fables of Bel and the 
Dragon, which are not contained in the Hebrew Bible, the man who makes this a charge against me proves 
himself to be a fool and a slanderer; for I explained not what I thought but what they commonly say against 
us. I did not reply to their opinion in the Preface, because I was studying brevity, and feared that I should 
seem to he writing not a Preface but a book. I said therefore, "As to which this is not the time to enter into 
discussion." Otherwise from the fact that I stated that Porphyry had said many things against this prophet, 
and called, as witnesses of this, Methodius, Eusebius, and Apollinarius, who have replied to his folly in 
many thousand lines, it will be in his power to accuse me for not baring written in my Preface against the 
books of Porphyry. If there is any one who pays attention to silly things like this, I must tell him loudly and free 
that no one is compelled to read what he does not want; that I wrote for those who asked me, not for those 
who would scorn me, for the grateful not the carping, for the earnest not the indifferent. Still, I wonder that a 
man should read the version of Theodotion the heretic and judaizer, and should scorn that of a Christian, 
simple and sinful though he may be. 

34. 1 beg you, my most sweet friend, who are so curious that you even know my dreams, and that yon 
scrutinize for purposes of accusations all that I have written during these many years without fear of future 
calumny; answer me, how is it you do not know the prefaces of the very books on which you ground your 
charges against me? These prefaces, as if by some prophetic foresight, gave the answer to the calumnies 
that were coming, thus fulfilling the proverb, "The antidote before the poison." What harm has been done to 
the churches by my translation? You bought up, as I knew, at great cost the versions of Aquila, Symmachus, 
and Theo-dotion, and the Jewish authors of the fifth and sixth translations. Your Origen, or, that I may not 
seem to be wounding you with fictitious praises, our Origen, (for I may call him ours for his genius and 
learning, though not for the truth of his doctrines) in all his books explains and expounds not only the 
Septuagint but the Jewish versions. Eusebius and Didymus do the same. I do not mention Apollinarius, who, 
with a laudable zeal though not according to knowledge, attempted to patch up into one garment the rags of 
all the translations, and to weave a consistent text of Scripture at his own discretion, not according to any 
sound rule of criticism. The Hebrew Scriptures are used by apostolic men; they are used, as is evident, by 
the apostles and evangelists. Our Lord and Saviour himself whenever he refers to the Scriptures, takes his 
quotations from the Hebrew; as in the instance of the words(1) "He that believeth on me, as the Scripture 
hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water," and in the words used on the cross itself, "Eli, Eli, 
lama sabachthani," which is by interpretation "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" not, as it is 
given by the Septuagint, "My God, my God, look upon me, why hast thou forsaken me?" and many similar 
cases. I do not say this in order to aim a blow at the seventy translators; but I assert that the Apostles of 
Christ bare an authority superior to theirs. Wherever the Seventy agree with the Hebrew, the apostles took 

their quotations from that translation; but, where they disagree, they set down in Greek what they had found in 
the Hebrew. And further, I give a challenge to my accuser. I have shown that many things are set down in the 
New Testament as coming from the older books, which are not to be found in the Septuagint; and I have 
pointed out that these exist in the Hebrew. Now let him show that there is anything in the New Testament 
which comes from tile Septuagint but which is not found in the Hebrew, and our controversy is at an end. 
35. By all this it is made clear, first that the version of the Seventy translators which has gained an 
established position by having been so long in use, was profitable to the churches, because that by its 
means the Gentiles heard of the coming of Christ before he came; secondly, that the other translators are 
not to be reproved, since it was not their own works that they published but the divine books which they 
translated; and, thirdly, that my own familiar friend should frankly accept from a Christian and a friend what he 
has taken great pains to obtain from the Jews and has written down for him at great cost. I have exceeded 
the bounds of a letter; and, though I had taken pen in hand to contend against a wicked heresy, I have been 
compelled to make answer on my own behalf, while waiting for my friend's three books, and in a state of 
constant mental suspense about the charges he had heaped up against me. It is easier to guard against 
one who professes hostility than to make head against an enemy who lurks under the guise of a friend. 

JEROME'S APOLOGY IN ANSWER TO RUFINUS-BOOK III. 

The two first books formed a complete whole, but it was intimated that there might be more to come when 
Jerome should have received Rufinus' work in full. The two first books were brought to Rufinus by the 
captain of a merchant-ship trading with Aquileia, together with a copy of Jerome's friendly letter which had 
been suppressed by Pammachius. The bearer had (as stated by Rufinus, though Jerome mocks at this as 
impossible) only two days to wait. Chromatius the Bishop of Aquileia urged that the strife should now cease, 
and prevailed so far as that Rufinus made no public reply. He wrote a private letter, however, to Jerome, 
which has not come down to us, and which does not seem, from the extracts given in c. 4, 6, etc., to have 
been of a pacific tenor. Its details may be gathered from Jerome's reply. Jerome intimates that it sought to 
involve him in heresy, that it renewed and aggravated the former accusations, speaking of him in language 
fit only for the lowest characters on the stage; and that it declared that, if its writer had been so minded, he 
could have produced facts which would have been the destruction of his adversary. Jerome, though 
receiving some expressions of the desire of Chromatius that he should not reply (perhaps also the regretful 
expostulation of Augustin,-Jer. Letter ex, 6, Aug. Letter 73) declared that it was impossible for him to yield. 
He could not refrain from defending himself from a capital charge, nor could he spare the heretics. Peace 
could only come by unity in the faith. 

1 . Your letter is full of falsehood and violence. I will try not to take the same tone. 

2. Why cannot we differ as friends? Why do you, by threats of death, compel me to answer? 

3. 4. Your shameful taunt that I wished to get copies of your Apology by bribing your Secretary is an 
imputation to me of practices which are your own. 

5. Eusebius should not have accused you; but your charges against him will not stand. 

6. You taunt me with boasting of my eloquence. Will you boast of your illiteracy? 

7. 8. You wish first to praise, then to amend me, but both with fisticuffs; and make it impossible for me to keep 
silence. 

9. Why cannot you join with me in condemning Origen, and so put an end to our quarrel? 

10. The assertion that you had only two days for your answer is a fiction. 

1 1 . Your translation, contrariwise to my Commentaries, vouches for the soundness of Origen. 

12. You try to shield Origen by falsely attributing the Apology for him to Pamphilus. 

13. In my Commentaries my quotation of opposite opinions shows that neither is mine. 

14. Had you translated honestly, you would not have had Origen's heresies imputed to you. 

15. You say the Bishops of Italy accept your views on the Resurrection. I doubt it. 

16. You rashly say that you will agree to whatever Theophilus lays down. You have to consider your 
friendship for Isidore now his enemy. 

17. 18. You speak of the Egyptian Bishop Paul. We received him, though an Origenist, as a stranger; and he 
has united himself to the orthodox faith. Not only Theophilus but the Emperors condemn Origen. 

19. Against Vigilantius I wrote only what was right. I knew who had stirred him up against me. 

20. As to the letter of Pope Anastasius condemning you, you will find that it is genuine. 

21 . Siricius who is dead may have written in your favour; Anastasius who is living writes to the East against 
you. 

22. My departure from Rome for the East had nothing blameable in it as you insinuate. 

23. Epiphanius, it is true, gave you the kiss of peace; but he showed afterwards that he had come to distrust 
you. 

24. When we parted as friends I believed you a true believer; no one was sent to Rome to injure you. 

25. You swear that you dad not write my pretended retractation. Your style betrays you, and I have given a 
full answer about my translations already. 

26. You bid me beware of falsification and treachery. You warn me against yourself. 

27. There is nothing inconsistent in praising a man for some things and blaming him in others. You have 
done it in my case. 

28-31 . My ignorance of many natural phenomena is no excuse for your ignorance as to the origin of souls. 
You ought, according to your boasting dream to know everything. The thing of most importance was 

forgotten in your cargo of Eastern wares. 

32. Your dream was a boast: mine of which you accuse me humbled me. 

33. It was not I who first disclosed your heresies, but Epiphanius long ago and Aterbius before him. 

34-36. As to our translations of the <greek>Peri</greek>'A<greek>rkpn</greek>, yours was doing harm, and 
mine was necessary in self-defence. You should be glad that heresy is exposed. 

37. Your Apology for Origen did not save him but involved you in heresy. 

38. My friendly letter was to prevent discord: the other to crush false opinions. 

39. 40. Pythagoras was rightly quoted by me. I produce some of his sayings. 

41 , 42. You threaten me with destruction. I will not reply in the same way. Personalities should be excluded 

from controversies of faith. 

43, 44. The way of peace is through the wisdom taught in the Book of Proverbs, and through unity in the faith. 

I have read the letter(1) which you in your' wisdom have written me. You inveigh against me, and, though you 
once praised me and called me true partner and brother, you now write books to summon me to reply to the 
charges with which you terrify me. I see that in you are fulfilled the words of Solomon: (2)"ln the mouth of the 
foolish is the rod of(3) contumely," and (4)" A fool receives not the words of prudence, unless you say what is 
passing in his heart;" and the words of Isaiah: (5)"The fool will speak folly, and his heart will understand vain 
things, to practise iniquity and speak falsehood against the Lord." For what need was there for you to send 
me whole volumes full of accusation and malediction, and to bring them before the public, when in the end of 
your letter you threaten me with death if I dare to reply to your slanders-l beg pardon-to your praises? For 
your praises and your accusations amount to the same thing; from the same fountain proceed both sweet 
and bitter. I beg you to set me the example of the modesty and shamefacedness which you recommend to 
me; you accuse another of lying: cease to be a liar yourself. I wish to give no one an occasion of stumbling, 
and I will not become your accuser; for I have not to consider merely what you deserve but what is 
becoming in me. I tremble at our Savior's words. (6)" Whosoever shall cause one of these little ones that 
believe in me to stumble, it were better for him that a great mill stone were hanged about his neck and he 
were drowned in the depths of the sea;" and(7) "Woe unto the world because of occasions of stumbling: for 
it must needs be that occasions arise; but woe to the man through whom the occasion cometh." It would 
have been possible for me too to pile up falsehoods against you and to say that I had heard or seen what 
no one had observed, so that among the ignorant my effrontery might be taken for veracity, and my violence 
for resolution. But far be it from me to be an imitator of you, and to do thyself what I denounce in you. He who 
is capable of doing filthy things may use filthy words. (1)"The evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart 
bringeth forth that which is evil; for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh." You may count it 
as good fortune that one whom you once called friend but now accuse has no mind to make vile imputations 
against you. I say this not from any dread of the sword of your accusation, but because I prefer to be 
accused than to be the accuser, to suffer an injury than to do one. I know the precept of the Apostle: 
(2)"Dearly beloved avenge not yourselves but rather give place unto wrath: for it is written Vengeance is 
mine, I will repay saith the Lord. Therefore, if thine enemy hunger feed him, if he thirst give him drink; for in so 
doing thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head." For he that avenges himself cannot claim the vindication 
of the Lord. 

2. But, before I make my answer to your letter, I must expostulate with you; you who are first in age among the 
thanks, good presbyter, follower of Christ; is it possible for you to wish to kill your brother, when even to hate 
him is to be a homicide? Have you learned from your Saviour the lesson that if one strike you on the one 
cheek you should turn to him the other also? Did not he make answer to the man who struck him, (3) "If I have 
spoken evil, bear witness of the evil, but if well, why smitestthou me?" You threaten me with death, which can 
be inflicted on us even by serpents. To die is the lot of all, to commit homicide only of the weak man. What 
then? If you do not kill me shall I never die? Perhaps I ought to be grateful to you that you turn this necessity 
into a virtue We read of Apostles quarrelling, namely Paul and Barnabas who were angry with each other on 
account of John whose surname was Mark; those who were united by the bonds of Christ's gospel were 
separated for a voyage; but they still remained friends. Did not the same Paul resist Peter to the face 
because he did not walk uprightly in the Gospel? Yet he speaks of him as his predecessor in the Gospel, 
and as a pillar of the church; and he lays before him his mode of preaching, (1) ' lest he should be running, or 
had run in vain.' Do not children differ from parents and wives from husbands in religions matters, while yet 
domestic affections remain unimpaired. If you are as I am, why should you hate me? Even if you believe 
differently, why should you wish to kill me? Is it so, that whoever differs from you is to be slain? I call upon 
Jesus who will judge what I am now writing and your letter also, as a witness upon my conscience, that when 
the reverend bishop Chromatius begged the to keep silence, my wish was to do so, and thus to make an 
end of our dissensions, and to overcome evil with good. But, now that yon threaten me with destruction, I am 
compelled to reply; otherwise, my silence will be taken as an acknowledgment of the crime, and you will 
interpret my moderation as the sign of an evil conscience. 

3. The dilemma in which I am placed is of your making: it is brought out, not from the resources of dialectics, 
of which you are ignorant, but from among the tools of the murderer and with an intention like his. If I keep 
silence, I am held guilty: if I speak, I become an evil speaker. You at once forbid me to answer and compel 
me. Well, then; I must shun excess on both sides. I will say nothing that is injurious; but I must dissipate the 
charges made against me, for it is impossible not to be afraid of a man who is prepared to kill you. And I will 
do this in the order of what you have now set before me, leaving the rest as they are in those most learned 
books of yours which I confuted before I had read them. 

You say that 'you sent your accusation against me not to the many but only to those who had been offended 
by what I had said; for one ought to speak to Christians not for display but for edification.' Whence then, I beg 
you to consider, did the report of your having written these books reach me? Who was it t that sowed them 
broadcast through Rome and Italy and the islands of the coast of Dalmatia? How did these charges against 
me ever come to my ears, if they were only lurking in your desk, and those of your friends? How can you 
dare to say that you are speaking as a Christian not for display but for edification when you set yourself in 
mature age to say things against your equal which a murderer could hardly say of a thief, or a harlot against 
one of her class, or a buffoon against a farce-player? You have for ever so long been labouring to bring 
forth these mountains of accusations against me and sharpening these swords to pierce my throat. Your 
cries have been as loud as Ceres' complaints(l) or a driver's shouts to his horses. Was this to make all the 
provinces through which they resounded read the praise you wrote of me? and recite your panegyrics upon 
me in every street, every corner, even in the weaving-shops of the women? This is the religious restraint and 
Christian edification of which you speak. Your reserve, your reticence is such that men come to me from the 
West, crowd upon crowd, and tell me of your abuse of me; and this, though only from memory, yet with such 
exact agreement that I was obliged(2) to make my answer, not to your writings which I bad not then read, but 
to what was said to be contained in them, and to intercept with the shield of truth the missiles of mendacity 
which were flying about through all the world. 

4. Your letter goes on: 

"Pray do not trouble yourself to give a large sum of gold to bribe my secretary, as your friends did in the 
case of my papers containing the <greek>Peri</greek>'A<greek>rkpn</greek>, before they had been 
corrected and brought to completion, so that they might more easily falsify documents which no one 
possessed, or at least very few. Accept the document which I send you gratis, though you would be glad to 
pay a large sum to buy it." 

I should have thought you would be ashamed of such a beginning of your work. What! I bribe your 
Secretary! Is there any one who would attempt to vie with the wealth of Croesus(3) and Darius?(3) who is 
there that does not tremble when he is suddenly confronted with a Demaratus(4) or a Crassus?(5) Have you 
become so brazen-faced, theft you put your trust in lies and think lies will protect you and that we shall 
believe every fiction which you choose to frame? Who then was it who stole that letter in which you were so 
highly praised, from the cell of our brother Eusebius? Whose artfulness was it, and whose accomplices, 
through which a certain document was found in the lodgings of that Christian woman Fabiola and of that wise 
man Oceanus, which they themselves had never seen? Do you think that you are innocent because you 
can cast upon others all the imputations which properly belong to you? Is every one who offends you, 
however guiltless and harmless he may be, at once held to become a criminal? You think so, I suppose, 
because you are possessed of that through which the chastity of Danae(1) was broken down, that which had 
more power with Gihazi than his master's sacred character, that for which Judas betrayed his Master.(2) 

5. Let us understand what was the wrong done by my friend(2) who, you say 'falsified parts of your papers 
when they had not yet been corrected nor carried to completion, and it was the more possible to falsify them 
because very few if any as yet possessed them. '(4) I have already said, and I now repeat, with protestations 
in the presence of God, that I did not approve his accusing you, nor of any Christian accusing another 
Christian; for what need is there that matters which can be corrected or set right in private should be 
published abroad to the stumbling and fall of many? But since each man lives for his own gullet, and a man 
does not by becoming your friend become master of your will, while I blame the accusing of a brother even 
when it is true, so also I cannot accept against a man of saintly character this accusation of falsify-ing your 
papers. How could a man who only knows Latin change anything in a translation from the Greek? Or how 
could he take out or put in anything in such books as the <greek>Peri</greek>'A<greek>rkpn</greek>, in 
which everything is so closely knit together that out part hangs upon another, and anything that may be 
taken out or' put in to suit your will must at once show out like a patch on a garment? What you ask me to do, 
it is for you to do yourself. Put on at least a small measure of natural if not of Christian modesty in your 
assertions; do not despise and trample upon your conscience, and imagine yourself justified by a show of 
words, when the facts are against you. If Eusebius bought your uncorrected papers for money in order to 
falsify them, produce the genuine papers which have not been falsified: and if you can shew that there is 
nothing heretical in them, he will become amenable to the charge of forgery. But, however much you may 
alter or correct them, you will not make them out to be catholic. If the error existed only in the words or in 

some few statements, what is bad might be cut off and what is good be substituted for it. But, when the whole 
discussion(l) proceeds on a single principle, namely, the notion that the whole universe of reasonable 
creatures have fallen by their own will, and will hereafter return to a condition of unity: and that again from that 
starting point another fall will begin: what is there that you can amend, unless you alter the whole book? But if 
you were to think of doing this, you would no longer be translating another man's work but composing a work 
of your own. 

However, I hardly see which way your argument tends. I suppose you mean that the papers being 
uncorrected and not having undergone a final revising were more easily falsified by Eusebius. Perhaps I 
am stupid; but the argument appears to me somewhat foolish and pointless. If the papers were uncorrected 
and had not undergone their final revision, the errors in them mast be imputed not to Eusebius but to your 
sloth and delay in putting off their correction; and all the blame that can be laid upon him is that he circulated 
among the body of Christians writings which you had intended in course of time to correct. But if, as you 
assert, Eusebius falsified them, why do you put forward the allegation that they were uncorrected, and that 
they had gone out before the public without their final revision? For papers whether corrected or uncorrected 
are equally susceptible of falsification. But, No one, you say possessed these books, or very few. What 
contradictions this single sentence exhibits! If no one bad these books, how could they be in the hands of a 
few? If a few possessed them, why do you state falsely that there were none? Then, when you say that a few 
had them, and by your own confession the statement that no one had them is overthrown, what becomes of 
your complaint that your secretary was bribed with money? Tell us the secretary's name, the amount oF the 
bribe, the place, the intermediary, the recipient. Of course the traitor has been cast off from you, and one 
convicted of so great a crime has been separated from all familiarity with you. Is it not more likely to be true 
that the copies of the work which Eusebius obtained were given him by those few friends whom you speak 
of, especially since these copies agree and coincide with one another so completely that there is not the 
difference of a single stroke. We might ask also whether it was quite wise to give a copy to others which you 
bad not yet corrected? The documents had not received their last corrections, and yet other men 
possessed these errors of yours which needed correction. Do you not see that your falsehood will not hold 
together? Besides, what profit was there for you, at that particular moment-how would it have helped you in 
escaping from the condemnation of the bishops-that the book which was the subject of discussion should 
be open to everyone, and that you should thus be refuted by your own words? From all this it is clear, 
according to the epigram of the famous orator, that you have a good will for a lie, but not the art of framing it. 
6. I will follow the order of your letter, and subjoin your very words as you spoke them. "I admit, that, as you 
say, I praised, your eloquence in my Preface; and I would praise it again now were it not that contrary to the 
advice of your Tully, you make it hateful by excessive boastfulness." Where have I boasted of my 
eloquence? I did not even accept willingly the praise which you bestowed on it. Perhaps your reason for 
saying this is that you do not wish, yourself, to be flattered by public praise given in guile. Rest assured you 
shall be accused openly; you reject one who would praise you; you shall have experience of out who 
openly arraigns you. I was not so foolish as to criticize your illiterate style; no one can expose it to 
condemnation so strongly as you do whenever you write. I only wished to show your fellow-disciples who 
shared your lack of literary training what progress you had made during your thirty years in the East, an 
illiterate writer, who takes impudence for eloquence, and universal evil speaking a sign of a good 
conscience. I am not going to administer the ferule; I do not assume, as you put it, to apply the strokes of the 
leather thong to teach an aged pupil his letters. But the fact is your eloquence and teaching is so sparkling 
that we mere tract-writers cannot bear it, and you dazzle our eyes with the acuteness of your talents to such 
an extent that we must all seem to be envious of you; and we must really join in the attempt to suppress you, 
for, if once you obtain the primacy among us as a writer, and stand on the summit of the rhetorical arch, all of 
us who profess to know anything will not be allowed to mutter a word. I am, according to you, a philosopher 
and an orator, grammarian, dialectician, one who knows Hebrew, Greek and Latin, a 'trilingual' man. On this 
estimate, you also will be 'bilingual,' who know enough Latin and Greek to make the Greek think you a Latin 
scholar and the Latin a Greek: and the bishop Epiphanius will be a 'pentaglossic(l) man' since he speaks 
in five languages against you and your favorite. (2) But I wonder at the rashness which made you dare to say 
to one so accomplished as you profess to think me: " You, whose accomplishments give you so many 
watchful eyes, how can you be pardoned if you go wrong? How can you fail to be buried in the silence of a 
never ending shame?" When I read this, and reflected that I must somewhere or other have made a slip in 
my words (for (3) " if any man does not go wrong in word, the same is a perfect man") and was expecting that 
he was about to expose some of my faults; all of a sudden I came upon the words: "Two days before the 
carrier of this letter set out your declamation against me was put into my hands." What became then of those 
threats of yours, and of your words: "How can you be pardoned if you go wrong? How Call you fail to be 
covered with the silence of a never ending shame?" Yet perhaps, notwithstanding the shortness of the time, 
you were able to put this in order; or else you were intending to hire in one of the learned sort, who would 
expect to find in my works the ornaments and gems of an eloquence like yours. You wrote before this: 

"Accept the document which I send which you wished to buy at a great price;" but now you speak with the 
pretence of humility. "I intended to follow your example; but, since the messenger who was returning to yon 
was hurrying back again I thought it better to write shortly to you than at greater length to others." In the 
meantime you boldly take pleasure in your illiteracy. Indeed you once confessed it, declaring that ' it was 
superfluous to notice a few faults of style, when it was acknowledged that there were faults in every part.' I 
will not therefore find fault with you for putting down that a document was acquired when you meant that it was 
bought; though acquiring is said of things like in kind, whereas buying implies the counting out of money: nor 
for such a sentence as " as he who was returning to you was hurrying hack again" which is a redundancy 
worthy of the poorest style of diction. I will only reply to the arguments, and will convict you, not of solaecisms 
and barbarisms, but of falsehood, cunning and impudence. 

7. If it is true that you write a letter to me so as to admonish me, and, because you wish that I should be 
reformed, and that you do not wish that men should have a stumbling block put in their way, and that some 
may be driven mad and others be put to silence; why do you write books addressed to others against me, 
and scatter them by your myrmidons for the whole world to read? And what becomes of your dilemma in 
which you try to entangle me," Whom, best of masters, did you think to correct? If those to whom you wrote, 
there was no fault to find with them; if me whom you accuse, it was not to me that you wrote"? And I will reply 
to you in your own words: "Whom did you wish to correct, unlearned master? Those who had done no 
wrong? or me to whom you did not write? You think your leaders are brutish and are all incapable of 
understanding your subtilty, or rather your ill will, (for it was in this that the serpent was more subtile than all 
the beasts in paradise,) in asking that my admonition to you should be of a private character, when you 
were pressing an indictment against me in public. You are not ashamed to call this indictment of yours an 
Apology: And you complain that I oppose a shield to your poniard, and with much religiosity and 
sanctimoniousness you assume the mask of humility, and say: "If I had erred, why did you write to others, 
and not try to confute me?" I will retort on you this very point. What you complain that I did not do, why did you 
not do yourself? It is as if a man who is attacking another with kicks and fisticuffs, and flints him intending to 
shew fight, should say to him: " Do you not know the command, 'If a man smites you on the cheek, turn to him 
the other'?" It comes to this, my good sir, you are determined to beat me, to strike out my eye; and then, 
when I bestir myself ever so little, you harp upon the precept of the Gospel. Would you like to have all the 
windings of your cunning exposed?-those tricks of the foxes who dwell among the ruins, of whom Ezekiel 
writes, (1) " Like foxes in the desert, so are thy prophets, O Israel." Let me make you understand what you 
have done. You praised me in your Preface in such a way that your praises are made a ground of 
accusation against me, and if I had not declared myself to be without any connexion with my admirer, I 
should have been judged as a heretic. After I repelled your charges, that is your praises, and without 
shewing ill will to you personally, answered the accusations, not the accuser, anti inveighed against the 
heretics, to shew that, though defamed by you, I was a catholic; you grew angry, and raved and composed 
the most magnificent works against me; and when you had given them to all men to read and repeat, letters 
came to me from Italy, and Rome and Dalmatia, shewing each more clearly than the last, what all the 
encomiums were worth with which in your former laudation you had decorated me. 

8. I confess, I immediately set to work to reply to the insinuations directed against me, and tried with all my 
might to prove that I was no heretic, and I sent these books of my Apology to those whom your book had 
pained, so that your poison might be followed by my antidote. In reply to this, you sent me your former 
books, and now send me this last letter, full of injurious language and accusations. My good friend, what do 
you expect me to do? To keep silence? That would be to acknowledge myself guilty. To speak? But you 
hold your sword over my head, and threaten me with an indictment, no longer before the church but before 
the law-courts. What have I done that deserves punishment? Wherein have I injured you? Is it that I have 
shewn myself not to be a heretic? or that I could not esteem myself worthy of your praises? or that I laid bare 
in plain words the tricks and perjuries of the heretics? What is all this to you who boast yourself a true man 
and a catholic, and who shew more zeal in attacking me than in defending yourself? Must I be thought to be 
attacking yon because I defend myself? or is it impossible that you should be orthodox unless you prove 
me to be a heretic? What help can it give you to be connected with me? and what is the meaning of your 
action? You are accused by one set of people and you answer only by attacking another. You find an 
attack made on you by one man, and you turn your back upon him and attack another who was for leaving 
you alone. 

9. I call Jesus the Mediator to witness that it is against my will, and fighting against necessity, that I come 
down into the arena of this war of words, and that, had you not challenged me, I would have never broken 
silence. Even now, let your charges against me cease, and my defence will cease. For it is no edifying 
spectacle that is presented to our readers, that of two old men engaging in a gladiatorial conflict on account 
of a heretic; especially when both of them wish to be thought catholics. Let us leave off all favouring of 
heretics, and there will be no dispute between us. We once were zealous in our praise of Origen; let us be 
equally zealous in condemning him now that he is condemned by the whole world. Let us join hands and 

hearts, and march with a ready step behind the two trophy-bearers of the East and West.(1) We went wrong 
in our youth, let us mend our ways in our age. If you are my brother, be glad that I have seen my errors; if I 
am your friend, I must give you joy on your conversion. So long as we maintain our strife, we shall be thought 
to hold the right faith not willingly but of necessity. Our enmity prevents our affording the spectacle of a true 
repentance. If our faith is one, if we both of us accept and reject the same things, (and it is from this, as even 
Catiline testifies, that firm friendships arise), if we are alike in our hatred of heretics, and equally condemn 
our former mistakes, why should we set out to battle against each other, when we have the same objects 
both of attack and defence? Pardon me for having praised Origen's zeal for Scriptural learning in my 
youthful clays before I fully knew his heresies; and I will grant you forgiveness for having written an Apology 
for his works when your head was grey. 

10. You state that my book came into your hands two days before you wrote your letter to me, and that 
therefore you had no sufficient leisure to make a reply. Otherwise, if you had spoken against me after full 
thought and preparation, we might think that you were casting forth lightnings rather than accusations. But 
even so veracious a person as you will hardly gain credence when you tell its that a merchant of Eastern 
wares whose business is to sell what he has brought from these parts and to buy Italian goods to bring over 
here for sale, only stayed two days at Aquileia, so that you were obliged to write your letter to me in a hurried 
and extempore fashion. For your books which it took you three years to put into complete shape are hardly 
more carefully written. Perhaps, however, you had no one at hand then to amend your sorry productions, 
and this is the reason why your literary journey is destitute of the aid of Pallas, and is intersected by faults of 
style, as by rough places and chasms at every turn. It is clear that this statement about the two days is false; 
you would not have been able in that time even to read what I wrote, much less to reply to it; so that it is 
evident that either you took a good many days in writing your letter, which its elaborate style makes 
probable; or, if this is your hasty style of composition, and yon can write so well off-hand, you would be very 
negligent m your composition to write so much worse when you have had time for thought. 

1 1 . You state, with some prevarication, that you have translated from the Greek what I had before translated 
into Latin; but I do not clearly understand to what you are alluding, unless you are still bringing up against me 
the Commentary on the Ephesians, and hardening yourself in your effrontery, as if you had received no 
answer on this head. You stop your ears and will not hear the voice of the charmer. What I have done in that 
and other commentaries is to develop both my own opinion and that of others, stating clearly which are 
catholic and which heretical. This is the common rule and custom of those who undertake to explain books 
in commentaries: They give at length in their exposition the various opinions, and explain what is thought by 
themselves and by others. This is done not only by those who expound the holy Scriptures but also by 
those who explain secular books whether in Greek or in Latin. You, however, cannot screen yourself in 
reference to the <greek>Peri</greek>'A<greek>rkpn</greek> by this fact; for you will be convicted by your 
own Preface, in which you undertake that the evil parts and those which have been added by heretics have 
been cut off but that all that is best remains; so that all that you have written, whether good or bad, must be 
held to be the work, not of the author whom you are translating, but of yourself who have made the 
translation. Perhaps, indeed, you ought to have corrected the errors of the heretics, and to have set forth 
publicly what is wrong in Origen. But on this point, (since you refer me to the document itself.) I have made 
you my answer before reading your letter. 

12. About the book of Pamphilus, what happened to me was, not comical as you call it, but perhaps 
ridiculous; namely that, after I had asserted it to be by Eusebius not by Pamphilus, I stated at the end of the 
discussion that I had for many years believed that it was by Pamphilus, and that I had borrowed a copy of 
this book from you. You may judge how little I fear your derision from the fact that even now I make the same 
statement. I took it from your manuscript as being a copy of a work of Pamphilus. I trusted in you as a 
Christian and as a monk: I did not imagine that you would be guilty of such a wicked imposture. But, after that 
the question of Origen's heresy was stirred throughout the world on account of your translation of his work, I 
was more careful in examining copies of the book, and in the library of Caesarea I found the six volumes of 
Eusebius' Apology for Origen. As soon as I had looked through them, I at once detected the book on the 
Son and the Holy Spirit which you alone have published under the name of the martyr, altering most of its 
blasphemies into words of a better meaning. And this I saw must have been done either by Didymus or by 
you or some other (it is quite clear that you did it in reference to the 

<greek>Peri</greek>'A<greek>rkpn</greek>) by this decisive proof, that Eusebius tells us that Pamphilus 
published nothing of his own. It is for you therefore to say from whence you obtained your copy; and do not, 
for the sake of avoiding my accusation, say that it was from some one who is dead, or, because you have 
no one to point to, name one who cannot answer for himself. If this rivulet has its source in your desk, the 
inference is plain enough, without my drawing it. But, suppose that the title of this book and the name of the 
author has been changed by some other lover of Origen, what motive had you for turning it into Latin? 
Evidently this, that, through the testimony given to him by a martyr, all should trust to the writings of Origen, 
since they were guaranteed beforehand by a witness of such authority. But the Apology of this most learned 

man was not sufficient for you; you must write a treatise of your own in his defence, and, when these two 
documents had been widely circulated, you felt secure in proceeding to translate the 
<greek>Peri</greek>'A<greek>rkpn</greek> itself from the Greek, and commended it in a Preface, in which 
you said that some things in it had been corrupted by the heretics, but that you had corrected them from a 
study of others of Origen's writings. Then come in your praises of me for the purpose of preventing any of 
my friends from speaking against you. You put me forward as the trumpeter of Origen, you praise my 
eloquence to the skies, so that you may drag down the faith into the mire; you call me colleague and 
brother, and profess yourself the imitator of my works. Then, while on the one hand you cry me up as having 
translated seventy homilies of Origen, and some of his short treatises on the Apostle, in which you say that I 
so smoothed things down that the Latin reader will find nothing in them which is discrepant from the Catholic 
faith; now on the other hand you brand these very books as heretical; and, obliterating your former praise, 
you accuse the man whom you had preached up when you thought he would figure as your ally, because 
you find that he is the enemy of your perfidy. Which of us two is the calumniator of the martyr? I, who say that 
he was no heretic, and that he did not write the book which is condemned by every one; or you, who have 
published a book written by a man who was an Arian and changed his name into that of the martyr? It is not 
enough for you that Greece has been scandalized; you must press the book upon the ears of the Latins, 
and dishonor an illustrious martyr as far as in you lies by your translation. Your intention no doubt was not 
this; it was not to accuse me but to make me serve for the defence of Origen's writings. But let me tell you 
that the faith of Rome which was praised by the voice of an Apostle, does not recognize tricks of this kind. A 
faith which has been guaranteed by the authority of an Apostle cannot be changed though an Angel should 
announce another gospel than that which he preached. Therefore, my brother, whether the falsification of the 
book proceeds from you, as many believe, or from another, as yon will perhaps try to persuade us, in which 
case you have only been guilty of rashness in believing the composition of a heretic to be that of a martyr, 
change the title, and free the innocence of the Romans from this great peril. It is of no advantage to you to be 
the means of a most illustrious martyr being condemned as a heretic: of one who shed his blood for Christ 
being proud to be an enemy of the Christian faith. Take another course: say, I found a book which I believed 
to be the work of a martyr. Do not fear to be a penitent. I will not press you further. I will not ask from whom 
you obtained it; you can name some dead man if you please, or say you bought it from an unknown man in 
the street: for I do not wish to see you condemned, but converted. It is better that it should appear that you 
were in error than that the martyr was a heretic. At all events, by some means or other, draw out your foot 
from its present entanglement: consider what answer you will make in the judgment to come to the 
complaints which the martyrs will bring against you. 

13. Moreover, you make a charge against yourself which has been brought by no one against you, and 
make excuses where no one has accused you. You say that you have read these and in my letter: " I want 
to know who has given you leave when translating a book, to remove some things, change others, and 
again add others." And you go on to answer yourself, and to speak against me: "I say this to you Who I 
pray, has given you leave, in your Commentaries, to put down some things out of Origen, some from 
Apollinarius, some of your own, instead of all from Origen or from yourself or from some other?" All this while, 
while you are aiming at something different, you have been preferring a very strong charge against yourself; 
and you have forgotten the old proverb, that those who speak falsehood should have good memories. You 
say that I in my Commentaries have set down some things out of Origen, some from Apollinarius, some of 
my own. If then these things which I have set down under the names of others are the words of Apollinarius 
and of Origen; what is the meaning of the charge which you fasten upon me, that, when I say "Another says 
this," "The following is some one's conjecture," that " other" or " some one" means myself? Between Origen 
and Apollinarius there is a vast difference of interpretation, of style, and of doctrine. When I set down 
discrepant opinions on the same passage, am I to be supposed to accept both the contradictory views? 
But more of this hereafter. 

14. Now I ask you this: Who may have blamed you for having either added or changed or taken away 
certain things in the books of Origen, and have put you to the question like a man on the horse-rack;(1) Are 
those things which you put down in your translation bad or good? It is useless for you to simulate innocence, 
and by some silly question to parry the force of the true inquiry. I have never accused you for translating 
Origen for your own satisfaction. I have done the same, and so have Victorinus, Hilary, and Ambrose; but I 
have accused you for fortifying your translation of a heretical work by writing a preface approving of it. You 
compel me to go over the same ground, and to walk in the lines I myself have traced. For you say in that 
Prologue that you have cut away what had been added by the heretics; and have replaced it with what is 
good. If you have taken out the false statement of the heretics, then what you have left or have added must 
be either Origen's, or yours, and you have set them down, presumably, as good. But that many of these are 
bad you cannot deny. " What is that," you will say, " to me?" You must impute it to Origen; for I have done no 
more than alter what had been added by the heretics. Tell us then for what reason yon took out the bad 
things written by the heretics and left those written by Origen untouched. Is it not clear that parts of the false 

doctrines of Origen you condemned under the designation of the doctrines of heretics, and others you 
accepted because you judged them to be not false but true and consonant with your faith? It was these last 
about which I inquired whether those things which you praised in your Preface were good or bad: it was 
these which yon confessed you have left as perfectly good when you cut out all that was worst; and I thus 
have placed you, as I said, on the horse-rack, so that, if you say that they are good, you will be proved to be 
a heretic, but if you say they are bad, you will at once be asked: " Why then did you praise these bad things 
in your Preface?" And I did not add the question which you craftily pretend that I asked; "Why did yon by 
your translation bring evil doctrines to the ears of the Latins?" For to exhibit what is bad may be done at 
times not for the sake of teaching them but of warning men against them: so that the reader may be on his 
guard not to follow the error, but may make light of the evils which he knows, whereas if unknown they might 
become objects of wonder to him. Yet after this, you dare to say that I am the author of writings of this kind, 
whereas you, as a mere translator would be going beyond the translator's province if you had chosen to 
correct anything, but, if you did not correct anything, you acted as a translator alone. You would be quite right 
in saying this if your translation of the <greek>Peri</greek>'A<greek>rkpn</greek> had no Preface; just as 
Hilary, when he translated Origen's homilies took care to do it so that both the good and evil of them should 
be imputed not to the translator but to their own author. If you had not boasted that you had cut out the worst 
and left the best, you would, in some way or other, have escaped from the mire. But it is this that brings to 
nought the trick of your invention, and keeps you bound on all sides, so that you cannot get out. And I must 
ask you not to have too mean an opinion of the intelligence of your readers nor to think that all who will read 
your writings are so dull as not to laugh at you when they see you let real wounds mortify while you put 
plasters on a healthy body. 

1 5. What your opinions are on the resurrection of the flesh, we have already learned from your Apology. " 
No member will be cut off, nor any part of the body destroyed." This is the clear and open profession which 
you make in your innocence, and which you say is accepted by all the bishops of Italy. I should believe your 
statement, but that the matter of that book which is not Pamphilus' makes me doubt about you. And I wonder 
that Italy should have approved what Rome rejected; that the bishops should have accepted what the 
Apostolic see condemned. 

16. You further write that it was by my letters that you had been informed that the pope Theophilus lately put 
forth an exposition of the faith which has not yet reached you and you promise to accept whatever he may 
have written. I am not aware that I ever said this, or that I sent any letters of the sort. But you consent to things 
of which you are still in uncertainty, and things as to which you do not know what and of what kind they will 
turn out to be, so that you may avoid speaking of things which you know quite well, and may not be bound 
by the consent you have given to them. There are two letters of Theophilus, (1) a Synodal and a Paschal 
letter, against Origen and his disciples, and others against Apolli-narius and against Origen also, which, 
within the last two years or thereabouts, I have translated and given to the men who speak our language for 
the edification of the church. I am not aware that I have translated anything else of his. But, when you say that 
you assent to the opinion of the pope Theophilus in everything, you must take care not to let your masters 
and disciples hear you, and not to offend these numerous persons who call me a robber and you a martyr, 
and also not to provoke the wrath of the man(2) who wrote letters to you against the bishop Epiphanius, and 
exhorted you to stand fast in the truth of the faith, and not to change your opinion for any terror. This epistle in 
its complete form is held by those to whom it was brought. After this you say, after your manner: "I will satisfy 
you even when you rage against me, as I have in the matter you spoke of before." But again you say, "What 
do you want? have you anything more at which you may shoot with the bow of your oratory?" And yet you 
are indignant if I find fault with your distasteful way I of speaking, though you take up the lowest expressions 
of the Comedians, and in writing on church affairs adopt language fit only for the characters of harlots and 
their lovers on the stage. 

17. Now, as to the question which you raise, when it was that I began to admit the authority of the pope 
Theophilus, and was associated with him in community of belief. You make answer to yourself: "Then, I 
suppose, when you were the supporter of Paul whom he bad condemned and made the greatest effort to 
help him, and instigated him to recover through an imperial rescript the bishopric from which he had been 
removed by the episcopal tribunal." I will not begin by answering for myself, but first speak of the injury which 
you have here done to another. What humanity or charity is there in rejoicing over the misfortunes of others 
and in exhibiting their wounds to the world? Is that the lessen you have learned from that Samaritan who 
carried back the man that was half dead to the inn? Is this what you understand by pouring oil into his 
wounds, and paying the host his expenses? Is it thus that you interpret the sheep brought back to the fold, 
the piece of money recovered, the prodigal son welcomed back? Suppose that you had a right to speak 
evil of me, because I had injured you, and, to use your words, had goaded you to madness and stimulated 
you to evil speaking: what harm had a man who remains in obscurity done you, that you should lay bare his 
scars, and when they were skinned over, should tear them open by inflicting this uncalled for pain? Even if 
he was worthy of your re preaches, were you justified in doing this? If I am not mistaken, those whom you 

wish to strike at through him (and I speak the open opinion of many) are the enemies of the Origenists; you 
use the troubles of one of them to show your violence against both.(1) If the decisions of the pope 
Theophilus so greatly please you, and you think it impious that an episcopal decree should be nullified, 
what do you say about the rest of those whom he has condemned? And what do you say about the pope 
Anastasius, about whom you assert most truly that no one thinks him capable as the bishop of so great a 
city, of doing an injury to an innocent or an absent man? I do not say this because I set myself up as a judge 
of episcopal decisions, or wish what they have determined to be rescinded; but I say, Let each of them do 
what he thinks right at his own risk, it is for him alone to consider how his judgment will be judged. Our duties 
in our monastery are those of hospitality; we welcome all who come to us with the smile of human 
friendliness. We must take care lest it should again happen that Mary and Joseph do not find room in the 
inn, and that Jesus should be shut out and say to us, "I was a stranger and ye took me not in." The only 
persons we do not welcome are heretics, who are the only persons who are welcomed by you: for our 
profession binds us to wash the feet of those who come to us, not to discuss their merits. Bring to your 
remembrance, my brother, how he whom we speak of had confessed Christ: think of that breast which was 
gashed by the scourges: recall to mind the imprisonment he had endured, the darkness, the exile, the work 
in the mines, and you will not be surprised that we welcomed him as a passing guest. Are we to be thought 
rebels by you because we give a cup of cold water to the thirsty in the name of Christ? 
18. 1 can tell you of something which may make him still dearer to us, though more odious to you. A short 
time ago, the faction of the heretics which was scattered away from Egypt and Alexandria came to 
Jerusalem, and wished to make common cause with him, so that as they suffered together, they might have 
the same heresy imputed to them. But lie repelled their advances, he scorned and cast them from him: he 
told them that he was not an enemy of the faith and was not going to take up arms against the Church: that 
his previous action had been the result of vexation not of unsoundness in the faith; and that he had sought 
only to prove his own innocence, not to attack that of others. You profess to consider an imperial rescript 
upsetting an episcopal decree to be an impiety. That is a matter for the responsibility of the man who 
obtained it. But what is your opinion of men who, when they have been themselves condemned, haunt the 
palaces of the great, and in a serried column make an attack on a single man who represents the faith of 
Christ? However, as to my own communion with the Pope Theophilus, I will call no other witness than the 
very man whom you pretend that I injured. (1) His letters were always addressed to me, as you well know, 
even at the time when yon prevented their being forwarded to me, and when you used daily to send letter 
carriers to him repeating to him with vehemence that his opponent was my most intimate friend, and telling 
the same falsehoods which you now shamelessly write, so that you might stir up his hatred against me and 
that his grief at the supposed injury done him might issue in oppression against me in matters of faith. But he, 
being a prudent man and a man of apostolical wisdom, came through time and experience to understand 
both our loyalty to him and your plots against us. If, as you declare, my followers stirred up a plot against 
you at Rome and stole your un-corrected manuscripts while you were asleep; who was it that stirred up the 
pope Theophilus against the public enemy in Egypt? Who obtained the decrees of the princes against 
them, and the consent of the whole of this quarter of the world? Yet you boast that you from your youth were 
the hearer and disciple of Theophilus, although he, before he became a bishop, through his native 
modesty, never taught in public, and you, after he became a Bishop, were never at Alexandria. Yet you 
dare, in order to deal a blow at me, to say " I do not accuse, or change, my masters." If that were true it would 
in my opinion throw a grave suspicion on your Christian standing. As for myself, you have no right to charge 
me with condemning my former teachers: but I stand in awe of those words of lsaiah:(1) " Woe unto them that 
call evil good and good evil, that put darkness for light and light for darkness, that call bitter sweet and 
sweet bitter." But it is you who drink alike the honeywine of your masters and their poisons, who have fallen 
away from your true master the Apostle, who teaches that neither he himself or an angel, if they err in matters 
of faith, must not be followed. 

19. You allude to Vigilantius. What dream this is that you have dreamed about him I do not know. Where 
have I said that he was defiled by communion with heretics at Alexandria? Tell me the book, produce the 
letter: but you will find absolutely no such statement. Yet with your wonted carelessness of statement or 
rather impudence of lying, which makes you imagine that every one will believe what you say, you add: " 
When you quoted a text of Scripture against him in so insulting a way that I do not dare to repeat it with my 
own mouth." You do not dare to repeat it because you can make the charge seem worse by keeping 
silence; and, because your accusation has no facts to rest upon, you simulate modesty, so that the reader 
may imagine that you are acting from consideration towards me, although your lies show that you do not 
consider your own soul. What is this text of Scripture which is too shameful to proceed out of that most 
shameless month of yours? What shameful thing, indeed, can you mention in the sacred books? If you are 
ashamed to speak, at any rate you can write it down, and then I shall be convinced of wantonness by my 
own words. I might be silent on all other points, and I should still prove by this single passage how brazen is 
your effrontery. You know how little I fear your impeachment. If you produce the evidence with which you 

threaten me, all the blame which now rests on you will rest on me. I gave my reply to you when I dealt with 
Vigilantius; for he brought the same charges against the which you bring first in the guise of friendly eulogy, 
afterwards in that of hostile accusation. I am aware who it was that stirred up his ravings against me; I know 
your plots and vices; I am not ignorant of his simplicity which is proclaimed by every one. Through his folly 
your hatred against me found an outlet for its fury; and, if I wrote a letter to suppress it, so that you should not 
be thought to be the only one who possesses a literary cudgel, that does not justify you in inventing 
shameful expressions which you can find in no part of my writings whatever. You must accept and confess 
the fact that the same document which answered his madness aroused also your calumnies. 

20. In the matter of the letter of the pope Anastasius, you seem to have come on a slippery place; you walk 
unsteadily, and do not see where to plant your feet. At one moment you say that it must have been written by 
me; at another that it ought to have been transmitted to you by him to whom it was sent. Then again you 
charge the writer with injustice; or you protest that it matters nothing to yon whether he wrote it or not, since 
you hold his predecessor's testimonial, and, while Rome was begging you to give her the honor of your 
presence, you disdained her through love of your own little town. If you have any suspicion that the letter was 
forged by me, why do you not ask for it in the chartulary of the Roman See and then, when you discover that 
it was not written by the bishop, hold me manifestly guilty of the crime? You would then instead of trying to 
bind me with cobwebs, hold me fast bound in a net of strong cords. But if it is as written by the Bishop of 
Rome, it is an act of folly on your part to ask for a copy of the letter from one to whom it was not sent, and not 
from him who sent it, and to send to the East for evidence the source of which you have in your own country. 
You had better go to Rome and expostulate with him as to the reproach which he has directed against you 
when you were both absent and innocent. You might first point out that he had refused to accept your 
exposition of faith, which, as you say, all Italy has approved, and that he made no use of your literary cudgel 
against the dogs you spoke of. Next, you might complain that he had sent to the East a letter aimed at you 
which branded you with the mark of heresy, and said that by your translation of Origen's books 
<greek>Peri</greek>'A<greek>rkpn</greek> the Roman church which had received the work in its 
simplicity was in danger of losing the sincerity of faith which it had learned from the Apostle; and that he had 
raised yet more ill will against you by daring to condemn this very book, though it was fortified by the 
attestation of your Preface. It is no light thing that the pontiff of so great a city should have fastened this 
charge upon you or have rashly taken it up when made by another. You should go about the streets 
vociferating and crying over and over again, "It is not my book, or, if it is, the uncorrected sheets were stolen 
by Eusebius. I published it differently, indeed I did not publish it at all; I gave it to nobody, or at all events to 
few; and my enemy was so unscrupulous and my friends so negligent, that all the copies alike were falsified 
by him." This, my dearest brother, is what you ought to have done, not to turn your back upon him and to 
direct the arrows of your abuse across the sea against me; for how can it cure your wounds that I should be 
wounded? Does it comfort a man who is stricken for death to see his friend dying with him? 

21. You produce a letter of Siricius(1) who now sleeps in Christ, and the letter of the living Anastasius you 
despise. What injury you ask, can it do you that he should have written (or perhaps not written at all) when 
you knew nothing of it? If he did write, still it is enough for you that yon have the witness of the whole world in 
your favor, and that no one thinks it possible that the bishop of so great a city could have done an injury to 
an innocent man, or even to one who was simply absent. You speak of yourself as innocent, though your 
translation made all Rome shudder; you say you were absent, but it is only because you dare not reply 
when you are accused. And you so shrink from the judgment of the city of Rome that you prefer to subject 
yourself to an invasion of the barbarians(l) than to the opinion of a peaceful city. Suppose that the letter of 
last year was forged by me; who then wrote the letters which have lately been received in the East? Yet in 
these last the pope Anastasius pays you such compliments that, when you read them, you will be more 
inclined to set to work to defend yourself than to accuse me. 

I should like you to consider how inevitable is the wisdom which you are shunning and the Attic Salt and the 
eloquence of your diction in religious writing. You are attacked by others, you are pierced through by their 
condemnation, yet it is against me that you toss yourself about in your fury, and say: " I could unfold a tale as 
to the manner of your departure from Rome; as to the opinions expressed about you at the time, and written 
about you afterwards, as to your oath, the place where you embarked, the pious manner in which you 
avoided committing perjury; all this I could enlarge upon, but I have determined to keep back more than I 
relate." These are specimens of your pleasant speeches. And if after this I say anything sharp in answer to 
you threaten me with immediate proscription and with the sword. You are a most eloquent person, and have 
all the tricks of rhetoric; you pretend to be passing over things which you really reveal, so that what you 
cannot prove by an open charge, you may make into a crime by seeming to put it aside. All this is your 
simplicity; this is what you mean by sparing your friend and reserving your statements for the judicial 
tribunal; you spare me byheaping up a mass of charge against me. 

22. If any one wishes to hear the arrangements for my journey from Rome, they were these. In the month of 
August,(2) when the etesian winds were blowing, accompanied by the reverend presbyter Vincentius and 

my young brother, and other monks who are now living at Jerusalem, I went on board ship at the port of 
Rome, choosing my own time, and with a very large body of the saints attending me, I arrived at Rhegium. I 
stood for a while on the shore of Scylla, and heard the old stories of the rapid voyage of the versatile 
Ulysses, of the songs of the sirens and the insatiable whirlpool of Charybdis. The inhabitants of that spot 
told me many tales, and gave me the advice that I should sail not for the columns of Proteus but for the port 
where Jonah landed, because the former of those was the course suited for men who were hurried and 
flying, but the latter was best for a man who was imprisoned; but I preferred to take the course by Malea and 
the Cyclades to Cyprus. There I was received by the venerable bishop Epiphanius, of whose testimony to 
you boast. I came to Antioch, where I enjoyed the communion of Paulinius the pontiff and confessor and was 
set forward by him on my journey to Jerusalem, which I entered in the middle of winter and in severe cold. I 
saw there many wonderful things, and verified by the judgment of my own eyes things which had before 
come to my ears by report. Thence I made my way to Egypt. I saw the monasteries of Nitria, and perceived 
the snakes(1) which lurked among the choirs of the monks. Then making haste I at once returned to 
Bethlehem, which is now my home, and there poured my perfume upon the manger and cradle of the 
Saviour. I saw also the lake of ill-omen. Nor did I give myself to ease and inertness, but I learned many 
things which I did not know before. As to what judgment was formed of me at Rome, or what was written 
afterwards, you are quite welcome to speak out, especially since you have writings to trust to; for I am not to 
be tried by your words which you at your will either veil in enigma or blurt out with open falsehood, but by the 
documents of the church. You may see how little I am afraid of you. If you can produce against me a single 
record of the Bishop of Rome or of any other church, I will confess myself to be chargeable with all the 
iniquities which I find assigned to you. It would be easy for me to tell of the circumstances of your departure, 
your age, the date of sailing, the places in which you lived, the company you kept. But far be it from me to do 
what I blame you for doing, and in a discussion between churchmen, to make up a story worthy of the 
ravings of quarrelling hags. Let this word be enough for your wisdom to remember. Do not adopt a method 
with another which can at once be retorted on yourself. 

23. As regards our reverend friend Epiphanius, this is strange shuffling of yours, when you say that it was 
impossible for him to have written against you after his giving you the kiss and joining with you in prayer. It is 
as if you were to contend that he would not be dead if a short time before he had been alive, or as if it were 
not equally certain that he had first reproved you and then, after the kiss of peace, excommunicated you. 
"They went out from us," it is said,(1) "but they were not of us; otherwise they would no doubt have continued 
with us." The apostle bids us avoid a heretic after first and second admonition: of course this implies that he 
was a member of the flock of the church before he was avoided or condemned. I confess I cannot restrain 
my laughter when, at the prompting of some clever person, you strike up a hymn in honour of Epiphanius. 
Why, this is the 'silly old man,' the 'anthropomorphite,' this is the man who boasted in your presence of the 
six thousand books of Origen that he had read, who ' thinks himself entrusted with the preaching of the 
Gospel against Origen among all nations in their own tongue who 'will not let others read Origen for fear they 
should discover what he has stolen from him.' Read what he has written, and the letter, or rather letters, one 
of which I will adduce as a testimonial to your orthodoxy, so that it may be seen how worthy he is of your 
present praise. (2) " May God set you free, my brother, and the holy people of Christ which is entrusted to 
you, and all the brethren who are with you, and especially the Presbyter Rufinus, from the heresy of Origen, 
and all other heresies, and from the perdition which they bring. For if many heresies have been condemned 
by the Church on account of one word or of two, which are contrary to the faith, how much more must that man 
be counted a heretic who has invented so many perverse things, so many false doctrines! He stands forth 
as the enemy of God and of the church." This is the testimony which this saintly man bears to you. This is the 
garland of praise which he gives you to parade in. Thus runs the letter which your golden coins extracted 
from the chamber of our brother Eusebius, so that you might calumniate the translator of it, and might fix upon 
me the guilt of a most manifest crime-that of rendering a Greek word as 'dearest' which ought to have been 
'honourable!' But what is all this to you who can control all events by your prudent methods, and can trim 
your path between different possibilities, first saying, if you can find any one to believe you, that neither 
Anastasius nor Epiphanius ever wrote a line against you; and, secondly, when their actual letters cry out 
against you, and break down your audacious effrontery, despising the judgment of them both, and say it 
does not matter to you whether they wrote or not, since it was impossible for them to write against an 
innocent and an absent man. 

Then again, you have no right to speak evil of that saintly man, as you do when you say " that it may be 
seen that he gave me peace with his words and his kiss, but kept evil and deceit in his heart"-for this is your 
reasoning, and it is thus that you defend yourself. That this is the letter of Epiphanius and that it is hostile to 
you, all the world knows: and that it came in its genuine form into your haads we can prove; and it is therefore 
an astounding shame or rather utter shamelessness in you to deny what you cannot doubt to be true. What! 
Is Epiphanius to be befouled with the imputation that he gave you the sign of peace but had deceit in his 
heart? Is it not much truer to believe that he first admonished you because he wished to save you from error 

and bring you back to the right way; and that therefore he did not reject your Judas kiss, wishing to break 
down by his forbearance the betrayer of the faith,— but that afterwards when he found that all his toil was 
fruitless, and that the leopard could not change its spots nor the Ethiopian his skin, he proclaimed in his 
letter what had before been only a suspicion in his mind? 

24. It is somewhat the same argument which you use against the pope Anastasius, namely, that, since you 
hold the letters of the bishop Siricius, it was impossible that he should write against you. I am afraid you 
suspect that some injury has been done you. I cannot understand how a man of your acuteness and 
capacity can condescend to such nonsense; you suppose that your readers are foolish, but you shew that 
you are foolish yourself. Then after this extraordinary argumentation, you subjoin this little sentence: " Far be 
such conduct from these reverend persons. It is from your school that such actions proceed. You gave us all 
the signs of peace at our departure, and then threw missiles charged with venom from behind our backs." In 
this clause or rather declamatory speech, you intended, no doubt, to I shew your rhetorical skill. It is true we 
gave you the signs of peace, but not to embrace heresy; we joined hands, we accompanied you as you set 
forth on your journey, on the understanding that you were catholic not that we were heretical. But I want to 
learn what these poisoned missiles are which you complain that I threw from behind your back. I sent the 
presbyters, Vincentius, Paulinianus, Eusebius, Rufinus. Of these, Vincentius went to Rome long before you 
Paulinianus and Eusebius set out a year after you had sailed; Rufinus two years after, for the cause of 
Claudius; all of them either for private reasons, or because another was in peril of his life. Was it possible for 
me to know that when you entered Rome, a nobleman had dreamed that a ship full of merchandise was 
entering with full blown sails? or that all questions about fate were being solved by a solution which should 
not itself be fatuous? or that you were translating the book of Eusebius as if it were Pamphilus'? or that you 
were putting your own cover upon Origen's poisoned dish by lending your majestic eloquence to this 
translation of his notorious work <greek>Peri</greek>'A<greek>rkpn</greek>? This is a new way of 
calumniating a man. We sent out the accusers before you had committed the crime. It was not, I repeat, it 
was not by our plan, but by the providence of God, that these men, who were sent out for another reason, 
came to fight against the rising heresy. They were sent, like Joseph, to relieve the coming famine by the 
fervour of their faith. 

25. To what point will not audacity burst forth when once it is freed from restraints? He has imputed to himself 
the charge made against another so that we may be thought to have invented it. I made a charge against 
some one unnamed, and he takes it as spoken against himself; he purges himself from another man's sins, 
being only sure of his own innocence. For he takes his oath that he did not write the letter that passed under 
my name to the African bishops, in which I am made to confess that I had been induced by Jewish influence 
to make false translations of the Scriptures; and he sends me writings which contain all these things which 
he declares to be unknown to him. It is remarkable to know how his subtlety has coincided with another 
man's malice, so that the lies which this other told in Africa, he in accord with him declared to be true; and 
also how that elegant style of his could be imitated by some chance and unskilled person. You alone have 
the privilege of translating the venom of the heretics, and of making all nations drink a draught From the cup 
of Babylon. You may correct the Latin Scriptures from the Greek, and may deliver to the Churches to read 
something different from what they received from the Apostles; but I am not to be allowed to go behind the 
Septuagint version which I translated after strict correction for the men of my native tongue a great many 
years ago, and, for the confutation of the Jews, to translate the actual copies of the Scriptures which they 
confess to be the truest, so that when a dispute arises between them and the Christians, they may have no 
place of retreat and subterfuge, but may be smitten most effectually with their own spear. I have written pretty 
fully on this point if I rightly remember, in many other places, especially in the end of my second book; and I 
have checked your popularity-hunting, with which you seek to arouse ill will against me among the innocent 
and the inexperienced, by a clear statement of fact. To that I think it enough to refer the reader. 

26. 1 think it a point which should not be passed over, that you have no right to complain that the falsifier of 
your papers, holds in my esteem the glorious position of a confessor, since you who are guilty of this very 
crime are called a martyr and all apostle by all the partisans of Origen, for that exile and imprisonment of 
yours at Alexandria. On your alleged inexperience in Latin composition I have answered you above. But, 
since you repeat the same things, and, as if forgetful of your former defence, again remind me that I ought to 
know that you have been occupied for thirty years in devouring Greek books, and therefore do not know 
Latin, I would have you observe that it is not a few words of yours with which I find fault, though indeed all your 
writing is worthy of being destroyed. What I wished to do was to shew your followers, whom you have taken 
so much pains in teaching to know nothing, to understand what amount of modesty there is in a man who 
teaches what he does not know, who writes what he is ignorant of, so that they may expect to find the same 
wisdom in his opinions. As to what you add " That it is not faults of words which are offensive, but sins, such 
as lying, calumny, disparagement, false witness, and all evil speaking, and that the mouth which speaketh 
lies kills the soul," and your deprecation, "Let not that ill-savour reach my nostrils;" I would believe what you 
say, were it not that I discover facts inconsistent with this. It is as if a fuller or a tanner in speaking to a dealer 

in pigments should warn him that he had better hold his nose as he passed their shops. I will do what you 
recommend; I will stop my nose, so that it may not be put to the torture by the delightful odour of your 
truth-speaking and your benedictions. 

27. In reference to your alternate praise and disparagement of me, you argue with great acuteness that you 
have the same right to speak good and evil of me that I have to find fault with Origen and Didymus whom I 
once praised. I must instruct you, then, wisest of men and chief of Roman dialecticians, that there is no fault 
of logic in praising a than in certain respects while you blame him in others, bat only in approving and 
disapproving one and the same thing. I will take all example, so that, though you may not understand, the 
wise reader may join me in understanding the point. In the case of Tertullian we praise his great talent, but 
we condemn his heresy. In that of Origen we admire his knowledge of the Scriptures, but nevertheless we 
do not accept his false doctrine. As to Didymus, however, we extol both his powers of memory, and the 
purity of his faith in the Trinity, while on the other point in which he erred in trusting to Origen we withdraw from 
him. The vices of our teachers are not to be imitated, their virtues are. There was a man at Rome who had 
an African, a very learned man, as his grammar teacher; and he thought that he was rising to an equality with 
his teacher because he copied his strident voice and his faulty pronunciation. You in your Preface to the 
<greek>Peri</greek>'A<greek>rkpn</greek> speak of me as your brother and call me your most eloquent 
colleague, and proclaim my soundness in the faith. From these three points you cannot draw back; carp at 
me on all other points as you please, so long as you do not openly contradict this testimony which you bear 
to me; for in calling me friend and colleague, you confess me worthy of your friendship; when you proclaim 
me an eloquent man, you cannot go on accusing me of ignorance; and when you confess that I am in all 
points a catholic, you cannot fix on me the guilt of heresy. Beyond these three points you may charge me 
with anything you like without openly contradicting yourself. From all this calculation the net result is that you 
are wrong in blaming in me what you formerly praised; but that I am not in fault when, in the case of the same 
men, I praise what is laudable and blame what is censurable. 

28. You pass on to the origin of souls, and at great length exclaim against the smoke which you say I raise. 
You want to be allowed to express ignorance on a point on which you advisedly dissemble your 
knowledge; and therefore begin questioning me about angels and archangels; as to the mode of their 
existence, the place and nature of their abodes, the differences, if there be any, existing between them; and 
then as to the course of the sun, the waxing and waning of the moon, the character and movements of the 
stars. I wonder that you did not set down the whole of the lines:(1) 

Whence come the earthquakes, whence the high swollen seas 
Breaking their bounds, then sinking back to rest; 
The Sun's eclipse, the labours of the moon; 
The race of men and beasts, the storm, the fire, 
Arcturus' rainy Hyads, and the Bears: 
Why haste the winter's suns to bathe themselves 
Beneath the wave, what stays its lingering nights. 

Then, leaving things in heaven, and condescending to those on earth, you philosophize on minor points. 
You say: "Tell us what are the causes of the fountains, and of the wind; what makes the hail and the showers; 
why the sea is salt, the rivers sweet; what account is to be given of clouds and storms, thunderbolts, and 
thunder and lightning." You mean that if do not know all this, you are entitled to say you know nothing about 
the origin of souls. You wish to balance your ignorance on a single point by mine on many. But do not you, 
who in page after page stir up what you call my smoke, understand that I can see your mists and whirlwinds? 
You wish to be thought a than of extensive knowledge, and among the disciples of Calpurnius(2) to enjoy a 
great reputation for wisdom, and therefore you raise up tile whole physical world in front of me, as if Socrates 
had said in vain when he passed over to the study of Ethics: " What is above us is nothing to us." So then, if I 
cannot tell you why the ant, which is such a little creature, whose body is a mere point, has six feet, whereas 
an elephant with its vast bulk has only four to walk on; why serpents and snakes glide along on their chests 
and bellies; why the worm which is commonly called the millipede has such a swarming array of feet; I am 
prohibited from knowing anything about the origin of souls! You ask me what I know about souls, so that, 
when I make any statement about them, you may at once attack it. And if I say that the church's doctrine is 
that God forms souls every day, and sends them into the bodies of those who are born, you will at once 
bring out the snares your master invented, and ask, Where is God's justice if he grants souls to those who 
are born of adultery or incest? Is he not an accessory to men's sins, if he creates souls for the adulterers 
who make the bodies? as if, when you hear that seed corn had been stolen, you are to suppose the fault to 
lie in the nature of the corn, and not in the man who stole the wheat; and that therefore the earth had no 
business to nourish the seed in its bosom, because the hands of the sower who cast them in were unclean. 
Hence comes also your mysterious question, Why do infants die? since it is because of their sins, as you. 
hold, that they received bodies. There exists a treatise of Didymus addressed to you, in which he meets this 
inquiry of yours, with the answer, that they had not sinned much, and therefore it was enough punishment for 

them just to have touched their bodily prisons. He, who was your master and mine also, when you asked 
this question, wrote at my request three books of comments on the prophet Hosea, and dedicated them to 
me. This shows what parts of his teaching we respectively accepted. 

29. You press me to give my opinions about the nature of things. If there were room, I could repeat to you the 
views of Lucretius who follows Epicurus, or those of Aristotle as taught by the Peripatetics, or of Plato and 
Zeno by the Academics and the Stoics. Passing to the church, where we have the rule of truth, the books of 
Genesis and the Prophets anti Ecclesiastes, give us much information on questions of this kind. But if we 
profess ignorance about all these things, as also about the origin of souls, you ought in your Apology to 
acknowledge your ignorance of all alike, and to ask your calumniators why they had the impudence to force 
you to reply on this single point when they themselves know nothing of all those great matters. But Oh! how 
vast was the wealth contained in that trireme(1) which had come full of all the wares of Egypt and the East to 
enrich the poverty of the city of Rome. 

(2) "Thou art that hero, well-nam'd Maximus, 
Thou who alone by writing sav'stthe state." 

Unless you had come from the East, that very learned man would be still sticking fast among the 
mathematici,(3) and all Christians would still be ignorant of what might be said against fatalism. You have a 
right to ply me with questions about astrology and the cause of the sky and the stars, when you brought to 
land a ship full of such wares as these. I acknowledge my poverty; I have not grown rich to this extent in the 
East like you. You learned in your long sojourn under the shadow of the Pharos what Rome never knew: 
Egypt instructed you in lore which Italy did not possess till now. 

30. Your Apology says that there are three opinions as to the origin of souls: one held by Origen, a second 
by Tertullian and Lactantius (as to Lactantius what you say is manifestly false), a third by us simple and 
foolish men, who do not see that, if our opinion is true, God is thereby shewn to be unjust. After this you say 
that you do not know what is the truth. I say, then, tell me, whether you think that outside of these three 
opinions any truth can be found so that all these three may be false; or whether you think one of these three 
is true. If there is some other possibility, why do you confine the liberty of discussion within a close-drawn 
line? and why do you put forward the views which are false and keep silence about the true? But if one of the 
three is true and the two others false, why do you include false and true in one assertion of ignorance? 
Perhaps you pretend not to know which is true in order that it may be safe for you, whenever you may 
please, to defend the false. This is the smoke, these are the mists, with which you try to keep away the light 
from men's eyes. You are the Aristippus(l) of our day: you bring your ship into the port of Rome full of 
merchandize of all kinds; you set your professorial chair on high, and represent to us Hermagoras(2) and 
Gorgias(3) of Leontinum: only, you were in such a hurry to set sail that you left one little piece of goods, one 
little question, forgotten in the East. And you cry out with reiteration that you learned both at Aquileia and at 
Alexandria that God is the creator of both our bodies and our souls. This then, forsooth, is the pressing 
question, whether our souls were created by God or by the devil, and not whether the opinion of Origen is 
true that our souls existed before our bodies and committed some sin because of which they have been 
tied to these gross bodies; or whether, again, they slept like dormice in a state of torpor and of slumber. 
Every one is asking this question, but you say nothing about it; nobody asks the other, but to that you direct 
your answer. 

31 . Another part of my 'smoke' which you frequently laugh at is my pretence, as you say, to know what I do 
not know, and the parade I make of great teachers to deceive the common and ignorant people. You, of 
course, are a man not of smoke but of flame, or rather of lightning; you fulminate when you speak; you 
cannot contain the flames which have been conceived within your mouth, and like Barchochebas,(1) the 
leader of the revolt of the Jews, who used to hold in his month a lighted straw and blow it out so as to appear 
to be breathing forth flame: so you also, like a second Salmoneus,(2) brighten the whole path on which you 
tread, and reproach us as mere men of smoke, to whom perhaps the words might be applied, (3)"Thou 
touchest the hills and they smoke." You do not understand the allusion of the Prophet(4) when he speaks of 
the smoke of the locusts; it is no doubt the beauty of your eyes which makes it impossible for you to bear the 
pungency of our smoke. 

32. As to your charge of perjury, since you refer me to your book; and since I have made my reply to you 
and Calpurnius(5) in the previous books, it will be sufficient here to observe that you exact from me in my 
sleep what you have never yourself fulfilled in your waking hours. It seems that I am guilty of a great crime 
because I have told girls and virgins of Christ, that they had better not read secular works, and that I once 
promised when warned in a dream not to read them. But your ship which was announced by revelation to 
the city of Rome, promises one thing and effects another. It came to do away with the puzzle of the 
mathematici: what it does is to do away with the faith of Christians. It had made its run with sails full set over 
the Ionian and AEgean, the Adriatic and Tyrrhenian seas, only to make shipwreck in the Roman port. Are 
you not ashamed of hunting up nonsense of this kind and putting me to the trouble of bringing up similar 
things against you? Suppose that some one had seen a dream about you such as might make you 

vainglorious; it would have been modest as well as wise in you not to seem to know of it, instead of boasting 
of other people's dreams as a serious testimony to yourself. What a difference there is between your dream 
and mine! Mine tells how I was humbled and repressed; yours boasts over and over again how you were 
praised. You cannot say, It matters nothing to me what another man dreamed, for in those most enlightening 
books of yours you tell us that this was the motive which led you to make the translation; you could not bear 
that an eminent man should have dreamed in vain. This is all your endeavour. If you can make me out guilty 
of perjury, you think you will be deemed no heretic. 

33. 1 now come to the most serious charge of all, that in which you accuse me of having been unfaithful after 
the restoration of our friendship. I confess that, of all the reproaches which you bring against me or threaten 
me with, there is none which I would so much deprecate as that of fraud, deceit and breach of faith. To sin is 
human, to lay snares is diabolical. What! Was it for this that I joined hands with you over the slain lamb in the 
Church of the Resurrection, that I might 'steal your manuscripts at Rome'? or that I might 'send out my dogs 
to gnaw away your papers before they were corrected'? Can any one believe that we made ready the 
accusers before you had committed the crime? Is it supposed that we knew what plans you were meditating 
in your heart? or what another man had been dreaming? or how the Greek proverb was having its fulfilment 
in your case, "the pig teaches Minerva"? If I sent Eusebius to bark against you, who then stirred up the 
passion of Aterbius and others against you? Is it not the fact that he thought that I also was a heretic because 
of my friendship with you? And, when I had given him satisfaction as to the heresies of Origen, you shut 
yourself up at home, and never dared to meet him, for fear you should have to condemn what you wished 
not to condemn, or by openly resisting him should subject yourself to the reproach of heresy. Do you think 
that be cannot be called as a witness against you because he is your accuser? Before ever the reverend 
bishop Epiphanius came to Jerusalem, and gave you the signs of peace by word and kiss, 'yet having evil 
thoughts and guile in his heart'; before I translated for him that letter(1) which was such a reproof to you, and 
in which he wrote you down a heretic though he had before approved you as orthodox; Aterbius was 
barking against you at Jerusalem, and, if he had not speedily taken himself off, would have felt not your 
literary cudgel but the stick you flourish in your right hand to drive the dogs away. (2) 

34. "But why," you ask, "did you accept my manuscripts which had been falsified? and why, when I had 
translated the <greek>Peri</greek>'A<greek>rkpn</greek> did you dare to put your pen to the same work? 
If I had erred, as any man may, ought you not to summon me to reply by a private letter, and to speak 
smoothly to me, as I am speaking smoothly in my present letter?" My whole fault is this that, when 
accusations were brought against me in the guise of disingenuous praise, I tried to purge myself from them, 
and this without invidiously introducing your name. I wished to refer to many persons a charge which you 
alone had brought, not so as to retort the charge of heresy upon you, but to repel it from myself. Could I know 
that you would be angry if I wrote against the heretics? You had said that you had taken away the heretical 
passages from the works of Origen. I therefore turned my attacks not upon you but upon the heretics, for I did 
not believe that you were a favourer of heresy. Pardon me, if I did this with too great vehemence. I thought 
that I should give you pleasure. You say that it was by the dishonest tricks of those who acted for me that 
your manuscripts were brought out before the public, when they were kept secretly in your chamber, or were 
in possession only of the man who had desired to have the translation made for him. But how is this 
reconcilable with your former statement that either no one or very few had them? If they were kept secret in 
your chamber, how could they be in the possession of the man who had desired to have the translation 
made for him? If the one man for whom the manuscripts had been written had obtained them in order to 
conceal them, then they were not kept secret in your chamber, and they were not in the hands of those few 
who, as you now declare, possessed them. You accuse us of having stolen them away; and then again you 
reproach us with having bought them for a great sum Of money and an immense bribe. In a single matter, 
and in one little letter, what a tissue of various and discordant falsehoods! You have full liberty for 
accusation, but I have none for defence. When you bring a charge, you think nothing about friendship. When 

I begin to reply, then your mind is fall of the rights of friendship. Let me ask you: Did you write these 
manuscripts for concealment or for publication? If for concealment, why were they written? If for publication, 
why did you conceal them? 

35. But my fault, you will say, was this, that I did not restrain your accusers who were my friends. Why, I had 
enough to do to answer their accusations against myself; for they charged me with hypocrisy, (1) as I could 
shew by producing their letters, because I kept silence when I knew you to be a heretic; and because by 
incautiously maintaining peace with you, I fostered the intestine wars of the Church. You call them my 
disciples; they suspect me of being your fellow-disciple; and, because I was somewhat sparing in my 
rejection of your praises, they think me to be initiated, along with you, into the mysteries of heresy. This was 
the service your Prologue did me; you injured me more by appearing as my friend than you would had you 
shewn yourself my enemy. They had persuaded themselves once for all (whether rightly or wrongly is their 
business) that you were a heretic. If I should determine to defend you, I should only succeed in getting 
myself accused by them along with you. They cast in my teeth your laudation of me, which they suppose to 

have been written not in craft but sincerity; and they vehemently reproach me with the very things which you 
always praised in me. What am I to do? To turn my disciples into my accusers for your sake? To receive on 
my own head the weapons which were hurled against my friend? 

36. In the matter of the books <greek>Peri</greek>'A<greek>rkpn</greek>, I have even a claim upon your 
gratitude. You say that you cut off anything that was offensive and replaced it by what was better. I have 
represented things just as they stood in the Greek. By this means both things are made to appear, your faith 
and the heresy of him whom you translated. The leading Christians of Rome wrote to me: Answer your 
accuser; if you keep silence, you will be held to have assented to his charges. All of them unanimously 
demanded that I should bring to light the subtle errors of Origen, and make known the poison of the heretics 
to the ears of the Romans to put them on their guard. How can this be an injury to you? Have you a 
monopoly of the translation of these books? Are there no others who take part in this work? When you 
translated parts of the Septuagint, did you mean to prohibit all others from translating it after your version 
had been published? Why, I also have translated many books from the Greek. You have full power to make 
a second translation of them at your pleasure; for both the good and the bad in them must be laid to the 
charge of their author. And this would hold in your case also, had you not said that you had cut out the 
heretical parts and translated only what was positively good. This is a difficulty which you have made for 
yourself, and which cannot be solved, except by confessing that you have erred as all men err, and 
condemning your former opinion. 

37. But what defence can you make in reference to the Apology which you have written for the works of 
Origen, or rather in reference to the book of Eusebius, though you, have altered much, and translated the 
work of a heretic under the title of a martyr, yet you have set down still more which is incompatible with the 
faith of the church. You as well as I turn Latin books into Greek; can you prohibit me from giving the works of 
a foreigner to my own people? If I had made my answer in the case of some other work of yours in which you 
had not attacked me, it might have been thought that, in translating what you had already translated, I was 
acting in hostility to you, and wishing to prove you inaccurate or untrustworthy. But this is a new kind of 
complaint, when you take it amiss that an answer is made you on a point on which you have accused me. 
All Rome was said to have been upset by your translation; every one was demanding of me a remedy for 
this; not that I was of any account, but that those who asked this thought me so. You say that you who had 
made the translation were my friend. But what would you have had me do? Ought we to obey God or man? 
To guard our master's property or to conceal the theft of a fellow-servant? Can I not be at peace with you 
unless I join with you in committing acts which bring reproach? If you had not mentioned my name, if you had 
not tricked me out in your flatteries, I might have had some way of escape, and have made many excuses 
for not translating what had already been translated. But you, my friend, have compelled me to waste a 
good many days on this work, and to bring out before the public eye what should have been engulfed in 
Charybdis; yet still, though I had been injured, I observed the laws of friendship, and as far as possible 
defended myself without accusing you. It is a too suspicious and complaining temper which you shew when 
you take home to yourself as a reproach what was spoken against the heretics. If it is impossible to be your 
friend unless I am the friend of heretics, I shall more easily put up with your enmity than with their friendship. 

38. You imagine that I have contrived yet another piece of falsehood, namely, that I have composed a letter 
to you in my own name, pretending that it was written long ago, in which I make myself appear kindly and 
courteous; but which you never received. The truth can easily be ascertained. Many persons at Rome have 
had copies of this letter for the last three years; but they refused to send it to you knowing that you were 
throwing out insinuations against my reputation, and making up stories of the most shameful kind and 
unworthy of our Christian profession. I wrote in ignorance of all this, as to a friend; but they would not transmit 
the letter to an enemy, such as they knew you to be, thus sparing me the effects of my mistakes and you the 
reproaches of your conscience. You next bring arguments to shew that, if I had written such a letter, I had no 
right to write another con-raining many reproaches against you. But here is the error which pervades all that 
you say, and of which I have a right to complain; whatever I say against the heretics you imagine to be said 
against you. What! Am I refusing you bread because I give the heretics a stone to crush their brains? But, in 
order to justify your disbelief in my letter, you are obliged to make out that of pope Anastasius rests upon a 
similar fraud. On this point I have answered you before. If you really suspect that it is not his writing, you have 
the means of convicting me of the forgery. But if it is his writing, as his letters of the present year also written 
against you prove, you will in vain use your false reasonings to prove my letter false, since I can shew from 
his genuine letter that mine also is genuine. 

39. In order to parry the charge of falsehood, it is your humour to become quite exacting. You are not to be 
called to produce the six thousand books of Origen, of which you speak; but you expect me to be 
acquainted with all the records of Pythagoras. What truth is there in all the boastful language, which you 
blurted out from your inflated cheeks, declaring that you had corrected the 

<greek>Peri</greek>'A<greek>rkpn</greek> by introducing words which you had read in other books of 
Origen, and thus had not put in other men's words but restored his own? Out of all this forest of his works you 

cannot produce a single bush or sucker. You accuse me of raising up smoke and mist. Here you have 
smoke and mist indeed. You know that I have dissipated and done away with them; but, though your neck is 
broken, you do not bow it down, but, with an impudence which exceeds even your ignorance, you say that I 
am denying what is quite evident, so as to excuse yourself, after promising mountains of gold, for not 
producing even a leatherlike farthing from your treasury. I acknowledge that your animosity against me rests 
on good grounds, and that your rage and passion is genuine; for, unless I made persistent demands for 
what does not exist, you would be thought to have what you have not. You ask me for the books of 
Pythagoras. But who has informed you that any books of his are extant? It is true that in my letter which you 
criticize these words occur: "Suppose that I erred in youth, and that, having been trained in profane literature, 
I at the beginning of my Christian course had no sufficient doctrinal knowledge, and that I attributed to the 
Apostles things which I had read in Pythagoras or Plato or Empedocles;" but I was speaking not of their 
books but of their tenets, with which I was able to acquaint myself through Cicero, Brutus, and Seneca. Read 
the short oration for(1) Vatinius, and others in which mention is made of secret societies. Turn over Cicero's 
dialogues. Search through the coast of Italy which used to be called Magna Graecia, and you will find there 
various doctrines of Pythagoras inscribed on brass on their public monuments. Whose are those Golden 
Rules? They are Pythagoras's; and in these all his principles are contained in a summary form. Iamblicus(2) 
wrote a commentary upon them, following in this, at least partly, Moderatus a man of great eloquence, and 
Archippus and Lysides who were disciples of Pythagoras. Of these, Archippus and Lysides held schools in 
Greece, that is, in Thebes; they retained so fully the precepts of their teacher, that they made use of their 
memory instead of books. One of these precepts is: "We must cast away by any contrivance, and cut out by 
fire and sword and contrivances of all kinds, disease from the body, ignorance from the soul, luxury from the 
belly, sedition from the state, discord from the family, excess from all things alike. "(3) There are other 
precepts of Pythagoras, such as these. "Friends have all things in common." "A friend is a second self." 
"Two moments are specially to be observed, morning and evening: that is, things which we are going to do, 
and things which we have done." "Next to God we must worship truth, for this alone makes men akin to God." 
There are also enigmas which Aristotle has collated with much diligence in his works: "Never go beyond 
the Stater," that is, "Do not transgress the rule of justice; " "Never stir the fire with the sword," that is, "Do not 
provoke a man when he is angry and excited with hard words." "We must not touch the crown," that is "We 
must maintain the laws of the state." "Do not eat out your heart," that is, "Cast away sorrow from your mind." 
"When you have started, do not returns" that is, "After death do not regret this life." "Do not walk on the public 
road," that is, "Do not follow the errors of the multitude." "Never admit a swallow into the family," that is, "Do 
not admit chatterers and talkative persons under the same roof with you." "Put fresh burdens on the 
burdened; put none on those who lay them down;" that is, "When men are on the road to virtue, ply them with 
fresh precepts; when they abandon themselves to idleness, leave them alone." I said I had read the 
doctrines of the Pythagoreans. Let me tell you that Pythagoras was the first to discover the immortality of the 
soul and its transmigration from one body to another. To this view Virgil gives his adherence in the sixth 
book of the AEneid in these words:(1) 
These, when the wheel full thousand years has turned, 
God calls, a long sad line, in Lethe's stream 
To drown the past, and long once more to see 
The skies above, and to the flesh return. 

40. Pythagoras taught, accordingly, that he had himself been originally Euphorbus, and then Callides, thirdly 
Hermotimus, fourthly Pyrrhus, and lastly Pythagoras; and that those things which had existed, after certain 
revolutions of time, came into being again; so that nothing in the world should be thought of as new. He said 
that true philosophy was a meditation on death; that its daily struggle was to draw forth the soul from the 
prison of the body into liberty: that our learning was recollection, and many other things which Plato works 
out in his dialogues, especially in the Phaedo and Timaeus. For Plato, after having formed the Academy 
and gained innumerable disciples, felt that his philosophy was deficient on many points, and therefore went 
to Magna Graecia, and there learned the doctrines of Pythagoras from Archytas of Tarentum and Timaeus 
of Lochs: and this system he embodied in the elegant form and style which he had learned from Socrates. 
The whole of this, as we can prove, Origen carried over into his book 

<greek>Peri</greek>'A<greek>rkpn</greek>, only changing the name. What mistake, then, was I making, 
when I said that in my youth I had imputed to the Apostles ideas which I had found in Pythagoras, Plato and 
Empedocles? I did not speak, as you calumniously pretend, of what I had read in the books of Pythagoras, 
Plato and Empedocles, but of what I had read as having existed in their writings, that is, what other men's 
writings shewed me to have existed in them. This mode of speaking is quite common. I might say, for 
instance "The opinions which I read in Socrates I believed to be true," meaning what I read as his opinions 
in Plato and others of the Socratic school, though Socrates himself wrote no books. So I might say, I wished 
to imitate the deeds which I had read of in Alexander and Scipio,(1) not meaning that they described their 
own deeds, but that I had read in other men's works of the deeds which I admired as done by them. 

Therefore, though I may not be able to inform you of any records of Pythagoras himself as being extant, and 
proved by the attestation of his son or daughter or others of his disciples, yet you cannot hold me guilty of 
falsehood, because I said not that I had read his books, but his doctrines. You are quite mistaken if you 
thought to make this a screen for your falsehood, and to maintain that because I cannot produce any book 
written by Pythagoras, you have a right to assert that six thousand books of Origen have been lost. 
41 . 1 come now to your Epilogue, (that is to the revilings which you pour upon me,) in which you exhort me to 
repentance, and threaten me with destruction unless I am converted, that is, unless I keep silence under 
your accusations. And this scandal, you say, will recoil upon my own head, because it is I who by replying 
have provoked you to the madness of writing when yon are a man of extreme gentleness and of a 
meekness worthy of Moses. You declare that you are aware of crimes which I confessed to you alone when 
you were my most intimate friend, and that yon will bring these before the public; that I shall be painted in my 
own colours; and that I ought to remember that I am lying at your feet, otherwise you might cut off my head 
with the sword of your mouth. And, after many such thing, in which you toss yourself about like a madman, 
you draw yourself up and say that you wish for peace, but still with the intimation that I am to keep quiet for 
the future, that is that I am not to write against the heretics, nor to answer any accusation made by you; if I do 
this, I shall be your good brother and colleague, and a most eloquent person, and your friend and 
companion; and, what is still more, you will pronounce all the translations I have made from Origen to be 
orthodox. But, if I titter a word or move a step, I shall at once be unsound and a heretic, and unworthy of all 
connexion with you. This is the way you trumpet forth my praises, this is the way you exhort me to peace. 
You do not grant me liberty for a groan or a tear in my grief. 

42. It would be possible for me also to paint you in your own colours, and to meet your insanity with a similar 
rage; to say what I know and add what I do not know; and with a license like yours, or rather fury and 
madness, to keep up things false and true alike, till I was ashamed to speak and you to hear: and to upbraid 
you in such a way as would condemn either the accused or the accuser; to force myself on the reader by 
mere effrontery, make him believe that what I wrote unscrupulously I wrote truly. But far be it from the practice 
of Christians while offering up their lives to seek the life of others, and to become homicides not with the 
sword but the will. This may agree with your gentleness and innocence; for you can draw forth from the dung 
heap within your breast alike the odour of roses and the stench of corpses; and, contrary to the precept of 
the Prophet, call that bitter which once you had praised as sweet. But it is not necessary for us, in treating of 
Christian topics, to throw out accusations which ought to be brought before the law courts. You shall hear 
nothing more from me than the vulgar saying: "When you have said what you like, you shall bear what you 
do not like." Or if the coarse proverb seems to you too vulgar, and, being a man of culture, you prefer the 
words of philosophers or poets, take from me the words of Homer.(1) 
"What words thou speakest, thou the like shalt hear." 

One thing I should like to learn from one of such eminent sanctity and fastidiousness, (whose holiness is 
such that in the presence of your very handkerchiefs and aprons the devils cry out); whom do you take for 
your model in your writings? Has any one of the catholic writers, in a controversy of opinions, imputed moral 
offences to the man with whom he is arguing? Have your masters taught you to do this? Is this the system in 
which you have been trained, that, when you cannot answer a man, you should take off his head? that when 
you cannot silence a man's tongue, you should cut it out? You have nothing much to boast of, for you are 
doing only what the scorpions and cantharides do. This is what Fulvia(2) did to Cicero and Herodias to 
John. They could not bear to hear the truth, and therefore they pierced the tongue that spoke truth with the 
pin that parted their hair. The duty of dogs is to bark in their masters' service; why may I not bark in the 
service of Christ? Many have written against Marcion or Valentinus, Arius or Eunomius. By which of them 
was any accusation brought of immoral conduct? Did they not in each case bring their whole effort to bear 
upon the refutation of the heresy? It is the machination of the heretics, that is of your masters, when convicted 
of betrayal of the faith, to betake themselves to evil speaking. So Eustathius(l) the Bishop of Antioch was 
made into a father unawares. So Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria cut off a third hand of Arsenius; for, when 
he appeared(2) alive after having been supposed to be dead, he was found to have two. Such things also 
now are falsely charged against the Bishop of the same church, and the true faith is assailed by gold, which 
constitutes the power of yourself and your friends. But I need pot speak of controversy with heretics, who, 
though they are really without, yet call themselves Christians. How many of our writers have contended with 
those most impious men, Celsus and Porphyry! but which of them has left the cause he was engaged in to 
busy himself with the imputation of crime to his adversary, such as ought to be set down not in 
church-writings but in the calendar of the judge? For what advantage have you gained if you establish a 
man's criminality but tail in your argument? It is quite unnecessary that in bringing an accusation you should 
risk your own head. If your object is revenge, you can hire an executioner, and satisfy your desire. You 
pretend to dread a scandal, and yet you are ready to kill a man who was once your brother, whom you now 
accuse, and whom you always treat as an enemy. Yet I wonder how a man like you, who knows what he is 
about, should be so blinded by madness as to wish to confer a benefit upon me by drawing forth my soul 

out of prison, (3) and should not suffer it to remain with you in the darkness of this world. 
43. If you wish me to keep silence, cease from accusing me. Lily down your sword, and I will throw away my 
shield. To one thing only I cannot consent; that is, to spare the heretics, and not to vindicate my orthodoxy. If 
that is the cause of discord between us, I can submit to death, but not to silence. It would have been right to 
go through the whole of the Scriptures for answers to your ravings, and, like David playing on his harp, to 
take the divine words to calm your raging breast. But I will content myself with a few statements from a single 
hook; I will oppose Wisdom to folly; for I hope if you despise the words of men you will not think lightly of the 
word of God. Listen, then, to that which Solomon the wise says about you and all who are addicted to evil 
speaking and contumely: 

"Foolish men, while they desire injuries, become impious and hate wisdom. (1) Devise not evil against thy 
friend. Be not angry with a man without a cause. The impious exalt contumely. (2) Remove from thee the evil 
mouth, keep far from thee the wicked lips, the eyes of him that speaketh evil, the tongue of the unjust, the 
hands which shed the blood of the just,(3) the heart that deviseth evil thoughts, and the feet which hasten to 
do evil. He that resteth upon falsehood feedeth the winds, and followeth the flying birds. For he hath left the 
ways of his own vineyard, and hath made the wheels of his tillage to err. He walketh through the dry and 
desert places, and with his hands he gathereth barrenness. (4) The mouth of the froward is near to 
destruction, and(5) he who uttereth evil words is the chief of fools. Every simple man is a soul that is blessed; 
but a violent man is dis-honourable.(6) By the fault of his lips the sinner falleth into a snare. (7) All the ways of 
a fool are right in his own eyes. (8) The fool showeth his anger on that very day. (9) Lying lips are an 
abomination to the Lord. (10) He that keepeth his lips guardeth his own soul; but he that is rash with his lips 
shall be a terror to himself.(11) The evil man in his violence doeth evil things, and the fool spreadeth out his 
folly. (12) Seek for wisdom among the evil and thou shall not find it.(13) The rash man shall eat of the fruit of 
his own ways. (14) The wise man by taking heed avoideth the evil; but the fool is confident, and joins himself 
to it.(15) A long-suffering man is strong in his wisdom; the man of little mind is very unwise. (15) He who 
oppresseth the poor reproacheth his Maker.(17) The tongue of the wise knoweth good things, but the mouth 
of fools speaketh evil.(1 8) A quarrelsome man preferreth strife, and every one that lifteth up his heart is 
unclean before God. (19) Though hand join with hand unjustly, they shall not be unpunished. (20) He that 
loveth life must be sparing to his mouth. (21) Insolence goeth before bruising, and evil thoughts before a 
fall. (22) He who closeth his eyes speaketh perverse things, and provoketh all evil with his lips. (23) The lips 
of a fool lead him into evil, and the foolhardy speech calleth down death. The man of evil counsel shall 
suffer much loss. (24) Better is a poor man who is just than a rich man that speaketh lies. (25) It is a glory to a 
man to turn away from evil words; but he that is foolish bindeth'himself therewith. (26) Love not detraction, lest 
thou be rooted out.(1) The bread of lying is sweet to a man, but afterwards his mouth shall be filled with 
gravel. (2) He that gaineth treasures with a lying tongue followeth vanity, and shall come into the snares of 
death. (3) Say thou nought in the ear of a fool, lest haply the wise mock at thy words. (4) The bludgeon and 
the sword and the arrow are hurtful things;(5) so is the man who beareth false witness against his friend. (6) 
As the birds and the sparrows fly away, so the curse shall be vain and shall not overtake him. (7) Answer not 
an unwise man according to his lack of wisdom, lest thou become like unto him; but answer a fool according 
to his folly, lest he appear to himself to be wise. (8) He who layeth wait for his friends when he is discovered 
saith, I did it in sport.(9) A faggot for the coals, and wood for the fire, and a man of evil words for the tumult of 
strife. (10) If thine enemy ask thee aught, sparingly but with a loud voice, (11) consent thou not to him, for there 
are seven degrees of wickedness in his heart. (12) The stone is heavy, and the sand hard to be borne; but 
the anger of a fool is heavier than either; indignation is cruel, anger is sharp, and envy is impatient. (1 3) The 
impious man speaketh against the poor; and he that trusteth in the audacity of his heart is most foolish. (14) 
The unwise man putteth forth all his anger, but the wise dealeth it out in parts. (1 5) An evil son-his teeth are 
swords, and his grinders are as harrows, to consume the weak from off the earth, and the poor from among 
men." 

Such are the lessons in which I have been trained and therefore I was unwilling to return bite for bite, and to 
attack you by way of retaliation; and I thought it better to exorcise the madness of one who was raving, and 
to pour in the antidote of a single book into his poisoned breast. But I fear I shall have no success, and that I 
shall be compelled to sing the song of David, and to take his words for my only consolation:(1) 
"The wicked are estranged from the womb, they go astray even from the belly. They have spoken lies. 
Their madness is like the madness of the serpent; like the deaf adder which stoppeth her ears, which will not 
hear the voice of the charmers, and of the magician wisely enchanting. God shall break their teeth in their 
mouth; the Lord shall break the great teeth of the lions. They shall come to nothing, like water that runneth 
away. He bendeth his bow until they be brought low. Like wax that melteth, they shall be carried away; the 
fire hath fallen upon them and they have not seen the sun." 
And again: (2) 

"The righteous shall rejoice when he seeth the vengeance upon the impious; he shall wash his hands in the 
blood of the sinner. And man shall say, Verily, there is a reward for the righteous; verily, there is a God that 

judgeth those that are on the earth." 

44. In the end of your letter you say: "I hope that you love peace." To this I will answer in a few words: If you 
desire peace, lay down your arms. I can be at peace with one who shews kindness; I do not fear one who 
threatens me. Let us be at one in faith, and peace will follow immediately. 

A COMMENTARY ON THE APOSTLES' CREED. 

This exposition of the Creed was made at the request of Laurentius, a Bishop whose see is unknown, but is 

conjectured by Fontanini, in his life of Rufinus, to have been Concordia, Rufinus' birthplace. 

Its exact date cannot be fixed; but from the fact that he says nothing of his difficulty in writing Latin after being 

so long in the East, as he does in several of his books, and from the comparative ease of the style, it is most 

probable that it was written in the later years of his sojourn at Aquileia, that is, about 307-309. 

Its value is considerable (1) as bearing witness to the state of the Creed in local churches at the beginning of 

the 5th century, especially their variations. (In the church of Aquileia, in Jesu Christo. Patrem invisibilem et 

impassibilem. Resurrectio hujus carnis); (2) as showing the adaptation of Eastern ideas to the formation of 

Western theology; (3) as giving the Canon of the books of Scripture, and the Apocrypha of both the Old and 

New dispensations. 

The exposition is clear and reasonable; and, with the exception of a very few passages, such as the 

argument from the Phoenix for the Virgin Birth of our Lord, is still of use to us. 

We prefix the words of the creed on which Rufinus makes his commentary. 

It seems desirable to give the original Latin, as well as the English version of the Creed of Aquileia. 

1. Credo in Deo Patre omnipotenti invisibili et impassibili. 

2. Et in Jesu Christo, unico Filio ejus, Domino nostro; 

3. Qui natus est de Spiritu Sancto ex Maria Virgine; 

4. Crucifixus sub Pontio Pilato, et sepultus; 

5. Descendit ad interna; tertia die resurrexit a mortuis; 

1. 1 believe in God the Father Almighty, invisible and impassible. 

2. And in Jesus Christ, His only Son, our Lord; 

3. Who was born from the Holy Ghost, of the VirginMary; 

4. Was crucified under Pontius Pilate, and buried; 

5. He descended to hell; on the third day he rose again from the dead. 

6. Ascendit in coelos; sedet ad dexteram Paths; 

7. Inde venturus estjudicare vivos et mortuos; 

8. Et in Spiritu Sancto; 

9. Sanctam Ecclesiam; 

10. Remissionem peccatorum; 

1 1. Hujus carnis resurrectionem. 

6. He ascended to the heavens; he sitteth at the right hand of the Father; 

7. Thence he is to come to judge the quick and thedead. 

8. And in the Holy Ghost; 

9. The Holy Church. 

10. The remission of sins. 

1 1 . The resurrection of this flesh. 

My mind has as little inclination for writing as sufficiency, most faithful Bishop (Papa) Laurentius, (1) for I well 
know that it is a matter of no little peril to submit a slender ability to general criticism. But, since in your letter 
you rashly (forgive my saying so) require me, by Christ's sacraments, which I hold in the greatest reverence, 
to compose something for you concerning the Faith, in accordance with the traditional and natural meaning 
of the Creed, although in so doing you impose a burthen upon me beyond my strength to bear (for I do not 
forget the opinion of the wise, which so justly says, that "to speak of God even what is true is perilous"); still, if 
you will aid with your prayers the necessity which your requisition has laid upon me, I will try to say 
something, moved rather by a reverential regard for your injunction than by presumptuous confidence in my 
ability. What I write, however, will hardly seem worthy of the consideration of persons of mature 
understanding, but suited rather to the capacity of children and young beginners in Christ. 
I find, indeed, that some eminent writers have published treatises on these matters piously and briefly 

written. Moreover, I know that the heretic Photinus has written on the same; but with the object, not of 
explaining the meaning of the text to his readers, but of wresting things simply and truthfully said in support of 
his own dogma, while yet the Holy Spirit has taken care that in these words nothing should be set down 
which is ambiguous or obscure, or inconsistent with other truths: for therein is that prophecy verified, 
"Finishing and cutting short the word in equity: because a short word will the Lord make upon the earth. "(2) It 
shall be our endeavour, then, first to restore and emphasize the words of the Apostles in their native 
simplicity; and, secondly, to supply such things as seem to have been omitted by former expositors. But that 
the scope of this "short word," as we have called it, may be made more plain, we will enquire from the 
beginning how it came to be given to the Churches. 

2. Our forefathers have handed down to us the tradition, that, after the Lord's ascension, when, through the 
coming of the Holy Ghost, tongues of flame had settled upon each of the Apostles, that they might speak 
diverse languages, so that no race however foreign, no tongue however barbarous, might be inaccessible 
to them and beyond their reach, they were commanded by the Lord to go severally to the several nations to 
preach the word of God. Being on the eve therefore of departing from one another, they first mutually agreed 
upon a standard of their future preaching, lest haply, when separated, they might in any instance vary in the 
statements which they should make to those whom they should invite to believe in Christ. Being all therefore 
met together, and being filled with the Holy Ghost, they composed, as we have said, this brief formulary of 
their future preaching, each contributing his several sentence to one common summary: and they ordained 
that the rule thus framed should be given to those who believe. 

To this formulary, for many and most sufficient reasons, they gave the name or Symbol. For Symbol 
(<greek>kumblon</greek>) in Greek answers to both "Indicium" (a sign or token) and "Collatio" (a joint 
contribution made by several) in Latin. For this the Apostles did in these words, each contributing his several 
sentence. It is called "Indicium" or "Signum," a sign or token, because, at that time, as the Apostle Paul 
says, and as is related in the Acts of the Apostles, many of the vagabond Jews, pretending to be apostles 
of Christ, went about preaching for gain's sake or their belly's sake, naming the name of Christ indeed, but 
not delivering their message according to the exact traditional lines. The Apostles therefore prescribed this 
formulary as a sign or token by which he who preached Christ truly, according to Apostolic rule, might be 
recognised. Finally, they say that in civil wars, since the armour of both sides is alike, and the language the 
same, and the custom and mode of warfare the same, each general, to guard against treachery, is wont to 
deliver to his soldiers a distinct symbol or watchword-in Latin "signum" or "indicium"-so that if one is met 
with, of whom it is doubtful to which side he belongs, being asked the symbol (watchword), he discloses 
whether he is friend or foe. And for this reason, the tradition continues, the Creed is not written on paper or 
parchment, but is retained in the hearts of the faithful, that it may be certain that no one has learnt it by 
reading, as is sometimes the case with unbelievers, but by tradition from the Apostles. 
The Apostles therefore, as we have said, being about to separate in order to preach the Gospel, settled 
upon this sign or token of their agreement in the faith; and, unlike the sons of Noah, who, when they were 
about to separate from one another, builded a tower of baked bricks and pitch, whose top might reach to 
heaven, they raised a monument of faith, which might withstand the enemy, composed of living stones and 
pearls of the Lord, such that neither winds might overthrow it, nor floods undermine it, nor the force of storms 
and tempests shake it. Right justly, then, were the former, when, on the eve of separation, they builded a 
tower of pride, condemned to the confusion of tongues, so that no one might understand his neighbour's 
speech; while the latter, who were building a tower of faith, were endowed with the knowledge and 
understanding of all languages; so that the one might prove a sign and token of sin, the other of faith. 
But it is time now that we should say something about these same pearls, among which is placed first the 
fountain and source of all, when it is said- 

3. I BELIEVE IN GOD THE FATHER ALMIGHTY. 

But before I begin to discuss the meaning of the words, I think it well to mention that in different Churches 
some additions are found in this article. This is not the case, however, in the Church of the city of Rome; the 
reason being, as I suppose, that, on the one hand, no heresy has had its origin there, and, on the other, that 
the ancient custom is there kept up, that those who are going to be baptized should rehearse the Creed 
publicly, that is, in the audience of the people; the consequence of which is that the ears of those who are 
already believers will not admit the addition of a single word. But in other places, as I understand, additions 
appear to have been made, on account of certain heretics, by means of which it was hoped that novelty in 
doctrine would be excluded. We, however, follow that order which we received when we were baptized in 
the Church of Aquileia. 

I BELIEVE, therefore, is placed in the forefront, as the Apostle Paul, writing to the Hebrews, says, "He that 
cometh to God must first of all believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder of those who believe on Him."(1) 
The Prophet also says, "Except ye believe, (2) ye shall not understand." That the way to understand, 
therefore, may be open to you, you do rightly first of all, in professing that you believe; for no one embarks 
upon the sea, and trusts himself to the deep and liquid element, unless he first believes it possible that he 

will have a safe voyage; neither does the husbandman commit his seed to the furrows and scatter his grain 
on the earth, but in the belief that the showers will come, together with the sun's warmth, through whose 
fostering influence, aided by favouring winds, the earth will produce and multiply and ripen its fruits. In fine, 
nothing in life can be transacted if there be not first a readiness to believe. What wonder then, if, coming to 
God, we first of all profess that we believe, seeing that, without this, not even common life can be lived. We 
have premised these remarks at the outset, since the Pagans are wont to object to us that our religion, 
because it lacks reasons, rests solely on belief. We have shewn, therefore, that nothing can possibly be 
done or remain stable unless belief precede. Finally, marriages are contracted in the belief that children will 
be born; and children are committed to the care of masters in the belief that the teaching of the masters will 
be transferred to the pupils; and one man assumes the ensigns of empire, believing that peoples and cities 
and a well-equipped army also will obey him. But if no one enters upon any one of these several 
undertakings except in the belief that the results spoken of will follow, must not belief be much more requisite 
if one would come to the knowledge of God? But let us see what this "short word" of the Creed sets forth. 
4. "I BELIEVE IN GOD THE FATHER ALMIGHTY." The Eastern Churches almost universally deliver the 
article thus, "I believe in ONE God the Father Almighty;" and again in the next article, where we say, "And in 
Christ Jesus, His only Son, our Lord," they deliver it., "And in ONE (Lord) our Lord Jesus Christ, His only 
Son;" confessing, that is, "one Gods" and "one Lord," in accordance with the authority of the Apostle Paul. 
But we shall return to this by-and-by. For the present, let us turn our attention to the words, "In God the Father 
Almighty." 

"God," so far as the human mind can form an idea, is the name of that nature or substance which is above all 
things. "Father" is a word expressive of a secret and ineffable mystery. When you hear the word "God," you 
must understand thereby a substance without beginning, without end simple, uncompounded, invisible, 
incorporeal, ineffable, inappreciable, which has in it nothing which has been either added or created. For He 
is without cause who is absolutely the cause of all things. When you hear the word "Father," you must 
understand by this the Father of a Son, which Son is the image of the aforesaid substance. For as no one is 
called "Lord" unless he have a possession or a servant whose lord he is, and as no one is called "master" 
unless he have a disciple, so no one can possibly be called "father" unless he have a son. This very name 
of "Father," therefore, shews plainly that, together with the Father there subsists a Son also. 
But I would not have you discuss how God the Father begat the Son, nor intrude too curiously into the 
profound mystery, lest haply, by prying too eagerly into the brightness of light inaccessible, you should lose 
the faint glimpse which, by the gift of God, has been vouchsafed to mortals. Or, if you suppose that this is a 
subject to be investigated with all possible scrutiny, first propose to yourself questions which concern 
ourselves, and then, if you are able to deal satisfactorily with them, speed on from earthly things to 
heavenly, from visible to invisible. Determine first, if you can, how the mind, which is within you, generates a 
word, and what is the spirit of the memory which is in it; and how these, though diverse in reality and in 
operation, are yet one in substance or nature; and though they proceed from the mind, yet are never 
separated from it. And if these, though they are in us and in the substance of our own soul, yet seem to be 
hidden from us in proportion as they are invisible to our bodily sight, let us take for our enquiry things which 
are more open to view. How does a spring generate a river from itself? By what spirit is it borne into a 
rapidly flowing stream? How happens it that, while the river and the spring are one and inseparable, yet 
neither can the river be understood to be, or can be called, the spring, nor the spring the river, and yet he 
who has seen the river has seen the spring also? Exercise yourself first in explaining these, and explain, if 
you are able, things which you have trader your hands; and then you may come to loftier matters. Do not 
think, however, that I would have you ascend all at once from the earth above the heavens: I would first, with 
your leave, draw your attention to this firmament which our eyes behold, and ask you to explain, if you can, 
the nature of this visible luminary , -how that celestial fire generates from itself the brightness of light, how it 
also produces heat; and though these are three in reality, how they are yet one in substance. And if you are 
capable of investigating each of these, even then you must acknowledge that the mystery of the Divine 
generation is by so much the more diverse and the more transcendent as the Creator is more powerful than 
the creatures, as the artificer is more excellent than his work, as He who ever is more noble than that which 
had its beginning out of nothing. 

That God then is the Father of His only Son our Lord is to be believed, not discussed; for it is not lawful for a 
servant to dispute about the nativity of his lord. The Father hath borne witness from heaven, saying, (1) "This 
is My beloved Son, in Whom I am well pleased: hear Him." The Father saith that He is His Son and bids us 
hear Him. The Son saith, "He who seeth Me seeth the Father also, "(2) and "I and the Father are one, "(3) and 
"I came forth from God and am come into the world. "(4) Where is the man who can thrust himself as a 
disputant between these words of Father and Son, who cart divide the Godhead, separate its volition, break 
asunder the substance, cut the spirit in parts, and deny that what the Truth speaks is true? God then is a true 
Father as the Father of the Truth, not begetting extrinsically, but generating the Son from that which Himself 
is; that is, as the All-wise He generates Wisdom, as the Just Justice, as the Everlasting the Everlasting, as 

the Immortal Immortality, as the Invisible the Invisible; because He is Light, He generates Brightness, 
because He is Mind, He generates the Word. 

5. Now whereas we said that the Eastern Churches, in their delivery, of the Creed, say, "In one God(5) the 
Father Almighty," and "in one Lord," the "one" is not to be understood numerically but absolutely. For 
example, if one should say, "one man" or "one horse," here "one" is used numerically. For there may be a 
second man and a third, or a second horse and a third. But where a second or a third cannot be added, if 
we say "one" we mean one not numerically but absolutely. For example, if we say, "one Sun," here the 
meaning is that a second or a third cannot be added, for there is but one Sun. Much more then is God, when 
He is said to be "one," called "one." not numerically but absolutely, that is, He is therefore said to be one 
because there is no other. In like manner, also, it is to be understood of the Lord, that He is one Lord, Jesus 
Christ, by or through Whom God the Father possesses dominion over all, whence also, in the next clause, 
God is called "Almighty." 

God is called ALMIGHTY because He possesses rule and dominion over all things. (1) But the Father 
possesses all things by His Son, as the Apostle says, "By Him were created all things, visible and invisible, 
whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers. "(2) And again, writing to the Hebrews, he 
says, "By Him also He made the worlds," and "He appointed Him heir of all things. "(3) By "appointed" we 
are to understand "generated." Now if the Father made the worlds by Him, and all things were created by 
Him, and He is heir of all things, then by Him He possesses rule also over all things. Because, as light is 
born of light, and truth of truth, so. Almighty is born of Almighty. As it is written of the Seraphim in the 
Revelation of John, "And they have no rest day and night, crying Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabaoth, 
which was and which is and which is to come, the Almighty. "(4) He then who "is to come" is called 
"Almighty." And what other is there who "is to come" but Christ, the Son of God? 

To the foregoing is added "INVISIBLE AND IMPASSIBLE." I should mention that these two words are not in 
the Creed of the Roman Church. They were added in our Church, as is well known, on account of the 
Sabellian heresy, called by us "the Patripassian," that, namely, which says that the Father Himself was born 
of the Virgin and became visible, or affirms that He suffered in the flesh. To exclude such impiety, therefore, 
concerning the Father, our forefathers seem to have added these words, calling the Father "invisible and 
impassible." For it is evident that the Son, not the Father, became incarnate and was born in the flesh, and 
that from that nativity in the flesh the Son became "visible and passible." Yet so far as regards that immortal 
substance of the Godhead, which He possesses, and which is one and the same with that of the Father, we 
must believe that neither the Father, nor the Son, nor the Holy Ghost is "visible or passible." But the Son, in 
that He condescended to assume flesh, was both seen and also suffered in the flesh. Which also the 
Prophet fore told when he said, "This is our God: no other shah be accounted of in comparison of Him. He 
hath found out all the way of knowledge, and hath given it unto Jacob His servant and to Israel His beloved. 
Afterward He shewed Himself upon the earth, and conversed with men."(1) 

6. Next there follows, "AND IN CHRIST JESUS, HIS ONLY SON, OUR LORD." "Jesus" is a Hebrew word 
meaning "Saviour." "Christ" is so called from "Chrism," i.e. unction. For we read in the Books of Moses, that 
Auses, the son of Nave, (2) when he was chosen to lead the people, had his name changed from "Auses" to 
"Jesus," to shew that this was a name proper for princes and generals, for those, namely, who should 
"save" the people who followed them. Therefore, both were called "Jesus," both the one who conducted the 
people, who had been brought forth out of the land of Egypt, and freed from the wanderings of the 
wilderness, into the land of promise, and the other, who conducted the people, who had been brought forth 
from the darkness of ignorance, and recalled from the errors of the world, into the kingdom of heaven. 
"Christ" is a name proper either to High Priests or Kings. For formerly both high priests and kings were 
consecrated with the ointment of chrism: but these, as mortal and corruptible, with material and corruptible 
ointment. Jesus is made Christ, being anointed with tile Holy Spirit, as the Scripture saith of Him "Whom the 
Father hath anointed with the Holy Spirit sent down from heaven. "(3) And Isaiah had prefigured the same, 
saying in the person of the Son, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon Me, because He hath anointed Me, He hath 
sent Me to preach good tidings to the poor."(4) 

Having shewn their what Jesus" is, Who saves His people, and what "Christ" is, Who is made a High Priest 
for ever, let us now see in what follows, of Whom these things are said, "His only Son, our Lord." Here we 
are taught that this Jesus, of whom we have spoken, and this Christ, the meaning of whose name we have 
expounded, is "the only Son of God" and "our Lord." Lest, perchance, you should think that these human 
names have an earthly significance, therefore it is added that He is "the only Son of God, our Lord." For He 
is born One of One, because there is one brightness of light, and there is one word of the understanding. 
Neither does an incorporeal generation degenerate into the plural number, or suffer division, where He Who 
is born is in no wise separated from Him Who begets. He is "only" (unique), as thought is to the mind, as 
wisdom is to the wise, as a word is to the understanding, as valour is to the brave. For as the Father is said 
by the Apostle to be "alone wise,"(1) so likewise the Son alone is called wisdom. He is then the "only Son." 
And, although in glory, everlastingness, virtue, dominion, power, He is what the Father is, vet all these He 

hath not unoriginately as the Father, but from the Father, as the Son, without beginning and equal; and 
although He is the Head of all things, yet the Father is the Head of Him. For so it is written, "The Head of 
Christ is God. "(2) 

7. When you hear the word "Son," you must not think of a nativity after the flesh; but remember that it is 
spoken of an incorporeal substance, and a simple and uncompounded nature. For if, as we said above, 
whether when the understanding generates a word, or the mind sense, or light brings forth brightness from 
itself, nothing of this sort is sought for, or any manner of weakness and imperfection imagined in this kind of 
generation, how much purer and more sacred ought to be our conception of the Creator of all these! 

But perhaps you say, "The generation of which you speak is an unsubstantial generation. For light does not 
produce substantial brightness, nor the understanding generate a substantial word, but the Son of God, it is 
affirmed, was generated substantially." To this we reply, first, When in other things examples or illustrations 
are used, the resemblance cannot hold in every particular, but only in some one point for which the 
illustration is employed. For instance, When it is said in the Gospel, "The kingdom of heaven is like leaven, 
which a woman hid in three measures of meal, "(3) are we to imagine that the kingdom of heaven is in all 
respects like leaven, so that like leaven it is palpable and perishable so as to become sour and unfit for 
use? Obviously the illustration was employed simply for this object-to shew how, through the preaching of 
God's word which seems so small a thing, men's minds could be imbued with the leaven of faith. So 
likewise, when it is said, "The kingdom of heaven is like unto a net cast into the sea, which draws in fishes of 
every kind,"(1) are we to suppose that the substance of the kingdom of heaven is likened in all respects to 
the nature of twine of which a net is made, and to the knots with which the meshes are tied? No; the sole 
object of the comparison is to shew that, as a net brings fishes to the shore from the depths of the sea, so by 
the preaching of the kingdom of heaven men's souls are liberated from the depth of the error of this world. 
From whence it is evident that examples or illustrations do not answer in every particular to the things which 
they are brought to exemplify or illustrate. Otherwise, if they were the same in all respects, they would no 
longer be called examples or illustrations, but rather would be the things themselves. 

8. Then further it is to be observed that no creature can be such as its Creator. And therefore, as the divine 
substance or essence admits of no comparison, so neither does the Divinity. Moreover, every creature is of 
nothing. If therefore a spark which is so unsubstantial but vet is fire, begets of itself a creature which is of 
nothing, and maintains in it the essential nature of that from which it springs, (i.e. the fire of the parent spark), 
why could not the substance of that eternal Light which ever has been because it has in itself nothing which 
is not substantial, produce froth itself substantial brightness? Rightly, therefore, is the Son called "only," 
"unique." For He who hath been so born is "only" and "unique." That which is unique can admit of no 
comparison. Nor can He who made all things be like in substance to the things which He has made. This 
then is Christ Jesus, the only Son of God, who is also our Lord. "Only" may be referred both to Son and to 
Lord. For Jesus Christ is "only" both as truly Son and as one Lord. For all other sons, though they are called 
sons, are so called by the grace of adoption, not by verity of nature; and if there be others who are called 
lords, they are called so from an authority bestowed not inherent. But Christ alone is the only Sonand the 
only Lord, as the Apostle saith, "One Lord Jesus Christ, by Whom are all things. "(2) Therefore, after the 
Creed has in due order set forth the ineffable mystery of the nativity of the Son froth the Father, it now 
descends to the dispensation which He vouchsafed to enter upon for man's salvation. And of Him whom just 
now it called the "only Son of God" and "our Lord," it now says. 

9. "WHO WAS BORN BY (de) THE HOLY GHOST OF THE VIRGIN MARY." This nativity among men is in 
the way of dispensation, (1) whereas the former nativity is of the divine substance; the one results from his 
condescension, the other from his essential nature. He is born by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin. Here a 
chaste ear and a pure mind is required. For you must understand that now a temple hath been built within the 
secret recesses of a Virgin's womb for Him of Whom erewhile you learnt that He was born ineffably of the 
Father. And just as in the sanctification of the Holy Ghost no thought of imperfection is to be admitted, so in 
the Virgin-birth no defilement is to be imagined. For this birth was a new birth given to this world, and rightly 
new. For He Who is the only Son in heaven is by consequence the only Son on earth, and was uniquely 
born, born as no other ever was or can be. 

The words of the Prophets concerning Him, "A Virgin shall conceive and bring forth a Son, "(2) are known to 
all, and are cited in the Gospels again and again. The Prophet Ezekiel too had predicted the miraculous 
manner of that birth, calling Mary figuratively "the Gate of the Lord," the gate, namely, through which the Lord 
entered the world. For he saith, "The gate which looks towards the East shall be closed, and shall not be 
opened, and no one shall pass through it, because the Lord God of Israel shall pass through it, and it shall 
be closed. "(3) What could be said with such evident reference to the inviolate preservation of the Virgin's 
condition? That Gate of Virginity was closed; through it the Lord God of Israel entered; through it He came 
forth from the Virgin's womb into this world; and the Virgin-state being preserved inviolate, the gate of the 
Virgin remained closed for ever. Therefore the Holy Ghost is spoken of as the Creator of the Lord's flesh 
and of His temple. 

10. Starting from this point you may understand the majesty of the Holy Ghost also. For the Gospel 
witnesses of Him that when the angel said to the Virgin, "Thou shalt bring forth a Son and shalt call His name 
Jesus, for He shall save His people from their sins, "(4) she replied, " How shall this be, seeing I know not a 
man?" on which the angel said to her, "The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest 
shall overshadow thee. Wherefore that holy Thing which shall be born of Thee shall be called the Son of 
God."(1) See here the Trinity mutually cooperating with each other. The Holy Ghost is spoken of as coming 
upon the Virgin, and the Power of the Highest as overshadowing her. What is the Power of the Highest but 
Christ Himself, Who is the Power of God and the Wisdom of God? Whose is this Power? The Power of the 
Highest. There is here then the Highest, there is also the Power of the Highest, there is also the Holy Ghost. 
This is the Trinity, everywhere latent, and everywhere apparent, distinct in names and persons, but 
inseparable in the substance of the Godhead. And although the Son alone is born of the Virgin, yet there is 
present also the Highest, there is present also the Holy Ghost, that both the conception and the bringing 
forth of the Virgin may be sanctified. 

1 1 . These things, since they are asserted upon the warrant of the Prophetical Scriptures, may possibly 
silence the Jews, infidel and incredulous though they be. But the Pagans are wont to ridicule us when they 
hear us speak of a Virgin-birth. We must, therefore, say a few words in reply to their cavils. Every birth, I 
suppose, depends upon three conditions. There must be a woman of mature age, she must have 
intercourse with a man, her womb must not be barren. Of these three conditions, in the birth of which we are 
speaking, one was wanting, the man. And this, forasmuch as He of Whose birth we speak was not an earthly 
but a heavenly man, was supplied by the Heavenly Spirit, the virginity of the mother being preserved 
inviolate. And yet why should it be thought marvellous for a virgin to conceive, when it is well known that the 
Eastern bird, which they call the Phoenix, is in such wise born, or born again, without the intervention of a 
mate, that it remains continually one, and continually by being born or born again succeeds itself?(2) That 
bees know no wedlock, and no bringing forth of young, is notorious. There are also other things which are 
found to be subject to some such law of birth. Shall it be thought incredible, then, that was done by divine 
power, for the renewal and restoration of the whole world, of which instances are observed in the nativity of 
animals? And yet it is strange that the Gentiles should think this impossible, who believe their own Minerva 
to have been born from the brain of Jupiter. What is more difficult to believe, or what more contrary to nature? 
Here, there is a woman, the order of nature is kept, there is conception, and in due time birth; there, there is 
no female, but a man alone, and-birth! Why does he who believes the one marvel at the other? Again, they 
say that Father Bacchus was born from Jupiter's thigh. Here is another portent, yet it is believed. Venus also, 
whom they call Aphrodite, was born, they believe, of the foam of the sea, as her compounded name shews. 
They affirm that Castor and Pollux were born of an egg, the Myrmidons of ants. There are a thousand other 
things which, though contrary to nature, find credit with them, such as the stones thrown by Deucalion and 
Pyrrha, and the crop of men sprung from thence. And when they believe such myths and so many of them, 
does one thing seem impossible to them, that a woman of mature age, not defiled by man but impregnated 
by the Holy Ghost, should conceive a divine progeny? who, forsooth, if they are hard of belief, ought in no 
wise to have given credence to those prodigies, being, as they are, so many and so degrading; but if they 
do believe them, they ought much more readily to receive these beliefs of ours, so honourable and so holy, 
than theirs so discreditable and so vile. 

12. But they say, perhaps, If it was possible to God that a virgin should conceive, it was possible also that 
she should bring forth, but they think it unmeet that a being of so great majesty should enter the world in such 
wise, that even though there had been no defilement from intercourse with man, there should yet be the 
unseemliness attendant upon the act of delivery. To which let us reply briefly, meeting them on their own 
level. If a person should see a little child in the act of being suffocated in a quagmire, and himself, a great 
man and powerful, should go into the mire, just at its verge, so to say, to rescue the dying child; would you 
blame this than as defiled for having stepped into a little mire, or would you praise him as merciful, for 
having preserved the life of one that was perishing? But the case supposed is that of an ordinary man. Let 
us return to the nature of Him Who was born. How much, think you, is the nature of the Sun inferior to him? 
How much beyond doubt, the Creature to the Creator? Consider now if a ray of the sun alights upon a 
quagmire, does it receive any pollution from it? or is the sun the worse for shedding his light upon foul 
objects? Fire, too, how far inferior is its nature to the things of which we are speaking? Yet no substance, 
whether foul or vile, is believed to pollute fire if applied to it. When the case is plainly thus with regard to 
material things, do you suppose that aught of pollution and defilement can befall that supereminent and 
incorporeal nature, which is above all fire and all light? Then, lastly, note this also: we say that man was 
created by God out of the clay of the earth. But if God is thought to be defiled in seeking to recover His own 
work, much more must He be thought so in making that work originally. And it is idle to ask why He passed 
through what is repugnant to our sense of modesty, when you cannot tell why He made what is so 
repugnant. And therefore it is not nature but general estimation that has made us think these things to be 
such. Otherwise, all things that are in the body, being formed from one and the same clay, are distinguished 

from one another only in their uses, and natural offices. 

13. But there is another consideration which we must not leave out in the solution of this question, namely, 
that the substance of God, which is wholly incorporeal, cannot be introduced into bodies or be received by 
them in the first instance, unless there be some spiritual substance as a medium, which is capable of 
receiving the divine Spirit. For instance, if we say that light is able to irradiate all the members of the body, 
yet by none of them can it be received except by the eye. For it is the eve alone which is receptive of light. 
So the Son of God is horn of a virgin, not associated with the flesh alone in the first instance, but begotten 
with a soul as a medium between the flesh and God. With the soul, then, serving as a medium, and receiving 
the Word of God in the secret citadel of the rational spirit, God was born of the Virgin without any such 
disparagement as you imagine. And therefore nothing is to be esteemed base or unseemly wherein was 
the sanctification of the Spirit, and where the soul which was capable of God became also a partaker of 
flesh. Account nothing impossible where the power of the Most High was present. Have no thought of human 
weakness where there was the plenitude of Divinity. 

14. HE WAS CRUCIFIED UNDER PONTIUS PILATE AND WAS BURIED: HE DESCENDED INTO HELL. 
The Apostle Paul teaches us that we ought to have "the eyes of our understanding enlightened"(1) "that we 
may understand what is the height and breadth and depth. "(2) "The height and breadth and depth" is a 
description of the Cross, of which that part which is fixed in the earth he calls the depth, the height that which 
is erected upon the earth and reaches upward, the breadth that which is spread out to the right hand and to 
the left. Since, therefore, there are so many kinds of death by which it is given to men to depart this life, why 
does the Apostle wish us to have our understanding enlightened so as to know the reason why, of all of 
them, the Cross was chosen in preference for the death of the Saviour. We must know, then, that Cross was 
a triumph. It was a signal trophy. A triumph is a token of victory over an enemy. Since then Christ, when He 
came, brought three kingdoms at once into subjection under His sway (for this He signifies when he says, 
"That in tile name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things on earth, and things 
under the earth"), (3) and conquered all of these by His death, a death was sought answerable to the 
mystery, so that being lifted up in the air, and subduing the powers of the air, He might make a display of His 
victory over these supernatural and celestial powers. Moreover the holy Prophet says that "all the day long 
He stretched out His hands"(4) to the people on the earth, that He might both make protestation to 
unbelievers and invite believers: finally, by that part which is sunk under the earth, He signified His bringing 
into subjection to Himself the kingdoms of the netherworld. 

15. Moreover,-to touch briefly some of the more recondite topics,-when God made the world in the 
beginning, He set over it and appointed certain powers of celestial virtues by whom the race of mortal men 
might be governed and directed. That this was so done Moses signifies in the Song in Deuteronomy, 
"When the Most High divided the nations, He appointed the bounds of the nations according to the number 
of the angels of God. "(5) But some of these, as he who is called the Prince of this world, did not exercise the 
power which God had committed to them according to the laws by which they had received it, nor did they 
teach mankind to obey God's commandments, but taught them rather to follow their own perverse guidance. 
Thus we were brought under the bonds of sin, because, as the Prophet saith, "We were sold under our 
sins. "(6) For every man, when he yields to lust, is receiving the purchase-money of his soul. Under that bond 
then every man was held by those most wicked rulers, which same bond Christ, when the came, tore down 
and stripped them of this their power. This Paul signifies under a great mystery, when he says of Him, "He 
destroyed the hand-writing which was against us, nailing it to His cross, and led away principalities and 
powers, triumphing over them in Himself."(1) Those rulers, then, whom God had set over mankind, having 
become contumacious and tyrannical, took in hand to assail the men who had been committed to their 
charge and to rout them utterly in the conflicts of sin, as the Prophet Ezekiel mystically intimates when he 
says, "In that day angels(2) shall come forth hastening to exterminate Ethiopia, and there shall he 
perturbation among them in the day of Egypt; for behold He comes. "(3) Having stript them then of their 
almighty power, Christ is said to have triumphed, and to have delivered to men the power which was taken 
from them, as also Himself saith to His disciples in the Gospel, "Behold I have given you power to tread 
upon serpents and scorpions, and upon all the might of the enemy. "(4) The Cross of Christ, then, brought 
those who had wrongfully abused the authority which they had received into subjection to those who had 
before been in subjection to them. But us, that is, mankind, it teaches first of all to resist sin even unto death, 
and willingly to die for the sake of religion. Next, this same Cross sets before us an example of obedience, 
in like manner as it hath punished the contumacy of those who were once oar rulers. Hear, therefore, how the 
Apostle would teach us obedience by the Cross of Christ: "Let this mind be in you, which was in Christ Jesus, 
Who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God, but made Himself of no 
reputation, taking upon Him the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men; and, being found in 
fashion as a man, He became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross. "(5) As, then, a 
consummate master teaches both by example and precept, so Christ taught the obedience, which good 
men are to render even at the cost of death, by Himself first dying in rendering it. 

16. But perhaps some one is alarmed at hearing us discourse of the death of Him of Whom, a short while 
since, we said that He is everlasting with God the Father, and that He was begotten of the Father's 
substance, and is one with God the Father, in dominion, majesty, and eternity. But be not alarmed, O faithful 
hearer. Presently thou wilt see Him of Whose death thou hearest once more immortal; for the death to which 
He submits is about to spoil death. For the object of that mystery of the Incarnation which we expounded just 
now was that the divine virtue of the Son of God, as though it were a hook concealed beneath the form and 
fashion of human flesh (He being, as the Apostle Paul says, "found in fashion as a man"),(1) might lure on 
the Prince of this world to a conflict, to whom offering His flesh as a bait, His divinity underneath might catch 
him and hold him fast with its hook, through the shedding of His immaculate blood. For He alone Who knows 
no stain of sin hath destroyed the sins of all, of those, at least, who have marked the door-posts of their faith 
with His blood. As, therefore, if a fish seizes a baited hook, it not only does not take the bait off the hook, but 
is drawn out of the water to be itself food for others, so He Who had the power of death seized the body of 
Jesus in death, not being aware of the hook of Divinity inclosed within it, but having swallowed it he was 
caught forthwith, and the bars of hell being burst asunder, he was drawn forth as it were from the abyss to 
become food for others. Which result the Prophet Ezekiel long ago foretold under this same figure, saying, "I 
will draw thee out with My hook, and stretch thee out upon the earth: the plains shall be filled with thee, and I 
will set all the fowls of the air over thee, and I will satiate all tim beasts of the earth with thee. "(2) The Prophet 
David also says, "Thou hast broken the heads of the great dragon, Thou hast given him to be meat to the 
people of Ethiopia. "(3) And Job in like manner witnesses of the same mystery, for he says in the person of 
the Lord speaking to him, "Wilt thou draw forth the dragon with a hook, and wilt thou put thy bit in his 
nostrils?"(4) 

17. It is with no loss or disparagement therefore of His Divine nature that Christ suffers in the flesh, but His 
Divine nature through the flesh descended into death, that by the infirmity of the flesh He might effect 
salvation; not that He might be detained by death according to the law of mortality, but that He might by 
Himself in his resurrection open the gates of death. It is as if a king were to proceed to a prison, and to go in 
and open the doors, undo the fetters, break in pieces the chains, the bars, and the bolts, and bring forth and 
set at liberty the prisoners, and restore those who are sitting in darkness and in the shadow of death to light 
and life. The king, therefore, is said indeed to have been in prison, but not under the same condition as the 
prisoners who were detained there. They were in prison to be punished, He to free them from punishment. 

18. They who have handed down the Creed to us have with much forethought specified the time when these 
things were done-"under Pontius Pilate, "-lest in any respect the tradition should falter, as though vague 
and uncertain. But it should be known that the clause, "He descended into Hell," is not added in the Creed of 
the Roman Church, neither is it in that of the Oriental Churches. It seems to be implied, however, when it is 
said that "He was buried." But in the love and zeal for the Divine Scriptures which possess you, you say to 
me, I doubt not, "These things ought to be proved by more evident testimonies from the Divine Scriptures. 
For the more important the things are which are to be believed, so much the more do they need apt and 
undoubted witness." True. But we, as speaking to those who know the law, have left unnoticed, for the sake 
of brevity, a whole forest of testimonies. But if this also be required, let us cite a few out of many, knowing, as 
we do, that to those who are acquainted with the Scriptures, a very ample sea of testimonies lies open. 

19. First of all, then, we must know that the doctrine of the Cross is not regarded by all in the same light. It is 
one thing to the Gentiles, to the Jews another, to Christians another; as also the Apostle says. "We preach 
Christ crucified,-to the Jews a stumbling-block, to the Gentiles foolishness, but to those who are called, both 
Jews and Greeks, Christ, the power of God and the wisdom of God;"(1) and, in the same place, "For the 
preaching of the Cross is to those who perish foolishness, but to those who are saved," that is, to us, it is "the 
Power of God. "(2) The Jews, to whom it had been delivered out of the Law, that Christ should abide for ever, 
were offended by His Cross, because they were unwilling to believe His resurrection. To the Gentiles it 
seemed foolishness that God should have submitted to death, because they were ignorant of the mystery of 
the Incarnation. But Christians, who had accepted His birth and passion in the flesh and His resurrection 
from the dead, of course believed that it was the power of God which had overcome death. 

First, therefore, hear how this very thing is prophetically declared by Isaiah, that the Jews, to whom the 
Prophets had foretold these things, would not believe, bat that they who had never heard them from the 
Prophets, would believe them. "To whom He was not spoken of they shall see, and they that have not heard 
shall understand. "(1) Moreover, this same Isaiah foretells that, while those who were engaged in the study of 
the Law from childhood to old age believed not, to the Gentiles every mystery should be transferred. His 
words are: "And the Lord of Hosts shall make a feast on this mountain unto all nations: they shall drink joy, 
they shall drink wine, they shall be anointed with ointment on this mountain. Deliver all these things to the 
nations. "(2) This was the counsel of the Almighty respecting all the nations. But they who boast themselves 
of their knowledge of the Law will, perhaps, say to us, "You blaspheme in saying that the Lord was 
subjected to the corruption of death and to the suffering of the Cross." Read, therefore, what you find written 
in the Lamentations of Jeremiah: "The Spirit of our countenance, Christ the Lord, was taken in our(3) 

corruptions, of whom we said, we shall live under His shadow among the nations. "(4) Thou hearest how the 
Prophet gays that Christ the Lord was taken, and for us, that is, for our sins, delivered to corruption. Under 
whose shadow, since the people of the Jews have continued in unbelief, he says the Gentiles lie, because 
we live not in Israel, but among the Gentiles. 

20. But, if it does not weary you, let the point out as briefly as possible, specific references to prophecy in the 
Gospels, that those who are being instructed in the first elements of the faith may have these testimonies 
written on their hearts, test any doubt concerning the things which they believe should at any time take them 
by surprise. We are told in the Gospel that Judas, one of Christ's friends and associates at table, betrayed 
Him. Let the show you how this is foretold in the Psalms: "He who hath eaten My bread hath lifted up his heel 
against Me:"(5) and in another place; "My friends and My neighbours drew near and set themselves against 
Me:"(6) and again; "His words were made softer than oil and yet be they very darts. "(7) What then is meant 
by his words were made soft? "Judas came to Jesus and said unto Him, Hail, Master, and kissed Him."(1) 
Thus through the soft blandishment of a kiss he implanted the execrable dart of betrayal. On which the Lord 
said to him, "Judas, betrayest thou the Son of Man with a kiss?"(2) You observe that He was appraised by 
the traitor's covetousness at thirty pieces of silver. Of this also the Prophet speaks, "And I said unto them, If 
ye think good, give me my price, or if not, forbear;" and presently, "I received from them," he says, "thirty 
pieces of silver, and I cast them into the house of the Lord, into the foundry. "(3) Is not this what is written in the 
Gospels, that Judas, "repenting of what he had done, brought back the money, and threw it down in the 
temple and departed?"(4) Well did He call it His price, as though blaming and upbraiding. For He had done 
so many good works among them, He had given sight to the blind, feet to the lame, the power of walking to 
the palsied, life also to the dead; for all these good works they paid Him death as His price, appraised at 
thirty pieces of silver. It is related also in the Gospels that He was bound. This also the word of prophecy 
had foretold by Isaiah, saying, "Woe unto their soul, who have devised a most evil device against 
themselves, saying, Let us bind the just One, seeing that He is unprofitable to us. "(5) 

21. But, says some one, "Are these things to be understood of the Lord? Could the Lord be held prisoner by 
men and dragged to judgment?" Of this also the same Prophet shall convince you. For he says, "The Lord 
Himself shall come into judgment with the elders and princes of the people. "(6) The Lord is judged then 
according to the Prophet's testimony, and not only judged, but scourged, and smitten on the face with the 
palms (of men's bands), and spitted on, and suffers every insult and indignity for our sake. And because all 
who should hear these things preached by the Apostles would be perfectly amazed, therefore also the 
Prophet speaking in their person exclaims, "Lord, who hath believed our report?"(7) For it is incredible that 
God, the Son of God, should be spoken of and preached as having suffered these things. For this reason 
they are foretold by the Prophets, lest any doubt should spring up in those who are about to believe. Christ 
the Lord Himself therefore in His own person, says, "I gave My back to the scourges, and My cheeks to the 
palms, (1) I turned not away My face from shame and spitting. "(2) This also is written among His other 
sufferings, that they bound Him, and led Him away to Pilate. This also the Prophet foretold, saying, "And 
they bound him and conducted Him as a pledge of friendship (xenium) to King Jarim."(3) But some one 
objects, "But Pilate was not a king." Hear then what the Gospel relates next, "Pilate hearing that He was from 
Galilee, sent Him to Herod, who was king in Israel at that time."(4)And rightly does the Prophet add the name 
"Jarim," which means "a wild-vine, for Herod was not of the house of Israel, nor of that Israelitish vine which 
the Lord had brought out of Egypt, and "planted in a very fruitful hill, "(5) but was a wild vine, i.e. of an alien 
stock. Rightly, therefore, was he called "a wild-vine," because he in nowise sprung from the shoots of the 
vine of Israel. And whereas the Prophet used the phrase "xenium," "A pledge of friendship," this also 
corresponds, "For Herod and Pilate," as the Gospel witnesses, "from being enemies were made 

friends, "(6) and, as though in token of their reconciliation, each sent Jesus bound to the other. What matter, 
so long as Jesus, as Saviour, reconciles those who were at variance, and restores peace, and also brings 
back concord! Wherefore of this also it is written in Job, "May the Lord reconcile the hearts of the princes of 
the earth."(7) 

22. It is related that when Pilate would fain have released Him all the people cried out, "Crucify Him, Crucify 
Him!"(8) This also the Prophet Jeremiah foretells, saying, in the person of the Lord Himself, "My inheritance 
is become to Me as a lion in the forest. He hath uttered his voice against Me, wherefore I have hated it. And 
therefore (saith He) I have forsaken and left My house. "(9) And again in another place, "Against whom have 
ye opened your mouth, and against whom have ye let loose your tongues?"(1 0) When He stood before His 
judge, it is written that "He held His peace. "(1 1) Many Scriptures testify of this. In the Psalms it is written, "I 
became as a man that beareth not, and in whose mouth are no reproofs. "(12) And again, "I was as a deaf 
man, and heard not, and as one that is dumb and openeth not his mouth." And again another Prophet saith, 
"As a lamb before her shearer, so He opened not Ills mouth. In His humiliation His judgment was taken 
away."(1) It is written that there was put on Him a crown of thorns. Of this hear in the Canticles the voice of 
God the Father marvelling at the iniquity of Jerusalem in the insult done to His Son: "Go forth and see, ye 
daughters of Jerusalem, the crown wherewith His mother hath crowned Him"(2) Moreover, of the thorns 

another Prophet makes mention: "I looked that she should bring forth grapes, and she brought forth thorns, 
and instead of righteousness a cry. "(3) But that thou mayest know the secrets of the mystery, it behoved 
Him, Who came to take away the sins of the world, to free the earth also from the curse, which it had 
received through the sin of the first man, when the Lord said "Cursed be the earth in thy labours: thorns: and 
thistles shall it bring forth to thee. "(4) For this cause, therefore, is Jesus crowned with thorns, that first 
sentence of condemnation might be remitted. He is led to the cross, and the life of the whole word is 
suspended on the wood of which it is made. I would point out how this also is confirmed by testimony from 
the Prophets. You find Jeremiah speaking of it thus, "Come and let us cast wood into His bread, and crush 
Him out of the land of the living. "(5) And again, Moses, mourning over them, says, "Thy life shall be 
suspended before thine eyes, and thou shall fear day and night, and shall not believe thy life. "(6) But we 
must pass on, for already we are exceeding our proposed measure of brevity, and are lengthening out our 
"short word" by a long dissertation. Yet we will add a few words more, test we should seem altogether to 
have passed over what we undertook. 

23. It is written that when the side of Jesus was pierced "He shed thereout blood and water."(7) This has a 
mystical meaning. For Himself had said, "Out of His belly shall flow rivers of living water."(8) But He shed 
forth blood also, of which the Jews sought that it might be upon themselves and upon their children. He shed 
forth water, therefore, which might wash believers; He shed forth blood also which might condemn 
unbelievers. Yet it might be understood also as prefiguring the twofold grace of baptism, one that which is 
given by the baptism of water, the other that which is sought through martyrdom in the outpouring of blood, 
for both are called baptism. But if you ask further why our Lord is said to have poured forth blood and water 
from His side rather than from any other member, I imagine that by the rib in the side the woman is signified. 
Since the fountain of sin and death proceeded from the first woman, who was the rib of the first Adam, the 
fountain of redemption and life is drawn from the rib of the second Adam. 

24. It is written that in our Lord's passion there was darkness over the earth from the sixth hour until the ninth. 
To this also you will find the Prophet witnessing, "Thy Sun shall go down at mid-day. "(1) And again, the 
Prophet Zechariah, "In that day there shall be no more light. There shall be cold and frost in one day, and 
that day known to the Lord; and it shall be neither day nor night, hut at evening time there shall be light"(2) 
What plainer language could the Prophet have used for his words to seem not so much a prophecy of the 
future as a narrative of the past? He foretold both the cold and the frost. For Peter was warming himself at the 
fire because it was cold: and he was suffering cold not only in respect of the time (the early hour), but also of 
his faith. There is added, (2)"and that day shall be known to the Lord; and it shall be neither day nor night." 
What is "neither day nor night?" Did he not plainly speak of the darkness interposed in the day, and then the 
light afterwards restored? That was not day, for it did not begin with sun-rise, neither was it complete night, for 
it did not, when the day was ended, receive its due space from the beginning or prolong it to the end; but the 
light which had been driven away by the crime of wicked men is restored at evening time. For after the ninth 
hour, the darkness is driven away, and the sun is restored to the world. Again, another Prophet witnesses of 
the same, "The light shall be darkened upon the earth in the day-time. "(3) 

25. The Gospel further relates that the soldiers parted the garments of Jesus among themselves, and cast 
lots upon His vesture. The Holy Spirit provided that this also should be witnessed beforehand by the 
Prophets, for David says, "They parted my garments among them, and upon my vesture they did cast 
lots. "(4) Nor were the Prophets silent even as to the robe, the scarlet robe, which the soldiers are said to 
have put upon Him in mockery. Listen to Isaiah, "Who is this that cometh from Edom, red in his garments 
from Bozrah? Wherefore are thy garments red, and thy raiment as though thou hadst trodden in the 
wine-press?" To which Himself replies, "I have trodden the wine-press alone, O daughter of Sion."(1) For He 
alone it is Who hath not sinned, and hath taken away the sins of the world. For if by one man death could 
enter into the world, how much more by one man. Who was God also, could life be restored! 

26. It is related also that vinegar was given Him to drink, or wine mingled with myrrh which is bitterer than gall. 
Hear what the Prophet has foretold of this: "They gave Me gall to eat, and when I was thirsty they gave Me 
vinegar to drink."(2) Agreeably with which Moses, even in his day, said to the people, "Their vine is of the 
vineyards of Sodom, and their branch of Gomorrah; their grape is a grape of gall, and their cluster a cluster 
of bittern ess. "(3) And again, the Prophet upbraiding them says, "Oh foolish people and unwise, have ye thus 
requited the Lord?"(4) Moreover, in the Canticles the same things are foretold, where even the garden in 
which the Lord was crucified is indicated: "I have come into my garden, my sister, my spouse, and have 
gathered in my myrrh. "(5) Here the Prophet has plainly set forth the wine mingled with myrrh which the Lord 
has given Him to drink. 

27. Next it is written that "He gave up the ghost."(6) This also had been foretold, by the Prophet, who says, 
addressing the Father in the Person of the Son. "Into Thy hands I commend My Spirit. "(7) He is related also 
to have been buried, and a great stone laid at the door of the sepulchre. Hear what the word of prophecy 
foretold by Jeremiah concerning this also, "They have cut off my life in the pit, and have laid a stone upon 
Me. "(8) These words of the Prophet point most plainly to His burial. Here are yet others, "The righteous hath 

been taken away from beholding iniquity, and his place is in peace. "(9) And in another place, "I will give the 
malignant for his burial;"(10) and yet once more, "He hath lain down and slept as a lion, and as a lion's 
whelp; who shall rouse Him tip?"(1 1) 

28. That He descended into hell is also evidently foretold in the Psalms, where it is said, "Thou hast brought 
Me also into the dust of the death. "(12) And again, "What profit is there in my blood, when I shall have 
descended into corruption?"(13) And again, "I descended into the deep mire, where there is no bottom. "(1) 
Moreover, John says, "Art Thou He that shall come (into hell, without doubt), or do we look for another?"(2) 
Whence also Peter says that "Christ being put to death in the flesh, but quickened in the Spirit which dwells 
in Him, descended to the spirits who were shut up in prison, who in the days of Noah believed not, to preach 
unto them;"(3) where also what He did in hell is declared. Moreover, the Lord says by the Prophet, as though 
speaking of the future, "Thou wilt not leave my soul in hell, neither wilt Thou stiffer Thy Holy One to see 
corruption. "(4) Which again, in prophetic language he speaks of as actually fulfilled, "O Lord, Thou hast 
brought my soul out of hell: Thou hast saved me from them that go down into the pit."(5) There follows next,- 

29. THE THIRD DAY HE ROSE AGAIN FROM THE DEAD. The glory of Christ's resurrection threw a lustre 
upon everything which before had the appearance of weakness and frailty. If a while since it seemed to you 
impossible that an immortal Being could die, you see now that He who has overcome death and is risen 
again cannot be mortal. But understand herein the goodness of the Creator, that so far as you by sinning 
have cast yourself down, so far has He descended in following you. And do not impute lack of power to 
God, the Creator of all things, by imagining his work to have ended in the fall into an abyss which He in His 
redemptive purpose was unable to reach. We speak of infernal and supernal, because we are bounded by 
the definite circumference of the body, and are confined within the limits of the region prescribed to us. But to 
God, Who is present everywhere and absent nowhere, what is infernal and what supernal? Notwithstanding, 
through the assumption of a body there is room for these also. The flesh which had been deposited in the 
sepulchre, is raised, that might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet, "Thou wilt not suffer Thy Holy 
One to see corruption. "(6) He returned, therefore, a victor from the dead, leading with Him the spoils of hell. 
For He led forth those who were held in captivity by death, as He Himself had foretold, when He said, 
"When I shall be lifted up from the earth I shall draw all unto Me." To this the Gospel bears witness, when it 
says, "The graves were opened, and many bodies of saints which slept arose, and appeared unto many, 
and entered into the holy City,"(1) that city, doubtless, of which the Apostle says, "Jerusalem which is above 
is free, which is the Mother of us all. "(2) As also he says again to the Hebrews, "It became Him, for Whom 
are all things, and by Whom are all things, Who had brought many sons into glory, to make the Author of 
their salvation perfect through suffering. "(3) Sitting, therefore, on the right hand of God in the highest heavens, 
He placed there that human flesh, made perfect through sufferings, which had fallen to death by the lapse of 
the first man, but was now restored by the virtue of the resurrection. Whence also the Apostle says, "Who 
hath raised us up together and made us sit together in the heavenly places. "(4) For He was the potter, Who, 
as the Prophet Jeremiah teaches, "took up again with His hands, and formed anew, as it seemed good to 
Him, the vessel which had fallen from His hands and was broken in pieces. "(6) And it seemed good to Him 
that the mortal and corruptible body which He had assumed, this body raised from the rocky sepulchre and 
rendered immortal and incorruptible, He should now place not on the earth but in heaven, and at His 
Father's right hand. The Scriptures of the Old Testament are full of these mysteries. No Prophet, no 
Lawgiver, no Psalmist is silent, but almost every one of the sacred pages speaks of them. It seems 
superfluous, therefore, to linger in collecting testimonies; vet we will cite some few, remitting those who 
desire to drink more largely to the well-springs of the divine volumes themselves. 

30. It is said then in the Psalms, "I laid me down and slept, and rose up again, because the Lord sustained 
me. "(6) Again, in another place, "Because of the wretchedness of the needy and the groaning of the poor, 
now will I arise, saith the Lord. "(7) And elsewhere, as we have said above, "O Lord, thou hast brought my 
soul out of hell; Thou hast saved me from them that go down into the pit."(8) And in another place, "Because 
Thou hast turned and quickened me, and brought me out of the deep of the earth again. "(9) In the 87th 
Psalm He is most evidently spoken of: "He became as a man without help, free among the dead. "(10) It is 
not said "a man," but "as a man." For in that He descended into hell, He was "as a man:" but He was "free 
among the dead." because He could not be detained by death. And therefore in the one nature the power of 
human weakness, in the other the power of divine majesty is exhibited. The Prophet Hosea also speaks 
most manifestly of the third day in this wise," After two days He will heal us; but on the third day we shall rise 
and shall live in His presence. "(1) This he says in the person of those who, rising with Him on the third day, 
are recalled from death to life. And they are the same persons who say, "On the third day we shall rise 
again, and shall live in His presence." But Isaiah says plainly, "Who brought forth from the earth the great 
Shepherd of the sheep."(2) Then, that the women were to see His resurrection, while the Scribes and 
Pharisees and the people disbelieved, this also Isaiah foretold in these words, "Ye women, who come from 
beholding, come: for it is a people that hath no understanding. "(3) But as to the women who are related to 
have gone to the sepulchre after the resurrection, and to have sought Him without finding, as Mary 

Magdalene, who is related to have come to the sepulchre before it was light, and not finding Him, to have 
said, weeping, to the angels who were there, "They have taken away the Lord, and I know not where they 
have laid Him"(4)-even this is foretold in the Canticles: "On my bed I sought Him Whom my soul loveth; I 
sought Him in the night, and found Him not."(5) Of those also who found Him, and held Him by the feet, it is 
foretold, in the same book, "I will hold Him Whom my soul loveth, and will not let Him go. "(6) Take these 
passages, a few of many; for being intent on brevity we cannot heap together more. 

31 . HE ASCENDED INTO HEAVEN, AND SITTETH ON THE RIGHT HAND OF THE FATHER: FROM 
THENCE HE SHALL COME TO JUDGE THE QUICK AND THE DEAD. These clauses follow with suitable 
brevity at the end of this part of the Creed which treats of the Son. What is said is plain, but the question is 
how and in what sense it is to be understood. For to "ascend," and to "sit," and to "come," unless you 
understand the words in accordance with the dignity of the divine nature, appear to point to something of 
human weakness. For having consummated what was to be done on earth, and having recalled souls from 
the captivity of hell, He is spoken of as ascending up to heaven, as the Prophet had foretold, "Ascending up 
on high He led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men,"(1) those gifts, namely, which Peter, in the Acts of 
the Apostles, spoke of concerning the Holy Ghost, "Being therefore by the right hand of God exalted, He 
hath shed forth this gift which ye do see and hear."(2) He gave the gift of the Holy Ghost to men, because the 
captives, whom the devil had before carried into hell through sin, Christ by His resurrection from death 
recalled to heaven. He ascended therefore into heaven, not where God the Word had not been before, for 
He was always in heaven, and abode in the Father, but where the Word made flesh had not been seated 
before. Lastly, since this entrance within the gates of heaven seemed new to its ministers and princes, they 
say to one another, on seeing the nature of flesh penetrating into the secret recesses of heaven, as David 
full of the Holy Ghost, declares, "Lift up your gates, ye princes, and be ye lift up ye everlasting gates, and the 
King of glory shall enter in. Who is the King of glory? The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord might in battle. "(3) 
Which words are spoken not with reference to the power of the divine nature, but with reference to the 
novelty of flesh ascending to the right hand of God. The same David says elsewhere, "God hath ascended 
jubilantly, and the Lord with the sound of the trumpet."(4) For conquerors are wont to return from battle with the 
sound of the trumpet. Of Him also it is said, "Who buildeth up His ascent in heaven. "(5) And again, "Who 
hath ascended above the cherubims, flying upon the wings of the winds. "(6) 

32. To sit at the right hand of the Father is a mystery belonging to the Incarnation. For it does not befit that 
incorporeal nature without the assumption of flesh; neither is the excellency of a heavenly seat sought for the 
divine nature, but for the human. Whence it is said of Him, "Thy seat, O God, is prepared from thence 
forward; Thou art from everlasting. "(7) The seat, then, whereon the Lord Jesus was to sit, was prepared from 
everlasting, "in whose name every knee should bow, of things in heaven and things on earth, and things 
tinder the earth; and every tongue shall confess to Him that Jesus is Lord in the glory of God the Father;"(8) 
of Whom also David thus speaks, "The Lord said unto my Lord. Sit Thou on my right hand until I make Thine 
enemies Thy footstool. "(9) Referring to which words the Lord in the Gospel said to the Pharisees, "If 
therefore David in spirit calleth Him Lord, how is He his Son?"(1) By which He shewed that according to the 
Spirit He was the Lord, according to the flesh He was the Son, of David. Whence also the Lord Himself says 
in another place, "Verily I say unto you, henceforth ye shall see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of the 
power of God. "(2) And the Apostle Peter says of Christ, "Who is on the right hand of God, seated in the 
heavens. "(3) And Paul also, writing to the Ephesians, "According to the working of the might of His power, 
which He wrought in Christ, when He raised Him froth the dead, and seated Him on His right hand. "(4) 

33. That He shall come to judge the quick and the dead we are taught by many testimonies of the divine 
Scriptures. But before we cite what the Prophets say on this point, we think it necessary to remind you that 
this doctrine of the faith would have us daily solicitous concerning the coming of the Judge, that we may so 
frame our conduct as having to give account to the Judge who is at hand. For this is what the Prophet said of 
the than who is blessed, that, "He ordereth his words in judgment."(5) When, however, He is said to judge 
the quick and the dead, this does not mean that some will come to judgment who are still living, others who 
are already dead; but that He will judge both souls and bodies, where, by souls are meant "the quick," and 
the bodies "the dead;" as also the Lord Himself saith in the Gospel, "Fear not them who are able to kill the 
body, but are not able to hurt the soul; but rather fear Him who is able to destroy both soul and body in 
Gehenna."(6) 

34. Now let us shew briefly, if you will, that these things were foretold by the Prophets. You will yourself, since 
you are so minded, gather together more from the ample range of the Scriptures. The Prophet Malachi 
says, "Behold the Lord Almighty shall come, and who shall abide the day of His coming, or who shall abide 
the sight of Him? For He doth come as the fire of a furnace and as fuller's soap: and He shall sit, refining and 
purifying as it were gold and silver."(7) But that thou mayest know more certainly Who this Lord is of Whom 
these things are said, hear what the Prophet Daniel also foretells: "I saw," saith he, "in the vision of the night, 
and, behold, One like the Son of Man coming with the clouds of heaven, and He came nigh to the Ancient of 
days, and was brought near before Him; and there was given to Him dominion, and honour, and a kingdom. 

And all peoples, tribes, and languages shall serve Him. And His dominion is an eternal dominion which 
shall not pass away, and His kingdom shall not be destroyed. "(1) By these words we are taught not only of 
His coming and judgment, but of His dominion and kingdom, that His dominion is eternal, and His kingdom 
indestructible, without end; as it is said in the Creed, (2) "and of His kingdom there shall be no end." So that 
one who says that Christ's kingdom shall one day have an end is very far from the faith. Yet it behoves us to 
know that the enemy is wont to counterfeit this salutary advent of Christ with cunning fraud in order to deceive 
the faithful, and in the place of the Son of Man, Who is looked for as coming in the majesty of His Father, to 
prepare the Son of Perdition with prodigies and lying signs, that instead of Christ he may introduce Antichrist 
into the world; of whom the Lord Himself warned the Jews beforehand in the Gospels, "Because I am come 
in My Father's Name, and ye received Me not, another will come in his own name, and him ye will 
receive. "(3) And again, "When ye shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, 
standing in the holy place, let him that readeth understand. "(4) Daniel, therefore, in his visions speaks very 
fully and amply of the coming of that delusion: but it is not worth while to cite instances, for we have enlarged 
enough already; we therefore refer any one who may wish to know more concerning these matters to the 
visions themselves. The Apostle also himself says, "Let no than deceive you by any means, for that day 
shall not come except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the Son of Perdition, 
who opposeth and exalteth himself above everything that is called God, or that is worshipped, so that he 
sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself as though himself were God. "(5) And soon afterwards, "Then 
shall that wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus shall slay with the breath of His mouth, and shall 
destroy with the brightness of His coming: whose coming is after the working of Satan with all power and 
signs and lying wonders. "(6) And again, shortly afterwards, "And therefore the Lord shall send unto them 
strong delusion, that they may believe a lie, that all may be judged who have not believed the truth.'" For this 
reason, therefore, is this "delusion" foretold unto us by the words of Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles, 
lest any one should mistake the coming of Antichrist for the coming of Christ. But as the Lord Himself says, " 
When they shall say unto you, lo, here is Christ, or lo, He is there, believe it not. For many false Christs and 
false prophets shall come and shall seduce many. "(8) But let us see how He hath pointed out the judgment 
of the true Christ: "As the lightning shineth from the east unto the west, so shall the coming of the Son of Man 
be. "(2) When, therefore, the true Lord Jesus Christ shall come, He will sit and set up his throne of judgment. 
As also He says in the Gospel, "He shall separate the sheep from the goats, "(4) that is, the righteous from 
the unrighteous; as the Apostle writes, "We must all stand before the judgment-seat of Christ, that every man 
may receive the awards due to the body, according as he hath done, whether they be good or evil. "(5) 
Moreover, the judgment will be not only for deeds, but for thoughts also, as the same Apostle saith, "Their 
thoughts mutually accusing or else excusing One another, in the day when God shall judge the secrets of 
men. "(6) But on these points let this suffice. Next follows in the order of the faith,— 

35. AND IN THE HOLY GHOST. What has been delivered above somewhat at large concerning Christ 
relates to the mystery of His Incarnation and of His Passion, and, by thus intervening, as belonging to His 
Person, has somewhat delayed the mention of the Holy Spirit. Otherwise, if the divine nature alone be taken 
into account, as in the beginning of the Creed we say "I believe in God the Father Almighty," and afterwards, 
"In Jesus Christ His only Son our Lord," so in like manner we add, " And in the Holy Ghost." But all of these 
particulars which are spoken of above concerning Christ relate, as we have said, to the dispensation of the 
flesh (to His Incarnation). By the mention of the Holy Spirit, the mystery of the Trinity is completed. For as one 
Father is mentioned, and there is no other Father, and one only-begotten Son is mentioned, and there is no 
other only-begot-ten Son, so also there is one Holy Ghost, and there cannot be another Holy Ghost. In 
order, therefore, that the Persons may be distinguished, the terms expressing relationship (the properties) 
are varied, whereby the first is understood to be the Father, of Whom are all things, Who Himself also hath 
no Father, the second the Son, as born of the Father, and the third the Holy Ghost, as proceeding from 
both,(1) and sanctifying all things. But that in the Trinity one and the same Godhead may be set forth, since, 
prefixing the preposition "in" we say that we believe " in God the Father," so also we say, "in Christ His Son," 
so also "in the Holy Ghost." But our meaning will be made more plain in what follows. For the Creed 
proceeds, - 

36. "THE HOLY CHURCH; THE FORGIVENESS OF SIN, THE RESURRECTION OF THIS FLESH." It is not 
said, "In the holy Church," nor'ln the forgiveness of sins," nor " In the resurrection of the flesh." For if the 
preposition "in" had been added, it would have had the same force as in the preceding articles. But now in 
those clauses in which the faith concerning the Godhead is declared, we say " In God the Father," and " In 
Jesus Christ His Son," and "In the Holy Ghost," but in the rest, where we speak not of the Godhead but of 
creatures and mysteries, the preposition "in" is not added. We do not say "We believe in the holy Church," 
but "We believe the holy Church," not as God, but as the Church gathered together to God: and we believe 
that there is "forgiveness of sins;" we do not say "We believe in the forgiveness of sins;" and we believe that 
there will be a "Resurrection of the flesh;" we do not say "We believe in the resurrection of the flesh." By this 
monosyllabic preposition, therefore, the Creator is distinguished from the creatures, and things divine are 

separated from things human. 

This then is the Holy Ghost, who in the Old Testament inspired the Law and the Prophets, in the New the 
Gospels and the Epistles. Whence also the Apostle says, " All Scripture given by inspiration of God is 
profitable for instruction. "(2) And therefore it seems proper in this place to enumerate, as we have learnt from 
the tradition of the Fathers, the books of the New and of the Old Testament, which, according to the tradition 
of our forefathers, are believed to have been inspired by the Holy Ghost, and have been handed down to 
the Churches of Christ. 

37. Of the Old Testament, therefore, first of all there have been handed down five books of Moses, Genesis, 
Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy; Then Jesus Nave, (Joshua the son of Nun), The Book of 
Judges together with Ruth; then four books of Kings (Reigns), which the Hebrews reckon two; the Book of 
Omissions, which is entitled the Book of Days (Chronicles), and two books of Ezra (Ezra and Nehemiah), 
which the Hebrews reckon one, and Esther; of the Prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Daniel; 
moreover of the twelve (minor) Prophets, one hook; Job also and the Psalms of David, each one book. 
Solomon gave three books to the Churches, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles. These comprise the books 
of the Old Testament. 

Of the New there are four Gospels, Matthew, Mark, Luke, John; the Acts of the Apostles, written by Luke; 
fourteen Epistles of the Apostle Paul, two of the Apostle Pete, one of James, brother of the Lord and 
Apostle, one of Jude, three of John, the Revelation of John. These are the books which the Fathers have 
comprised within the Canon, and from which they would have us deduce the proofs of our faith. 

38. But it should be known that there are also other books which our fathers call not "Canonical" but 
"Ecclesiastical:" that is to say, Wisdom, called the Wisdom of Solomon, and another Wisdom, called the 
Wisdom of the Son of Syrach, which last-mentioned the Latins called by the general title Ecclesiasticus, 
designating not the author of the book, but the character of the writing. To the same class belong the Book of 
Tobit, and the Book of Judith, and the Books of the Maccabees. In the New Testament the little book which 
is called the Book of the Pastor of Hermas, [and that] which is called The Two Ways,(1) or the Judgment of 
Peter; all of which they would have read in the Churches, but not appealed to for the confirmation of doctrine. 
The other writings they have named "Apocrypha." These they would not have read in the Churches. 
These are the traditions which the Fathers have handed down to us, which, as I said, I have thought it 
opportune to set forth in this place, for the instruction of those who are being taught the first elements of the 
Church and of the Faith, that they may know from what fountains of the Word of God their draughts must be 
taken. 

39. We come next in the order of belief to the HOLY CHURCH. We have mentioned above why the Creed 
does not say here, as in the preceding article, " In the Holy Church." They, therefore, who were taught above 
to believe in one God, under the mystery of the Trinity, must believe this also, that there is one holy Church in 
which there is one faith and one baptism, in which is believed one God the Father, and one Lord Jesus 
Christ, His Son, and one Holy Ghost. This is that holy Church which is without spot or wrinkle. For many 
others have gathered together Churches, as Marcion, and Valentinus, and Ebion, and Manichaeus, and 
Arius, and all the other heretics. But those Churches are not without spot or wrinkle of unfaithfulness. And 
therefore the Prophet said of them, "I hate the Church of the malignants, and I will not sit with the ungodly. "(1) 
But of this Church which keeps tim faith of Christ entire, hear what the Holy Spirit says in the Canticles, "My 
Glove is one; the perfect one of her mother is one. "(2) He then who receives this faith in the Church let him 
not turn aside in the Council of vanity, and let him not enter in with those who practise iniquity. 

For Marcion's assembly is a Council of vanity in that he denies that the Father of Christ is God, the Creator, 
who by His Son made the world. Ebion's is a Council of vanity since he teaches that, while we believe in 
Christ, we are withal to observe the circumcision of the flesh, the keeping of the Sabbath, the accustomed 
sacrifices, and all the other ordinances according to the letter of the Law. Manichaeus' is a Council of vanity 
in regard of his teaching; first in that he calls himself the Paraclete, then that he says that the world was made 
by an evil God, denies God the Creator, rejects the Old Testament, asserts two natures, one good the other 
evil, mutually opposing one another, affirms that men's souls are co-eternal with God, that, according to the 
Pythagoreans, they return through divers circles of nativity into cattle and animals and beasts, denies the 
resurrection of our flesh, maintains that the passion and nativity of the Lord were not in the verity of flesh, but 
only in appearance. It was the Council of vanity when Paul of Samosata and his successor Photinus 
afterwards taught, that Christ was not born of the Father before the world, but had His beginning from Mary, 
and believed not that being God He was born man, but that of man He was made God. It was the Council of 
vanity when Arius and Eunomius taught as their determinate opinion that the Son of God was not born of the 
very substance of the Father, but was created out of nothing, and that the Son of God had a beginning, and 
is inferior to the Father: moreover they affirm that the Holy Ghost is not only inferior to the Son, but is also a 
ministering Spirit.(1) Theirs also is a Council of vanity who confess indeed that the Son is of the substance of 
the Father, but distinguish and separate the Holy Spirit, while yet the Saviour shews in the Gospel that the 
power and Godhead of the Trinity are one and the same, saying, "Baptize all nations in the Name of the 

Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. "(2) and it is plainly impious for man to put asunder what God 
bath joined together. That also is the Council of vanity which a pertinacious and wicked contention formerly 
gathered together, affirming that Christ assumed human flesh indeed, but not a rational soul withal, since 
Christ conferred one and the same salvation on the flesh, and the animal soul, and the reason and mind of 
man. That also is the Council of vanity which Donatus drew together throughout Africa, by charging the 
Church with traditorship (delivering up the sacred books), and with which Novatus disturbed men's minds by 
denying the grant of repentance to the lapsed, and condemning second marriages, though contracted 
possibly of necessity. All of these then avoid as congregations of malignants. Those also, if such there be, 
who are said to assert that the Son of God does not see or know the Father, as Himself is known and seen 
by the Father; or that the kingdom of Christ will have an end; or that the flesh will not be raised in the 
complete restoration of its substance; these also who deny that there will be a just judgment of God in 
respect of all, and affirm that the devil will be absolved from the punishment of damnation due to him. To all 
these, I say, let the believer turn a deaf ear. But hold fast by the holy Church, which confesses God the 
Father Almighty, and His only Son, Jesus Christ our Lord, and the Holy Ghost, of one concordant and 
harmonious substance, believes that the Son of God was born of the Virgin, suffered for man's salvation, 
rose again from the dead in the same flesh in which he was born; and, lastly, hopes that He will come the 
Judge of all, through Whom also both the FORGIVENESS OF SINS AND THE RESURRECTION OF THE 
FLESH are preached. 

40. As to the FORGIVENESS OF SINS, it ought to be enough simple to believe. For who would ask the 
cause or the reason when a Prince grants indulgence? When the liberality of an earthly sovereign is no fit 
subject for discussion, shall man's temerity discuss God's largess? For the Pagans are wont to ridicule us, 
saying that we deceive ourselves, fancying that crimes committed in deed can be purged by words. And 
they say, "Can he who has committed murder be no murderer, and he who has committed adultery be 
accounted no adulterer? How then shall one guilty of crimes of this sort all of a sudden be made holy?" But 
to this, as I said, we answer better by faith than by reason. For he is King of all who hath promised it: He is 
Lord of heaven and earth who assures us of it. Would you have me refuse to believe that He who made me 
a man of the dust of the earth can of a guilty person make me innocent? And that He who when I was blind 
made me see, or when I was deaf made me bear, or lame walk, can recover for me my lost innocence? And 
to come to the witness of Nature-to kill a man is not always criminal, but to kill of malice, not by law, is 
criminal. It is not the deed then, in such mailers, that condemns me, because sometimes it is rightly done, but 
the evil intention of the mind. If then my mind which had been rendered criminal, and in which the sin 
originated, is corrected, why should I seem to you incapable of being made innocent, who before was 
criminal? For if it is plain, as I have shewn, that crime consists not in the deed but in the will, as an evil will, 
prompted by an evil demon, has made me obnoxious to sin and death, so the will prompted by the good 
God, being changed to good, hath restored me to innocence and life. It is the same also in all other crimes. 
In this way there is found to be no opposition between our faith and natural reason, while forgiveness of sins 
is imputed not to deeds, which when once done cannot be changed, but to the mind, which it is certain can 
be converted from bad to good. 

41 . This last article, which affirms the RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH, concludes the sum of all perfection 
with succinct brevity. Although on this point also the faith of the Church is impugned, not only by Gentiles, but 
by heretics likewise. For Valentinus altogether denies the resurrection of the flesh, so do the Manicheans, 
as we shewed above. But they refuse to listen to the Prophet Isaiah when he says, "The dead shall rise, and 
they who are in the graves shall be raised, "(1) or to most wise Daniel, when he declares, "Then they who 
are in the dust of the earth shall arise, these to eternal life, but those to shame and confusion. "(2) Yet even in 
the Gospels, which they appear to receive, they ought to learn from our Lord and Saviour, Who says, when 
instructing the Sadducees, " As touching the resurrection of the dead: have ye not read how He saith to 
Moses in the Bush, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of Jacob? Now God is not the God 
of the dead but of the living. "(3) Where in what goes before He declares what and how great is the glory of 
the resurrection, saying, " But in the resurrection of the dead they will neither marry or be given in marriage, 
but will be as the angels of God. "(4) But the virtue of the resurrection confers on men an angelical state, so 
that they who have risen from the earth shall not live again on the earth with the brute animals but with angels 
in heaven-yet those only whose purer life has fitted them forthis-those, namely, who even now preserving 
the flesh of their soul in chastity, have brought it into subjection to the Holy Spirit, and thus with every stain of 
sins done away and changed into spiritual glory by the virtue of santification, have been counted worthy to 
have it admitted into the society of angels. 

42. But unbelievers cry, "How can the flesh, which has been putrified and dissolved, or changed into dust, 
sometimes also swallowed up by the sea, and dispersed by the waves, be gathered up again, and again 
made one, and a man's body formed anew out of it?" To whom our first answer is in Paul's words: " Thou 
feel, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die. And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not the 
body, which shall be, but bare grain of wheat or of some other seed: but God giveth it a body as seemeth 

good to Him. "(5) Did you not believe that which you see taking place every year in the seeds which you 
cast into the ground will come to pass in your flesh which by the law of God is sown in the earth? Why, pray, 
have you so mean an opinion of God's power that you do not believe it possible for the scattered dust of 
which each man's flesh was composed to be re-collected and restored to its own original fabric? Do you 
refuse to admit the fact when you see mortal ingenuity search for veins of metal deeply buried in the ground, 
and the experienced eye discover gold where the inexperienced thinks there is nothing but earth? Why 
should we refuse to grant these things to Him who made man, when he whom He made can do so much? 
And when mortal ingenuity discovers that gold has its own proper vein, and silver another, and that a far 
different vein of copper, and diverse and distinct veins of iron and lead lie concealed beneath what has the 
appearance of earth, shall divine power be thought unable to discover and distinguish the component 
particles belonging to each man's flesh, even though they seem to be dispersed? 

43. But let us endeavour to assist those souls which fail in their faith through reasons drawn from nature. If 
one should mix different sorts of seeds together and sow them indiscriminately in the earth, will not the grain 
of each several kind, wherever it may have been thrown, shoot forth at the proper time in accordance with its 
own specific nature so as to reproduce the condition of its own form and its own body. 

Thus then the substance of each individual flesh, though its particles have been variously and diversely 
scattered, has within it an immortal principle, since it is the flesh of an immortal soul, and at the time which 
God in His good pleasure shall appoint, there will be collected from the earth and drawn to it, its own 
component particles, which will be restored to that form which death had formerly dissolved. And thus it will 
come to pass that to each soul will be restored, not a confused or foreign body but its own which it had when 
alive, in order that the flesh together with its own soul may for the conflicts of the present life either be 
crowned if undefiled, or punished if defiled. And accordingly our Church. (1) in teaching the faith instead of 
"the Resurrection of the flesh," as the Creed is delivered in other Churches, guardedly adds the pronoun 
"this"-" the resurrection of this flesh." " Of this," that is, no doubt, of the person who rehearses the Creed, 
making the sign of the cross upon his forehead, while he says the word, that each believer may know that 
his flesh, if he have kept it clean from sin, will be a vessel of honour, useful to the Lord, prepared for every 
good work; but, if defiled by sins, that it will be a vessel of wrath destined to destruction. 
But now, concerning the glory of the resurrection and the greatness of the promise by which God has bound 
Himself, if any one desires to be more fully informed, he will find notices in almost all the divine volumes, out 
of which, simply by way of bringing them to remembrance, we will mention a few passages in the present 
place, and then make an end of the work which you have enjoined. The Apostle Paul makes use of such 
arguments as the following in asserting that mortal flesh will rise again. "But if there be no resurrection of the 
dead, then is not Christ risen. And if Christ be not risen, our preaching is vain and your faith is vain."(1) And 
presently afterwards, "But now is Christ risen from the dead, the first-fruits of them that sleep. For since by 
man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ 
shall all be made alive. But every man in his own order. Christ the first-fruits, afterwards they that are Christ's 
at His coming, then cometh the end. "(2) And afterways he adds, "Behold I shew you a mystery: We shall all 
rise indeed, but we shall not(3) all be changed;" or as other copies read, "We shall all sleep, indeed but we 
shall not all be changed; in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump; for the trumpet shall sound, 
and the dead shall rise incorruptible, and we shall be changed. "(4) However, whichever be the true text, 
writing to the Thessalonians, he says, "I would not have you ignorant, brethren, concerning those who are 
asleep, that ye sorrow not, as the others who have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose 
again, so those also who sleep through Jesus shall God bring with Him. For this we say unto you by the 
word of the Lord, that we who are alive and remain at the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them that 
sleep. For the Lord Himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, with the 
trump of God, and the dead who are in Christ shall rise first: then we who are alive and remain shall be 
caught up together with them in the clouds to meet Christ in the air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord. "(5) 

44. But that you may not suppose this to be a novel doctrine peculiar to Paul, I will adduce also what the 
Prophet Ezekiel foretold by the Holy Ghost. "Behold," saith he, "I will open your graves and bring you forth 
out of your graves. "(1) Let me recall, further, how Job, who abounds in mystical language, plainly predicts 
the resurrection of the dead. "There is hope for a tree; for if it be cut down it will sprout again, and its shoot 
shall never fail. But if its root have waxed old in the earth, and the stock thereof be dead in the dust, yet 
through the scent of water it will flourish again, and put forth shoots as a young plant. But man, if he be dead, 
is he departed and gone? And mortal man, if he have fallen, shall he be no more?"(2) Dost thou not see, that 
in these words he is appealing to men's sense of shame, as it were, and saying, "Is mankind so foolish, that 
when they see the stock of a tree which has been cut down shooting forth again from the ground, and dead 
wood again restored to life, they imagine their own case, to have no likeness to that of wood or trees?" But 
convince you that Job's words are to be read as a question, when he says, "But mortal man when he hath 
fallen shall he not rise again?" take this proof from what follows; for he adds immediately, "But if a man be 
dead, shall he live?"(3) And presently afterwards he says, "I will wait till I be made again;"(4) and afterwards 

he repeats the same: "Who shall raise again upon the earth my skin, which is now draining this cup of 
suffering?"(5) 

45. Thus much in proof of the profession which we make in the Creed when we say "The resurrection of this 
flesh." As to the addition "this" see how consonant it is with all that we have cited from the divine books. 
What else does Job signify in the place which we explained above, "He will raise again my skin, which is 
now draining this cup of suffering," that is, which is undergoing these torments? Does he not plainly say that 
there will be a resurrection of this flesh, this, I mean, which is now undergoing the extremity of trials and 
tribulations? Moreover, when the Apostle says, "This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal 
must put on immortality, "(6) are not his words those of one who in a manner touches his body and places his 
finger upon it? This body then, which is now corruptible, will by the grace of the resurrection be incorruptible, 
and this which is now mortal will be clothed with virtues of immortality, that, as "Christ rising from the dead 
dieth no more, death hath no more dominion over Him, "(7) so those who shall rise in Christ shall never again 
feel corruption or death, not because the nature of flesh will have been cast off, but because its condition 
and quality will have been changed. There will be a body, therefore, which will rise from the dead 
incorruptible and immortal, not only of the righteous, but also of sinners; of the righteous that they may be 
able ever to abide with Christ, of sinners that they may undergo without end the punishment due to them. 

46. That the righteous shall ever abide with Christ our Lord we have proved above, where we have shewn 
that the Apostle says, "Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the 
clouds to meet Christ in the air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord."(1) And do not marvel that the flesh of 
the saints is to be changed into such a glorious condition at the resurrection as to be caught up to meet God, 
suspended in the clouds and borne in the air, since the same Apostle, setting forth the great things which 
God bestows on them that love Him, says, "Who shall change our vile body that it may be made like unto 
His glorious body. "(2) It is nowise absurd then, if the bodies of the saints are said to be raised up into the air, 
seeing that they are said to be renewed after the image of Christ's body, which is seated at God's right 
hand. But this also the holy Apostle adds, speaking either of himself or of others of his own place or merit, 
"He will raise us up together with Christ and make us sit together in the heavenly places. "(3) Whence, since 
God's saints bare these promises and an infinite number like them respecting the resurrection of the 
righteous, it will now not be difficult to believe those also which the Prophets have foretold, namely, that "the 
righteous shall shine as the sun and as the brightness of the firmament in the kingdom of God. "(4) For who 
will think it difficult that they should have the brightness of the sun, and be adorned with the splendour of the 
stars and of this firmament, for whom the life and conversation of God's angels are being prepared in 
heaven, or who are represented as being hereafter to be conformed to the glory of Christ's body? In 
reference to which glory, promised by the Saviour's mouth, the holy Apostle says, "It is sown as an animal 
body; it will rise a spiritual body. "(3) For if it is true, as it certainly is true, that God will vouchsafe to associate 
every one of the righteous and of the saints in companionship with the angels, it is certain that He will 
change their bodies also into the glory of a spiritual body. 

47. Nor let this promise seem to you contrary to the natural structure of the body. For if we believe, according 
to what is written, that God took clay of the earth and made man, and that the origin of our body was this, that, 
by the will of God, earth was changed into flesh, why does it seem absurd to you or contrary to reason if, on 
the same principles on which earth is said to be advanced to all animal body, an animal body in turn should 
be believed to be advanced to a spiritual body? These things anti many like these you will find in the divine 
Scriptures concerning the resurrection of the righteous. There will be given to sinners also, as we said 
above, a condition of incorruption and immortality at the resurrection, that, as God assigns this state to the 
righteous for perpetuity of glory, so He may assign the same to sinners for prolongation of confusion and 
punishment. For this also the Prophet's words, which we referred to above, state clearly: "Many shall rise 
froth the dust of the earth, some to life eternal, and others to confusion and eternal shame. "(1) 

48. If then we have understood in what august significance God Almighty is called Father, and in what 
mysterious sense our Lord Jesus Christ is held to be His only Son, and with what entire perfection of 
meaning His Spirit is called the Holy Spirit, and how the Holy Trinity is one in substance but has distinctions 
of relation and of Persons, what also is the birth from a Virgin, what the nativity of the Word in the flesh, what 
the mystery of the Cross, what the purpose of our Lord's descent into hell, what the glory of the Resurrection, 
and the delivery of souls from their captivity in the infernal regions, what also His ascension into heaven, 
and the expected advent of the Judge; moreover how the holy Church ought to be acknowledged as 
opposed to the congregations of vanity, what is the number of the sacred Volume, what conventicles of 
heretics ought to be avoided, and how in the forgiveness of sins there is no opposition whatever between 
the divine freedom and natural reason, and how not only the sacred oracles but also the example of Lord 
and Saviour Himself, and the conclusions of natural reason, confirm the truth of the resurrection of our 
flesh;— if, I say, we have intelligently followed these in succession in accordance with the rule of the tradition 
hereinbefore expounded, we pray that the Lord will grant to us, and to all who hear these words, that having 
kept the faith which we have received, having finished our course, we may await the crown of righteousness 

laid up for us, and be found among those who shall rise again to eternal life, and be delivered from 
confusion and eternal shame, through Christ our Lord, through Whom to God the Father Almighty with the 
Holy Ghost is glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen. 

THE PREFACE TO THE BOOKS OF RECOGNITIONS 
F ST. CLEMENT 

o, 

THE PREFACE TO THE BOOKS OF RECOGNITIONS OF ST. CLEMENT 
Addressed to Bishop Gaudentius 

(For the occasion and date(1) of this work see the Prolegomena, p. 412.) 

You possess so much vigour of character, my dear Gaudentius, you who are so signal all ornament of our 
teachers, or as I would rather say, you have the grace of the Spirit in so large a measure, that even what you 
say in the way of daily conversation, or of addresses that you preach in church, (2) ought to be consigned in 
writing and handed down for the instruction of posterity. But I am far less quick, my native talent being but 
slender, and old age is already making me sluggish and slow; and this work is nothing but the payment of a 
debt due to the command laid upon me by the virgin Sylvia whose memory I revere. She it was who 
demanded of me, as you have now done by the right of heirship, to translate Clement into our language. 
The debt is paid at last, though after many delays. It is a part of the booty, and in my opinion no small one, 
which I have carried off from the libraries of the Greeks, and which I am collecting for the use and advantage 
of our countrymen. I have no food of my own to bring them, and I must import their nourishment from abroad. 
However, foreign goods are apt to appear sweeter; and sometimes they are really more useful. Moreover, 
almost anything which brings healing to our bodies or is a defence against disease or an antidote to poison 
comes from abroad. Judaea sends us the distillation of the balsam tree, Crete the leaf of the dictamnus, 
Arabia her aromatic flowers, and India the crop of the spikenard. These goods come to us, no doubt, in a 
less perfect condition than those which our own fields produce, but they preserve intact their pleasant scent 
and their healing power. Therefore, my friend who are as my own soul, I present to you Clement returning to 
Rome. I present him dressed in a Latin garb. Do not think it strange if the aspect which his eloquence 
presents is less bright than it might be. It makes no difference if only the meaning is felt to be the same. 
These are foreign wares, then, which I am importing at a great expense of labour; and I have still to see 
whether our countrymen will regard with gratitude one who is bringing them the spoils(spolia) of his warfare, 
and who is unlocking with the key of our language a treasure house hitherto concealed, though he does it 
with the utmost good will. I only trust that God may look favourably on your good wishes, so that my present 
may not be met in any quarter by evil eyes and envious looks: and that we may not witness that extremely 
monstrous phenomenon, expressions of illwill on the part of those on whom the gift is conferred, while those 
from whom it is taken part with it ungrudgingly. It is but right that you, who have read this work in the Greek 
should point out to other's the design of my translation-unless indeed, you feel that in some respects I have 
not observed the right method of rendering the original. You are, I believe well aware that there are two 
Greek editions of this work of Clement, his Recognitions; that there are two sets of books, which in some few 
cases differ from each other though the bulk of the narrative is the same. For instance, the last part of the 
work, that which gives an account of the transformation of Simon Magus, exists in one of these, while in the 
other it is entirely absent. On the other hand there are some things, such as the dissertation on the 
unbegotten and the begotten God, and a few others, which, though they are found in both editions, are, to 
say the least of them, beyond my understanding; and these I have preferred to leave others to deal with 
rather than to present them in an inadequate manner. As to the rest, I have taken pains not to swerve, even 
in the slightest degree from either the sense or the diction; and this, though it makes the expression less 
ornate, renders it more faithful. 

There is a letter in which this same Clement writing to James the Lord's brother, gives an account of the 
death of Peter, and says that he has left him as his successor, as ruler and teacher of the church; and further 
incorporates a whole scheme of ecclesiastical government. This I have not prefixed to the work, both 
because it is later in point of time, and because it has been previously translated and published by me. 
Nevertheless, there is a point which would perhaps seem inconsistent with facts were I to place the 
translation of it in this work, but which I do not consider to involve an impossibility. It is this. Linus and Cletus 
were Bishops of the city of Rome before Clement. How then, some men ask, can Clement in his, letter to 
James say that Peter passed over to him his position as a church-teacher.(l) The explanation of this point, 
as I understand, is as follows. Linus and Cletus were, no doubt,' Bishops in the city of Rome before Clement, 

but this was in Peter's life-time; that is, they took charge of the episcopal work, while he discharged the 
duties of the apostolate. He is known to have done the same thing at Caesarea; for there, though be was 
himself on the spot, yet he had at his side Zacchaeus whom he had ordained as Bishop. Thus we may see 
how both things may be true; namely how they stand as predecessors of Clement in the list of Bishops, and 
vet how Clement after the death of Peter became his successor in the teacher's chair. But it is time that we 
should pay attention to the beginning of Clement's own narrative, which he addresses to James the Lord's 
brother. 

PREFACE TO THE TRANSLATION OF THE SAYINGS 
OF XYSTUS - RUFINUS TO APRONIANUS, HIS OWN 
FRIEND 

PREFACE TO THE TRANSLATION OF THE SAYINGS OF XYSTUS 
Composed at Aquileia about the year 307 A.D 

(For the questions relating to Xystus see the Prolegomena, p. 412.) 

RUFINUS TO APRONIANUS, HIS OWN FRIEND 

I know that, just as the sheep come gladly when their own shepherd calls them, so in matters of religion men 
attend most gladly to the admonitions of a teacher who speaks their own language: and therefore, my very 
dear Apronianus, when that pious lady who is my daughter but now your sister in Christ, had laid her 
commands on me to compose for her a treatise of such a nature that its understanding should not require 
any great, effort, I translated into Latin in a very open and plain style the work of Xystus, who is said to be the 
same man who at Rome is called Sixtus, and who gained the glory of being both bishop and martyr. I think 
that, when she reads this, she will find it expressed with such brevity that a vast meaning is unfolded in each 
several line, with such power that a sentence only a line long would suffice for a whole life's training, and yet 
with such simplicity that one who looked over the shoulder of a girl as she read it might question whether I 
were not quite weak in intellect. And the whole work is so concise that it would be possible for her never to 
let go of it. The entire book would hardly be bigger than the finger ring of one of our ancestors. And indeed it 
seems but right that one who has learnt through the word of God to count as dross the ornaments of the 
world should now receive at my hands by way of ornament a necklace of the word and of wisdom. For the 
present let this little book serve for a ring and be kept constantly in the hands: but it will not be long before it 
will penetrate into the treasure house and be wholly laid up in the heart, and bring forth from its innermost 
chamber the germs of instruction and of a participation in all good works. I have added further a few choice 
sayings addressed by a pious father to his son, but all so succinct that the whole of this, little work may 
rightly be called in Greek the Enchiridion(l) or in Latin the Annulus.(2) 

PREFACE TO THE TWO BOOKS OF ECCLESIASTICAL 
HISTORY, ADDED BY RUFINUS TO HIS TRANSLATION 
OFEUSEBIUS 

PREFACE TO THE TWO BOOKS OF ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY, ADDED BY RUFINUS TO 
HIS TRANSLATION OF EUSEBIUS 

Addressed to Chromatius, Bishop of Aquileia, A.D. 401 

(For the occasion of writing, and the date, see Prolegomena, p. 412.) 

It is the custom, they say, of skilful physicians, when they perceive that some epidemic disease is near at 
hand in one of our cities, to provide some kind of medicine, whether solid or liquid, which men may use as a 
preventative to defend themselves from the destruction which is hanging over them. You have imitated this 
method of the doctors, my venerable Father, Chromatius, at the moment when the gates of Italy were broken 
through by Alaricthe commander of the Goths, and thus a disease and plague poured in upon us, which 
made havoc of the fields and cattle and men throughout the land. You then sought a remedy against the 
cruelty and destruction, so that the minds of then which were languishing might be drawn away from the 
contagion of the prevailing malady, and might preserve their balance through an interest in better pursuits. 
This you have done by enjoining on me the task of translating into Latin the ecclesiastical history which was 
written in the Greek language by that most learned man, Eusebius of Caesarea. You thought that the mind of 
those who heard it read to them might be so held fast by it that, in its eager desire for the knowledge of past 
events, it might to some extent become oblivious of their actual sufferings. I tried to excuse myself from the 
task, as being, through my weakness unequal to it, and as having in the lapse of years lost the use of the 
Latin tongue. But I reflected that your commands were not to be divaricated from your position in the 
Apostolic order. For, at the time when the multitude in the desert were hungering, and the Lord said to his 
Apostles, "Give ye them to eat," Philip who was one of them instead of bringing out the loaves which were 
hid in the wallet of the Apostles, said that there was a little lad there who had five loaves and two fishes. He 
knew that the exhibition of the divine virtue would be none the less brilliant if the ministry of some of the little 
ones were used in its fulfilment. He modestly excused his action by adding, "What are these among so 
many?" So that the divine power might be more conspicuous through the difficult and desperate 
circumstances in which it acted. I felt that, since you were a scion of the Apostolic order, you had possibly 
acted in remembrance of Philip's example, and that, when you saw that the time was come for the multitudes 
to be fed, you had engaged the services of a little lad who might be able to contribute, twice told, the five 
loaves(1) which he had received, but who further, to fulfil the Gospel type, might add two small fishes(2) 
which he had captured by his own efforts. I have therefore made the attempt to execute what you had 
ordered, having the assurance that the deficiency of my inexperience would be excused on account of the 
authority of him who gave the command. 

I must point out the course I have taken in reference to the tenth book of this work. As it stands in the Greek, it 
has little to do with the process of events. All but a small part of it is taken up with discussions tending to the 
praise of particular Bishops, and adds nothing to our knowledge of facts. I have therefore left out all this 
superfluous matter; and, whatever in it belonged to genuine history I have added to the ninth book, with 
which I have made his history close. The tenth and eleventh books I have myself compiled, partly froth the 
traditions of the former generation, partly from facts within my own memory; and these I have added to the 
previous books, like the two fishes to the loaves. If you bestow your approval and benediction upon them, I 
shall have a sure confidence that they will suffice for the multitude. The work as now completed contains the 
events from the Ascension of the Saviour to the present time; my own two books those from the days of 
Constantine when the persecution came to an end on to the death of the Emperor Theodosius. 
The following note occurs at the end of the ninth book of Rufinus' Latin Version of Eusebius. 
Thus far Eusebius has given us the record of the history. As to the subsequent events, as they have 
followed on up to the present time, as I have found them recorded in the writings of the last generation, or so 
far as they are covered by my own knowledge, I will add them, obeying, as best I may, in this point also the 
commands of our father in God. (3) 

RUFINUS' PREFACE TO THE TRANSLATION OF 
ORIGEN'S COMMENTARY ON PSALMS 36, 37, AND 38 

RUFINUS" PREFACE TO THE TRANSLATION OF ORIGEN'S COMMENTARY ON PSALMS 
36, 37, AND 38. 

Addressed to Apronianus,(1) eitherat Rome or at Aquileia, between A.D. 398 and A.D. 407 

The whole exposition of the thirty-sixth, thirty-seventh and thirty-eighth Psalms is ethical in its character, 
being designed to enforce more correct methods of life; and teaches at one time the way of conversion and 
repentance, at another that of purification and of progress. I have therefore thought it well to translate it into 
Latin for you, my dearest son Apronianus, having first arranged it in nine of the short sermons which are 
called in Greek Homilies, and incorporated it into one whole; and thus this discourse which in all its parts 
aims at the correction and the advancement of the moral life, is collected into a single volume. My 
translation will at all events be of use so far as to put the reader without effort in possession of the meaning 
of the author, which is here fully laid open, and to bring home to him the simplicity of life which he enjoins with 
clearness of thought and in simple words; and thus the voice of prophecy may reach not men alone but also 
god-fearing women, and lend subtlety to the minds of the simple. Yet I fear that pious lady, who is my 
daughter but your sister in Christ, may think that she owes me no thanks for my work if it brings her nothing 
but puzzling thoughts and thorny questions: for the human body could hardly hold together if divine 
providence had formed it of bones and muscles alone without blending with them the ease and grace of the 
softer tissues. 

RUFINUS' PREFACE TO THE TRANSLATION OF 
ORIGEN'S COMMENTARY ON THE EPISTLE TO THE 
ROMANS, AND THE PERORATION OF RUFINUS 
APPENDED TO HIS TRANSLATION OF THE SAME 

RUFINUS" PREFACE TO THE TRANSLATION OF ORIGEN'S COMMENTARY ON THE 
EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS 

Addressed to Heraclius at Aquileia about A.D. 407 

My intention was to press the shore of the quiet land in the little bark in which I was sailing, and to draw oat a 
few little fishes from the pools of Greece: but you have compelled me, brother Heraclius, to give my sails to 
the wind and go forth into the deep sea; you persuade me to leave the work which lay before me in the 
translation of the homilies written by the Man of Adamant(1) in his old age, and to open to you the fifteen 
volumes in which he discussed the Epistle of Paul to the Romans. In these books, while he aims at 
representing the Apostle's thoughts, he is carried away into a sea of such depth that one who follows him 
into it may well be afraid of being drowned in the greatness of his thoughts as in the vastness of the waves. 
Then also you do not consider this, that my breath is but scanty for filling a grand trumpet of eloquence like 
his. And beyond all these difficulties is this, that the books themselves have been interpolated. In almost all 
the libraries (I grant that no one can tell how it happened) some of the volumes are absent from the body of 
the work; and to supply these, and to restore the continuity of the work in the Latin version is beyond my 
talent, but would be, as you must know when you make your demand, a special gift of God. You add, 
however, so that nothing may be wanting to the labour I am undertaking, that I had better abbreviate this 
whole body of fifteen volumes, which in the Greek reaches to the length of forty thousand lines or more, and 
bring it within moderate compass. Your injunctions are hard indeed, and might be thought to be imposed by 
one who did not care to consider what the burden of such a work must be. I will, however, attempt it, hoping 
that through your prayers, and the favour of the Lord, what seems impossible to man may become possible. 
But we will now, if you please, listen to the Preface which Origen himself prefixes to the work on which he was 
entering. 

THE PERORATION OF RUFINUS APPENDED TO HIS TRANSLATION OF ORIGEN'S 
COMMENTARY ON THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS 

Addressed to Heraclius at Aquileia, probably about 407 

A satisfactory conclusion has now, I trust, been reached of the Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans, 
the writing of which has been a work of very great labour and time. I confess, my most loving brother 
Heraclius, that in the attempt to respond to your request I have almost forgotten the precept; "Do not lift a 
burden above your strength." Even in the other translations of Origen's works into Latin, which were made 
because you earnestly requested it, or rather exacted it as a journeyman's task, the labour was very great; 
for I made it my object to supplement what Origen spoke extempore in the lecture room of the church; for his 
aim there was the application of the subject for the sake of edification rather than the exposition of the text. 
This I have done in the case of the Homilies, and the short lectures on Genesis and Exodus, and especially 
in those on the book of Leviticus, where he spoke in a hortatory manner, whereas my translation takes the 
form of an exposition. This duty of supplying what was wanted I took up because I thought that the practice of 
agitating questions and then leaving them unsolved, which he frequently adopts in his homiletic mode of 
speaking, might prove distasteful to the Latin reader. The works upon Jesus Nave(1) and the book of 
Judges and the thirty-sixth, thirty-seventh and thirty-eighth Psalms, I translated simply as I found them, with no 
great labour. While then in the other cases which I have mentioned above, I employed much labour in 
supplying what Origen had omitted, in this work on the Epistle to the Romans the labour that fell on me for the 
causes described in the Preface was immense and full of complexity. But there will have been nothing but 
pleasure in these labours, provided only that my experience in other cases, of ill-disposed minds requiting 
my toils and vigils with contumely, be pot repeated and that I do not gain for my studies the reward of 
detraction and for my labour a conspiracy to ruin me. For in dealing with these men I have to undergo a new 

form of accusation. They say to me; When you write these things, in which are found many pieces the 
composition or which is due to yourself, you should place your own name in the title, and let it run thus: 'The 
books of Rufinus' commentary on (for instance) the Epistle to the Romans;' for so, they say, in the case of 
profane writers, the name in the title is not that of the Greek author who is translated but of the Latin author 
who translates him. But all this complaisance, by which the works are ascribed to me, is caused not by love 
to me but by hatred to the author. I am much more observant of my conscience than of my reputation; it may 
be apparent that I have added some things to supply what was wanting; and that I have abbreviated what 
was too lengthy; hut to steal the title from the man who laid the foundations on which the building has been 
reared is what I cannot think right. It must be, I grant, in the discretion of the reader, when he has examined 
the work, to ascribe the work to any one he thinks right; but my intention has been not to seek the applause 
of students but the good of those who wish to be edified. 

I shall turn next to the work which was long ago imposed upon me but now is demanded with still greater 
vehemence by the Bishop Gaudentius, namely to turn into Latin the books called the Recognition of 
Clement the Bishop of Rome, the successor and compassion of the Apostles. In this work I well know that, to 
judge by the ordinary rule, I shall have labour upon labour. In this case I will do what my friends desire, I will 
put my own name in the title of the work, though I shall have that of the author also. It shall be called Rufinus's 
Clement. If the Lord enable me to fulfil this task, I shall afterwards return to that which you desire, and say 
something, God willing, on the books of Numbers or of Deuteronomy (for this alone is wanting to my whole 
work on the Heptateuch): or else I shall write what I can, the Lord being my guide, on the remaining epistles 
of the Apostle Paul. 

PREFACE TO ORIGEN'S HOMILIES ON NUMBERS 

Addressed to Ursacius.(l) Written in 410.(2) 

My dear brother, I might rightly address you in the words of the blessed master, "You do well, dearest 
Donatus, in reminding me of this;" for I well remember my promise that I would collect all that Adamantius 
wrote in his old age on the Law of Moses, and translate it into Latin for the use of our people. But, as he says, 
the season was not seasonable for the fulfilment of my promise, but was full of storm and confusion. How 
can the pen move freely when a man is in fear of the missiles of the enemy, when he has before his eyes the 
devastation of cities and country, when he has to fly from dangers of the sea, and there is no safety even in 
exile? As you yourself saw, the Barbarian was within sight of us; he had set fire to the city of Rhegium, and 
our only protection against him was the very narrow sea which separates the soil of Italy from Sicily. In such 
a position, what leisure could there be for writing, and especially for translating, a work in which one's duty is 
not to develop one's own opinions but to express those of another? However, when there was a quiet night, 
and our minds were relieved from the fear of an attack by the enemy, and we got at least some little leisure 
for thought, I set to work, as a solace from our troubles, and to relieve the burden of our pilgrimage, together 
into one and arrange all that Origen had written on the book of Numbers, whether in the way of homilies or in 
writings such as are called Excerpts, (3) and to translate them into the Roman tongue. You urged me to do 
this, Ursacius, and aided me with all your might, indeed, so eager were you, that you thought the youth who 
acted as secretary too slow in the execution of his office. I wish, however, to point out to you, my brother, that 
the object of this method of studying scripture is not to deal with each clause separately, as you find done in 
commentaries, but to open up a path for the understanding, so that the reader may not be made negligent, 
but as it is written(4) may "stir up his own spirit" and draw out the meaning, and, when he has heard the good 
word, may add to it by his own wisdom. In this way I have tried to give all the expositions which you desired; 
and now of all the writings that I have found upon the Law the short comments upon Deuteronomy alone are 
wanting; these, if God so will, and if he restores my eye-sight, I hope to add to the body of the work. Indeed, 
my very loving son Pinianus, whose truly Christian company I have joined in their flight because of my 
delight in their chaste conversation, requires yet other tasks from me. But do you and he join your prayers 
that the Lord may be present with us, and may give peace in our time, and shew mercy to those who are in 
trouble, and make our work fruitful for the edification of the reader.
