The Canons and Decrees of the Council of Trent (1545-1563)
Translation: Theodore Alois Buckley, B.A., of Christ Church, Oxford; George Routledge and Co., London (title page reads 1861), Public Domain
Source: https://archive.org/details/canonsanddecree00buckgoog

DECREES AND CANONS,

Sfc.

BULL OF INDICrriON OF THE SACRED (ECUMENICAL •

AND GENERAL COUNCIL OF TRENT,

Under the Sovereign Pontiff Paul III.

Pattl, bishop, servant of the senrants of God, for the
future memory hereof.

At the beginning of this our pontificate, which, not on
account of our own merits, but, of its own great goodness,
the providence of Almighiy God hath committed unto us,
ah*eadj perceiving into what disturbances of the times, and
unto how manj embarrassments of abnost all our affairs, our
pastoral care and watchfulness were called; we desired,
indeed, to remedy the evils of the Christian commonwealth,
with which it had long been afflicted and well-nigh over-
whelmed; but we alsQ, as men compassed with ir^rmity^
perceived that our strength was unequal to take upon us so
great a burthen. Por, whereas we saw that there was need
of peace to deliver and preserve the commonwealth £rom the
many impending dangers, we found all things replete with

* The term oecumenio&l {pUofitviKh^) is derived firom the Greek word
olKoviAsvri, applied to the whole earth, and subsequently, in a more
restricted sense, to the territory subject to the Roman empire (see
Pricseus and Kuinoel on Luke ii. 1, and Matt. xxiv. 14). Hence, it
signifies general ; i, e, *' a council gathered together from all, or most,
places of the world where the churcn of Christ is settled. — ^Beveridge on
Art. xxi. p. 250. Bishop Burnet (on Art. xxi.) says: "The natural
idea of a general council is a meeting of all the bishops of Christendom,
or at least of proxies instructed by them and their clergy. Now if any
will stand to tiiis description, then we are yo>7 sure that there was never
yet a true general council : which will appear to every one that reads the
subscriptions of the councils." ^ Heb. v. 2.

B

enmities and dissensions ; above all, the princes, to whom
well-nigli the whole direcl^on of matters has been intrusted
by God, at enmity with each other. Whereas we deemed it
necessary that there should be onefold and one shepherd^ for
the Lord's flock, in order to confirm the integrity of the
ChHstian religion, and the hope of heavenly things within
us ; the unity of the Christian name was well-nigh rent and
torn asunder by schisms, dissensions, heresies. Whereas
we could have wished the commonwealth safe and defended
from the arms and insidious attacks of the unfaithM, yet,
through our transgressions and the guilt of us all, — ^the
wrath of God, forsooth, hanging over our sins, — Bhodes
had been lost ; Hungary harassed ; war both by land and
sea had been intended and planned against Italy, Austria,
and niyria; whilst our implouB and^hless Lmj, the
Turk, was never at rest, and deemed our own mutual
enmities and dissensions his fitting opportunity for carrying
out his designs with success. '\^erefore, as we have said,
having been called upon to guide and govern the bark
of Peter, in so great a tempest, and in tho midst of so vio-
lently-upraised waves of heresies, dissensions, and wars, and,
as we did not rely sufficiently on our own strength, we, first of
all, cast our cares upon the Lord,^ that He might sustain us, and
furnish our soul with firmness and strength, our mind with
prudence and wisdom. Then, recalling to mind that our
predecessors, endowed with admirable wisdom and holiness,
had often, in the greatest perils of the Christian common-
wealth, had recourse to GBCumenical councils and general
assemblies of bishops, as tho best and most opportune re-
medy, we also fixed our mind on holding a general council ;
and having consulted the opinions of those princes, whose
consent seemed to us to be especially useM ana opportune for
this matter ; when we found them, at that time, not averse
from this so holy a work, we, as is attested by our letters
and records, indicted an cBCumenical council, and a general
assembly of those bishops and other £a.thers whom it
concerned, to be opened at the city of Mantua, on the
tenth of the calends of June,® in the year 1637 of the
incarnation of our Lord, the third of our pontificate ; having

« John X. 16. ^ Ps. Iv. 22. • I.e. May 23rd.

BUdi OT usTDianois. 3

an almost certain hope that, when we were there assembled
in the name of the liord, the Lord himself, as He promised,
would he in the midst of us} and, in His goodness and mercjr,
easily put down, bj the breath of His month, all the storms
and all the dangers of the times. But, as the enemy of
mankind ever sets his snares against holy deeds, at the very
first, contrary toallourhope and expectation, thecity of Mantua
was refused us, unless we would submit to certain conditions,
which we have described in other letters of ours, utterly
alien from the institutes of our ancestors, the state of the
times, our own dignity and liberty, that of this Holy See, and
of the ecclesiastical name. We were, therefore, necessitated
to find another place, and to choose some other city ; and
whereas one fit and stiitable did not immediately occur to us,
we were compelled to prorogue the celebration of the coun-
cil until the ensuing calends of Noyember.s Meanwhile our
cruel and perpetual enemy, the Turk, attacked Italy
with a vast fleet, haying taken, ravaged, sacked several cities
of Apulia, and carried off a booty of captives ; we, amidst,
the greatest alarm and danger of all, were busied in forti^-
ing our shores, and in ftumishirig assistance to the lieign-
bouring states. Nevertheless, we did not meanwhile omit
to consult with the Christian princes, and to exhort them
to inform us what, in their opinion, would be a suitable
place for holding the council: and whereas their opinions
were wavering and various, and delay seemed to be unneces-
sarily protracted, we, with the best mtent, and, as we think,
with the best judgment, fixed on Vicenza, a wealthy city,
and one which, by the valour, authority, and power of the
Venetians, who granted it to us, offered in a special manner
both imobstructed access, and a free and safe place of resi-
dence for all. But whereas too much time had already
passed away ; and it was reqiddte to signij^* to all the new
city that liad been chosen ; and whereas the approaching^
calends of November precluded the possibility of making-
the announcement [of this change] public, and winter was
now near ; we were again compellea to defer, by another
prorogation, the time i^r the council tiU the next ensuing
spring, and the next calends of May.^ This matter having

' Matt, xviii. 20. » Nov. 1. ^ M&j let.

b2

been firmly settled and decreed; con8idering,«>-wlulst we
were making ready ourselyes, and all other matters for fitly
conducting and celebrating that assembly under the help of
God, — ^that it was a point of the greatest importance, both
as regards the celebration of the council, and the general
weal of Christendom, that the Christian princes should be
united together in peace and concord ; we ceased not to im-
plore and conjure our most beloved sons in Christ, Charles,
eyer august, the emperor of the Bomans, and Francis, the
most Christian king, the two main supports and defences of
the Christian name, to meet together for a conference be-
tween them and us ; and, with both of them, by letters,
nuncios, and our legates a latere selected from the number
^f our venerable brethren, did we very often urge that
they should, instead of their jealousies and animosities,
.unite in one alliance and holy friendship, and succour the
ix)ttering cause of Christendom: for whereas it was to
preserve this especially, that their power had been bestowed
•on them by Qoo, if they neglectea to do this, and directed
not their counsels to the common weal of Christians, a
Bharp and severe account would they have to render unto
that God. They, yielding at last to our prayers, betook
themselves to Nice ; whither we also, for the cause of God,
and to bring about peace, undertook a long journey, though
greatly unsuited to our advanced age. Meanwhile, as the
time fixed for the council, the calends, to wit, of May,
drew nigh, we did not omit to send to Yicenza three
legates a latere, — ^men of the greatest virtue and authority,
chosen from the number of the aforesaid our own brethren,
the cardinals of the Holy Eoman Church, — ^to open the
•coimcil ; to receive the prelates as they arrived from various
-quarters ; and to transact and manage such matters as they
jsihould deem necessary, until we, returning from our journey
.and message of peace, should be able to direct everything
ivith greater predion. In the mean time, we appHed our-
uaelves \o that holy and most necessary work, to wit, the ne-
gotiation of peace between the princes ; and this with all the
zeal, the affection, and the earnestness of our soul. God is
•our witness, relying on whose clemency we exposed our-
selves to the dangers of that journey to the peril of our life :
our conscience is our witness, which herein, at least, cannot

reproach us with having either passed by, or not sought for,
an opportunity of effecting a reconduation : the princes-
themselves are our witnesses, whom we so often and so
earnestly conjured by our nuncios, letters, legates, admoni-
tions, exhortations, and by all kinds of entreaties, to lay
aside their jealousies, to unite in alliance, with combined
zeal and forces to succour the Christian commonwealth,
which was now reduced to the most pressing danger.
Yea, witnesses too are those watchings and cares, those
labours of our soul both by day and night, and those
grieyous solicitudes, which we haye already endured to such
an extent in this business and cause, xet have our coun-
sels and acts not as yet brought about the wished-for result..
For so hath it seemed good to the Lord Gbd, who, however^
we doubt not will yet cast a more fayourable eye on our
wishes. For ourselyes, we, as &r as in us lay, haye not, in-
deed, omitted anything in this matter that was due from our
pastoral office. And if there be any who interpret our
labours in behalf of peace in any other sense, we are grieyed
indeed ; but, in our griej^ we, neyertheless, return thanks to-
Almighty God, who, as a pattern and lesson of patience
unto us, willed that His own apostles should be accounted'
worthv to suffer shame for the name of Jesus} who is our
peace? Howeyer, in that our meeting and conference held
at Nice, though, by reason of our sins hindering, a true and
permanent peace could not be concluded between the twa
princes, yet was a truce for ten years settled ; under fayour
of which haying hopes, that both the sacred council might:
more conyeniently be celebrated, and further that peace
might be fully estabUshed by the authority of the council,
we were urgent with those princes to come in person to the
council, to bring with them those of their prelates who were
at hand, and to summon the absent. Tney haye excused
themselyes upon both these points, — ^because it was at that
time necessary for them to return to their kingdoms, and
because the prelates whom they had with them, being wearied
and exhausted by the journey and its expenses, must needs
be refreshed and recruited, — exhorted us to decree yet
another prorogation of the time for holding the council..

> Acts y. 41. « EpH. ii. 14.

And whereaa we made some difficully in yielding in tUa
matter, we meanwhile received letters from our legates at
Yicenza, to the effect that, although the day for opening the
councQ hadarriyed, nay, had long since passed by, Darely one
or two prelates from any of the foreign nations had betaken
themsef es to Vicenza. Upon receiving this information,
derceiving that the council could not, under any circum-
stances, be held at that time, we granted to the aforesaid
Snnces, that the time for holding the council should be
eferred till the next holy Easter, the feast-day of the
Besurrection of the Lord. Of which our ordinance and
prorogation, the decretal letters were given and published
n't G^noa, in the year of the Incarnation of our Lord 1538,
on the fourth of the calends of July.^ And this delay we
granted the more readily, because each of the princes pro-
mised us to send an ambassador to us at Eome ; in order
that those matters which were necessary for the complete
establishment of peace,— all of which could not, on account
of the shortness of the time, be completed at Nice, — ^might
be treated of and arranged more conveniently at Eome in
our presence. And for this reason also, they both begged of
us, that this negotiation of peace might precede the celebra-
tion of the council ; since, peace once established, the council
itself would then be much more useM and salutary to the
Christian commonwealth. For it was this hope of peace,
thus held out to us, that ever moved us to assent to the
wishes of the princes ; a hope which was greatly increased
by the kindly and Mendly interview between those two
princes after our departure from Nice ; the news of which
being received with very great joy, confirmed us in our good
hope, that we believed tmit our prayers had at length been
heard by God, and our earnest prayers for peace received.
As, then, we both desired and urged the conclusion of this
peace, and as it seemed good not only to the two princes afore-
named, but also to our most dear son in Christ, Ferdinand,
king of the Eomans, that the business of the council ought
not to be undertaken until peace had been established;
whilst all the parties urged upon us, by letters and their
ambassadors, again to appoint a furtW prorogation of

^ Juiie 28th.

BULL OP nn>ICTIOK, 7

the time; and the most serene emperor was especiaUj*
urgent, representing that he had promised to those who
dissent from Gathouc unily, that he would interpose his
mediation with us, to the end that some plan of con-
cord might be devised, which could not be satisfSM^rilj*
accomplished before his return to Gormany : we, ever im-
pelled bj the same desire of peace, and by the wishes of so
great princes, and, above all, perceiving that not even on
the said feast of the Besurrection had any other prelates
assembled at Vicenza, we, now avoiding the word proroga-
tion, which had been so often repeated m vain, chose rather
to suspend the celebration of the general council during our
own good pleasure, and that of the Apostolic See. We
accormngly did so, and despatched our letters touching such
suspension to each of the above-named princes, on the 10th
day of June, 1539, as from them may be clearly seen. This
8i4eii8ion, then, having been of necesidly, made by us.
whust we were awaiting that more suitable time, and some
conclusion of peace which was later to bring both dignity and
numbers to tne council, and more inmieaiate safety to the
Christian commonweal ; the affairs of Christendom, mean*
while, fell daily into a worse state. The Hungarians, upon
the death of tneir king, had invited the Turk ; King Eerdi-
nandhad declared war against them; a party of the Selgians
had been incited to revolt from the most serene emperor,
who, to crush that revolution, traversed Prance on the most
friendly and concordant terms with the most Christian king,
and with great show of mutual good-will towards each other ;
and, having reached Belgium, thence passed into Germany,
where he commenced holding diets^ of the princes and cities
of Germany, with the view of treating of that concord of
which he had spoken to us. But since, — ^the hope of peace
now failing,— the scheme of procuring and treating of re-
union in those diets seemed rather adapted to excite greater
discords, we were led to revert to our former remedy of a
general coimcil ; and by our legates, cardinals of the Holy
iBoman Church, we proposed this to the emperor himself ;
and this we did finally and especially in the diet of Eatisbon,
on which occasion our beloved son. Cardinal Guspar Con-

* CoQventus.

tarmi, of the title of St. Praxedes, acted as our legate with
the greatest learning and integrity. For, whereas, what we
had previouslj feared would come to pass, that by the advice
of that diet we were called upon to declare that certain of the
articles, maintained by those dissenting &om the Church,
were to be tolerated until they should be examined and
decided upon by an oecumenical council ; and whereas neither
Christian and Catholic truth, nor our own dignity and that
of the Apostolic See, would suffer us to yield this, — ^we pre-
ferred rather to command that it should be openly proposed,
that a council should be held as soon as possible. Nor
indeed had we ever been of any other opinion or wish, but
that an oecumenical and general council should be convened
at the very first opportunity. For we hoped that thereby
both peace might be restored to the Christian people, and
the integrity of the Christian religion ; yet were we desirous
to hold that [council] with the good-will and favour of the
Christian princes. And, whilst awaiting this good-will,
whilst watching for that hidden time,ybr the time of thy good
pleasure, O Qod^ we were at last compelled to come to the
conclusion, that every time is well pleasmg unto God wherein
deliberations are entered upon toucning holy things, and such
as relate to Christian piely. Wherefore, beholding with the
greatest pain of our soul, that the affairs of Christendom were
daily hunying on to a worse state, — Hungary being over-
whelmed by the Turks, Gtermany endangered, all the other
states oppressed with terror ana affliction, — ^we resolved to
await no longer the consent of any prince, but to look solely
to the will of the omnipotent God, and the advantage of the
Christian commonwealth. Accordingly, as we no longer had
the city of Vicenza, aud were desirous, in our own choice of
a new place for holding the council, to have regard both to
the common welfare of Christians, and also to the troubles
of the German nation ; and seeing, upon several places being
proposed, that they" wished for the city of T^nt, we, —
although we deemed that everything might be transacted
more conveniently in Italy,® — ^nevertheless yielded up our
will, with paternal charity, to their demands. Accordmgly^

^ Ps. Ixviii. 14 (in our yeraion, Ixix. 18, "in an acceptable time*').

* /. e, the Crermans.

* /. e. Cisalpine Italy, Italy within the Alps.

BITLL or INDICTIOlfr. 9

we have chosen the city of Trent as that wherein an oecu-
menical council should be held on the ensuing calends of
November ;P fixing upon that place as a suitable one whereat
the bishops andprektea can assemble very easayindeedfrom
Germany, and from the other nations bordering on Oermanj,
and without difficulty from France, Spain, and the other re-
moter provinces. But that day for the council has been
sought for by us which allowed sufficient time both for pub*
lishmg this our decree throughout the Christian nations, and
for giving all prelates an opportunity of coming. Our
reason for not prescribing that a whole year should expire
before changing the place of the coundl, as has been before
ordained by certain constitutions,^ was this, that we were
unwilling that our hope should be any longer delayed of
applying a remedy to some extent to the Christian common-
Wth, suffering as it is under se many disasters and cala-
ndties. And yet we observe the times, we acknowledge the
difficulties. We faiow that what may be hoped for from our
councils is uncertain. But, seeing it is written. Commit thy
way unto the Lord, trust also in him, and he shall briny it to
pass^we have resolved rather to trust in the clemency and
mercy of God, than to distrust our ownwealmess. Por it often
happens, upon engamng in good works, that>^hat human
counsels fell in, the cnvine power accomplisheiCN Wherefore,
relying and resting on the authority of that Almighty God,
Father and Son, and Holy Ghost, and on the authority of
His blessed apostles Peter and Paul, which [authority] we
also exercise on earth ; with the advice, also, and assent of
our venerable brethren, the cardinals of the Holy Boman
Church ; having removed and annulled, as by these presents
we do remove ^d annul, the suspension of which mention
has been above made, we proclaim, announce, convoke,
appoint, and decree a sacred, oecumenical, and general
council, in the city of Trent, a place convenient, fi^e, and
opportune for all nations; to be opened on the ensuing
calends of November of the present year, 1642 from the
Incarnation of the Lord ; ana to be prosecuted, concluded, .
and completed, with God's help, to His own glory and praise^ /

P November let. ^ CSoncil. Constantiense^ seas. 39.

» Pa. zxzvi. 5 (zzzvii. 5).

and the saving health' of the whole Christian people ; re-
quiring, exhcMSng. admoiririmig aIl,from eTerv countrv.aBweU
OUT venerable brethren the patriarchs, archbighops, bishops,
and our beloved sons the aobots, as also aU others soever,
unto whom, by right or privilege, the power has been
granted of sitting in general councUs, and of declaring
their sentiments therein; enjoining moreover, and strictly
commanding them, by yirtufi of the oath which they have
taken to us and to this Holy See, and in virtue of holy
obedience, and under the other penalties, which, by law or
custom, are wont to be passed and proposed in the cele-
bration of councils, a£;ainst those who do not attend, that
they (unless they shall happen to be hindered by some just
impediment, of which, however, they shall be compelled to
fiiniish proof,) are undoubtedly to repair to and to be
themselves present in person at this sacred council — or at
all events by their own lawful deputies and proctors : and
the aforenamed emperor, and the most Christian king, as
also the other kings, dukes, and princes, whose presence, at
this time indeed, if ever, would be of especial advantage to
the most holy &ith of Christ, and of all Christians ; we
beseech and conjure [them] by the bowels of the mercy of
God and of our Lord Jesus Christ, — the truth of whose
faith, and whose religion are now so heavily assailed both
from within and without, — ^that, if they would have the
Christian commonwealth safe, if they feel themselves bound
and obliged to the Lord by his great benefits towards them,
they abandon not His own cause and affairs ; but come in
person to the celebration of the sacred council, in which
their piety and virtue would be most greatly conducive to
the common advantage, to their own welfare, and that of
others, both temporal and eternal. But if, which we would
£un wish otherwise, they shall be unable to come in person,
let them at least send, with &11 powers to act,^ as their
deputies, men of weight, who may each in the council
represent the person of his prince with prudence and
digni^. But above all, let this — ^which is a matter very
easy K>r them — ^be their care, that, from their respective
kingdoms and provinces, the bishops and prelates set forth

■ Salutem. » Cum auctoritaie.

without ter^yersation and delay ; a re^^oest which it is just
that Gk)d himself and we should obtain from the prelates
and princes of Germany in a special manner ; since, as it is
principally on their account, and at their own desire, that
the council has been proclaimed and cohyoked, and in the
very city desired by them, let them, not think it burthen-
some to celebrate and adorn it with the presence of their
whole body, to the end that thus, what thmgs soeyer apper-
tain to the integrity and truth of the Christian religion;
the restoration of good, and the correction of eyil manners ;
the peace, unityy and concord between Christians, both

{)rinces and peoples ; and whatsoeyer be needful for repel-
ing those assaults of barbarians and infidels, with which
they seek to oyerthrow all Christendom, with Gh>d going
before us in our deliberations, and holding before our minds
the light of His own wisdom and truth, may, in the said
sacred oecumenical council, in a better and more Commodious
manner, be treated of, and, with the charity of all conspiring
to one end, be deliberated and discussed,, executed and
broi^ht to the desired issue, as speedily and happily as
possible. And that these our letters, and the contents
thereof, may come to the knowledge of all whom it concerns,
and that no one may plead ignorance thereof as an excuse,
especially also as there may not perhaps be free access to
al( unto whom our letters ought to be mdiyidually commu-
nicated ; we will and ordain, that in the Vatican Basilica of
the prince of the apostles, and in the Lateran Church, at
the time when the multitude of the people is wont to be
assembled there to hear diyine seryice, they be read publicly
in a loud yoice by officers of our court, or by certain
public notaries ; ana, after haying been read, be affixed to
the doors of the said churches, also to the gates of the
apostolic Chancery, and to the usual place in the Campo di
Fiore, where they shall for some time hang exposed to be
read and seen by all ; and, when remoyed thence, copies
thereof shall still remain affixed in the same places. Por
we will that, by being thus read, published, and affixed, all
and each of those whom our aforesaid letters include, shall
be obliged and bound, after the interval of two months from
the day of the letters being published and affixed, even as if
they had been read and communicated to them in person.

12 8BBBI0K I.

And we ordain and decree, that a certain and nndoubting
faith be given to copies thereof written, or subscribed by
the hand of a public notary, and guaranteed by the seal of
some ecclesiastic constituted in authority. 'Wherefore, let
it be lawful for no man to infringe this our letter of in*
diction, announcement, convocation, statute, decree, mandate,
precept, and entreaty, or with rash daring go contrary
thereunto. But if any one shall presume to attempt this,
let him know that he will incur the indignation of Ahnighty
God, and of His blessed apostles Peter and Paul. Given
at Bome, at Saint Peter's, in the year 1542 of the Lord's
Incarnation, on the eleventh of the calends of June,^ in the
eighth year of our pontificate, -^y
Blositjs. Jeb. DAin).

SESSION THE FIRST OF THE (ECUMENICAL AND
GENERAL COUNCIL OF TRENT,

Cdd^rated wider the Swereign Pontiff Pond IIL, on the thirteenth day of

the numm of December, A, J), 1545.

DEOBSB TOUOHINa THB OFENDia OV THB COUNCIL.

Doth it please you, unto the praise and glory of the holy
and undivided Trinity, Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost ;
for the increase and exaltation of the Christian faith and
religion ; for the extirpation of heresies ; for the peace and
union of the Church ; for the reformation of the Christian
clergy* and people ; for the depression and extinction of the
enemies of the Cluistian name, to decree and declare that
the sacred and general Council of Trent do begin, and hath
begun P
^ They answered : It pleaseth.

nrDionoN or the nbxt sBssioir.

And whereas the celebration of the Nativity of our Lord

Jesus Christ is near at hand, and other festivals of the

concluding and commencing year follow thereupon, doth it

please you, that the first ensuing session be held on the

« May 22nd,

OS THB MAKinfiB 01* Liyiir0, ZTO. 13

Thursday after the Epiphany, which will be the seyenth of
the month of January, in the year of the Lord 154:6 ?
Hiey answered : It pleaseth. \

SESSION THE SECOND,
CdebraUd on the teveiUh day o/ tht fiion(A of JanMory, 1546.

DECREE TOUCmNO THE XANEEB OF LITIKa, AND OTBEB XATTEBS TO BE

OBSEBVED, DUBINO THE OOUEdlto

The sacred and holy Synod of Trent, lawfully assembled
in the Holy Ohost, the same three le^tes of the Apostolic
See presidmg therein — ^recognizing, with the blessed apostle
James, that Every best ^fb and every perfect aift is from
above, comma down from the Mither of lights,'' wno, to those
who ash 01 him icisdam, giveth to all abundimtly, and
uphraideth them not ;^ and at the same time knowing that
The fear of the Lord is the heavnnvng of wisdom^ hath
ordained and decreed, as regards all and each of the faithful of
Christ, assembled in the city of Trent, that they should be
exhorted, as is [hereby] exhorted, to amend themselyes of
their eyils and sins heretofore committed, and to walk
henceforth in the fear of the Lord ; not to fulfil the lusts
of the fiesh;^ to be instant in frayer;^ to confess more
^equently ; to receiye the sacrament of the Eucharist ; to
yisit the churches ; to fulfil, in fine, as far as each one shall
be able, the commandments of the Lord ; and, furthermore,
daily to pray in private for peace between Christian princes,
and for Uie imity of the Church : but as regards the bishops,
and all others soever constituted in the priestly order, thio
are together celebrating an oecumenical council in this city,
that they busy themselyes to apply assiduously to the praises
of God, to offer up victims, praises, and prayers ; to cele-
brate the sacrifice of the mass on each Lord's day at least,
the day whereon Gk)d made the light, and rose again from
the dead, and poured forth the Holy Ohost upon his dis-
ciples; making, as the same Holy Ghost enjoins by the

^ i. 17. " i. 5. * Ps. ex. 10 (oxi. 10).

y Gal. V. 16. » Rom. xU. 12.

14 8I38I0K U.

apostle, 9ft^licationi,praifer8, intereesdom^ gvomg of thanks,^
for our most holy lord the pope, for the emperor, for kings,
and the rest who are placed in authority, and for all men,
that toe may lead a quiet and peaceable life,^ may enjoy
peace, and see an increase of £Euth. Furthermore, it exhorts
that they fest at least on every Friday, in memoiy of the
passion of the Lord, and bestow ahns on the poor. Further-
more, on every Thursday there shall be celebrated, in the
cathedral church, the mass of the Holy Ghost, with the
litanies and other prayers appointed to this end ; and on
the same day there shall be said, in the other churches, at
least the litanies and prayers. And during the time that
the sacred services are being performed, let there be no
talkings or conversations together, but, with mouth and
mind, association with the celebrant. And inasmuch as It
hehoveth bishops to be blameless, sober, chaste, ruling well
their own household,^ [the council] exhorts also that, above
all things, each observe sobriety at table, and moderation in
diet ; &irther, thal^ since idle conversations are often wont
to arise there, the reading of the divine Scriptures be in-
troduced,^ even At the tables of bishops ; and let each teach
and instruct his servants not to be quarrelsome, given to
wine, immodest, covetous, haughty, blasphemous, and lovers
of pleasures ; in fine, let them shun vice and embrace virtue,
and in dress, appearance, and in all their actions show forth
modesty, as becomes the servants of the servants of God.

Moreover, whereas it is the chief care, solicitude, and
intention of this sacred and holy council, that, the darkness
of heresies, which durins so many years has covered the
earth, being dispeUed, the light, brightness, and purity of
Catholic truth niay, by the aid of Jesus Ohrist, who is the
true light,^ shine lorth *, and that those things which need
reformation may be reformed ; the same synod exhorts all
Catholics here assembled, and to be assembled, and especially
those who are skilled in the sacred letters, that by sedulous
meditation they diligently reflect within themselves, by what
ways and means the intention of the synod may be best
directed,, and obtain the desired effect ; that, in the most

• 1 Tim. ii. 1. ^ lb. vs. 2.

« 1 Tim. iii. % 4, omitting "the husband of one wife."

«» C. ii. D. xliv. (Cone. Tol. iii.). • John i. 5.

THE SYKBOL OlS PAITH. 15

Erompt and prudent manner, things to be condemned, may
e condemned ; and things ito be approTed, apprOTed ; that
so, throughout the whole world, all may, with one mouth,
and with the same confession of faith, glorify Gk>d, and the
Tather of our Lord Jesus Christ.

But in delivering their sentiments, when the priests of
the Lord are sitting together in the place of benemction, no
one, according to the statute of the Council of Toledo, ^
ought either to be boisterous hj immoderate outcries, or
cause disturbance bj uproar ; none to be contentious with
false, vain, or obstmate disputations; but let whatsoever
is said be so tempered by the mildest utterance of the
words spoken, that neither the hearers be offended, nor the
dear perception of a correct judgment warped by the mind
beiQg troubled.

Eurthermore, this sacred svnod has ordained and decreed,
that if it should chance to nappen that any do not sit in
their due place, and [thus] deliver their sentiments, even
under the word Itpleaseth, are present at the congregations,
and take part in any other act soever while the council
lasts, none shall thereby be prejudiced, none acquire a new
right.K

INDIOnOV OF THS BXXT SBBSIGH*

After this, the next Session was indicted for Thursday, the
4(th of the ensuing month of Eebruary.

SESSION THE THIKD.
Cdebraled on the fourth day of the mmUh €f Februt^ryi, 1546.

DECREE TOUCUlNa THE BTMBOL 07 FAITH.

In ihe Nome of the Holy and Undivided Trinity, Father, and Son, and

Holy Ohost,

This sacred and holy, oecumenical and general Synod of
Trent, lawfully assembled in the Holy Qhost — ^the same
three legates of the Apostolic See presiding therein — con-
sidering the magnitude of the matters to be Seated of, espe-

' C. iii. C. V. qu. 4 (Cone. Tol. xi.),
' Repeated in Session zxy.

cially of those which are comprised under the two heads of
the extu*patmg of heresies, ana the reforming of manners, for
the sake of which chiefly it is assembled, and recognizing
with the apostles, that its wrestling is not against flesh and
hlood, hut against the spirits of wickedness in the high places,^
exhorts, with the same [^postle], all and each, above all
things, to be strong in theliord, and in the power of his mighty
in all things taking the shield of faith, wheremth theg may he
Me to quench all theflerg darts of the most wicked one, aim to
take the helmet ofsahation, with the sword of the spirit, which
is the word of Gjod} Wherefore, that this its pious solicitude
may have its beginning and progress by the grace of God, it
ordains and decrees that, before all other things, a confession
of faith is to be set forth ; following herein the examples of
the Fathers, who, in the most sacred councils, have been wont,
at the beginning of the transactions thereof, to oppose this
shield against heresies ; and with this alone, on some occa-
sions, have they drawn the unbelieving to the faith, over-
thrown heretics, and confirmed the fai^ul. Wherefore, it
has thought good, that the symboU of faith which the holy
]Roman Church makes use of, as being that principle wherein all
who profess the faith of Christ must necessarily agree, and that
firm and only foundation against which the gates of hell shall
never prevail,^ be expressed in the very same words in which
it is read in all the churches. Which [symbol] is as follows :*
I believe in one God, the Eather Almighty, maker of heaven
and earth, of all things visible and invisible ; and in one Lord
Jesu^ Christ, the only-begotten Son of GtoA, and bom of the
Father before all ages ; God of G^d, light of light, very God
of very God ; begotten, not made, of one substance with the
Father ; by whom all things were made : who for us men, and
for our salvation, came down from the heavens, and was incar-
nate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and was made
man : crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate, he suffered
and was buried ; and he rose again on the third day, accord-

' »» Ephes. vi. 12. « lb. v. 10, 16, 17.

J /. e» ieuera, or watchword^ " the object of creeds haying been to
distinguish true Christians from heretics and infidels." — ^Tomline on
Art. viii. p. 183. See the instances collected by Pearson on the Creed,
Prsef. p. 13, sq. note,

^ Matt. xvi. 18. ' See Cone. Constant, i., c. 4.

OK THE CAKOiaCAL SOBIPTXTBES. 17

ing to the Scriptures ; and he ascended into heaven, sitteth
at the right hand of the Father ; and again will come with
glorj to judge the Hying and the dead ; of whose kingdom
there shall ue no endj &nd in the Holy Ghost, the Lord
and giver of life, who proceedeth fix>m the rather( ftnd BosX .
who with the Father and the Son together is worshipped and
glorified ; who spoke by the prophets : and one holy Catho-
lic and Apostolic Church. 1 confess one baptism for the
remission of sins ; and I look for the resurrection of the
dead, and the life of the world to come. Amen.

INDIOnON 07 THB KIXT SESSION.

The some sacred and holy, oecumenical and general Synod
of Trent, lawfully assembled in the Holy Ghost, the same
three legates of tne Apostolic See presiding therein, — ^under-
standing that many prelates from divers places are girt for
their joum^, and that some also are on their way to come
hither ; and considering that all that may be decreed by the
said sacred Bjnod may seem to be in so much the greater
estimation and honour with all men, as it shall have been
sanctioned and confirmed by a more numerous and fuller
council and attendance of fathers, has resolved and decreed,
that the next session after the present one be celebrated
on the Thursday after lABta/re Sunday next ; but that, in the
interim, the discussion and examination of those things
which shall seem fit to the said synod to discuss and examine
be not deferred.

SESSION THE FOURTH,
Cd^aied on the eighth day of the month ofAprU, 1546.

DECBBE OONOEBNINa THB CANONICAL SCBlTrUBES.

The sacred and holy, oecumenical and general Synod of
Trent, lawfully assembled in the Holy Ghost, the same
three legates of : the Apostolic See presiding therein, — ^keep-
ing this always in view, that, errors being removed, the
purity itself of the Gospel be preserved in the Church ;
which [Gospel], before promised through the prophets in
the holy Scriptures," our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of

n Jerem. zxxi. 22 (qy. 83 f).
C

Gh)d, first promulgated with His own mouth, and then com-
manded to be preached>^ hj His apostles to every creature,
as the foimtain Doth of every saviae: truth, and discipline of

/ moraJB ; and perceiying that this toith <^d diseiplLe are
contained in the written books, and the unwritten traditions
which, received by the apostles from the mouth of Christ
himself, or &om the apostles themselves,^ the Holy Ghost

I dictating, have come down even unto us, transmitted as it
were from hand to hand ; [the synod] following the examples
of the orthodox Others, receives and venerates with equal
affection of piety, and reverence, all the books both of the
Old and of the New Testament, — seeing that one God is the
author of both, as also the said traditions, as well those
appertaining to faith as to morals, as having been dictated,
either by Christ's own word of mouth, or by the Holy
Ghost, and preserved by a continuous succession in the
Catholic Church. And it has thought it meet that a catar
logue of the sacred books be inserted m this decree, lest doubt
arise in any one's mind as to which are the books that are
received by this synod. They are as set down here below :
.of the Old Testament: the five books of Moses, to wit.
Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy; Jostiah,
Judges, Euth, four books of Kings, two of Paralipomena,P
the first book of Esdras, and the second which is entitled
Nehemias ; Tobias, Judith, Esther, Job, the Davidical Psal-
ter, [containing] a hundred and fifty psalms ; the Proverbs,
Ecclesiastes, the Canticle of Canticles, Wisdom, Ecclesias-
ticus, Isaias, Jeremias, mth Baruch ; Ezechiel, Daniel ; the
twelve minor prophets, to wit, Osea, Joel, Amos, Abdias,
Jonas, Micheas, Nahum, Habacuc, Sophonias, AggsBus,
Zacharias, M alachias ; two books of the Machabees, the
first and the second. Of the New Testament : the four
Gospels, according to Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John ; the
Acts of the Apostles written by Luke the Evangelist ; four-
teen epistles of Paul the apostle, [one] to the Eomans, two
to the Corinthians, [one] to the Gtilatiaiis, to the Ephesians,
to the Philippians, to the Colossians, two to the Thessa-
lonians, two to Timothy, [one] to Titus, to Philemon, to the

" Matt, xxviii. 19, sq. ; Mark xvi. 15. ® 2 Thess. ii. .14.

P /. e. chronicles ; lit. "things omitted," these books forming a kind
of supplement to the books of l^ngs.

OK THE CAKOKlOAL SCBIPTTJBSS. 10

Hebrews ; two of Peter the apostle, three of John the apos-
tle, one of the apostle James, one of Jude the apostle, and
the Apocalypse of John the Apostle. Bnt if any one receive
not, as Bocrei and canonical, these same books entire with
all their parts, as they have been used to be read in the
Catholic Church, and as they are contained in the old Latin
vul^ate edition ; and knowingly and deUberately despise the
traditions aforesaid ; let him be anathema.^ Let all, there-
fore, understand, in what order, and in what manner, this
said synod, after haying laid the foundation of the confession
of jBEuth, will proceed, and what testimonies and defences it
wfll nuunljr use in confirmiBg dogmas, and in restoring
morals in the Church*

DEOBXB CONOESNINO THE EDmOK AlTD THE USE 07 THE BAORED BOOKS.

Moreover, the same sacred and holy synod, considering
that no little utility may accrue to the Church of Qt)d, if, _
out of all the Latin editions, now in circulation of the sacred i
books, it be known which is to be held as authentic, ordains |
and declares, that the said old and vulgate edition, which, by
the long usa^e of so many ages, has been approved in the
Church, be, m public lectures, disputations, preachings, and
expositions, hela as authentic \ and that no one is to dare, or
presume to reject it under any pretext soever.

Eurthermore, in order to restrain petulant spirits, It
decrees, that no one, relying on his own skill, shall, in
matters of faith, and of morals pertaining to the edification
of Christian doctrine, wresting the sacred Scripture to his .
own senses, dare to interpret the said sacred Scripture con- \
trary to that sense which holy mother Church, whose it is toy
judge of the true sense and interpretation of the holy Scrip-
tures, hath held and doth hold ; or even contrary to the una-
nimous consent of the Fathers ;' even though suchlike inter-
pretations were never [intended] to be at any time published.'
They who shall contravene shall be made known by their
ordinaries, and be punished with the penalties by law estab-
lished.

'I /. 6. accursed, denoting the " absolute, irrevocable, and entire sepa-
ration of a person from the communion of the &ithful." — Galmet, s. v.,
p. 59 of my edition. See Bishop Tomline on Art. viii. p. 1 85, sqq.
whose temperate langua^ge on this subject deserves the highest com-
mendation. ' Edendse.

c2 -

And wishing also, as is just, to impose a restraint in this
matter upon printers, who now, without restraint, that is,
thinking that whatsoever they please is allowable, print,
without the license of ecclesiastical superiors, the said books
of BBcreA Scripture, and the annotations and expositions upon
them of all persons indifferently, with the press,* often un-
named, often even fictitious, and what is more grievous still,
without the author's name ; and also indiscriminately keep
for sale books of this kind printed elsewhere ; [this synod]
ordains and decrees, that, henceforth, the sacred Scripture,
and especially the aforesaid old and vulgate edition, be
printed in the most correct manner possille; and thLt it
shall not be lawM for any one to print, or cause to be
printed, any books whatever, on sacred matters, without the
name of the author ; nor to sell them in future, or even to
keep them by them, imless they shall have been first ex-
ammed, and approved of by the ordinary ; under pain of the
anathema and fine imposed in a canon of the last Council of
Lateran.* And, if they be regulars, besides this manner of
e3ui,mination and approval, they shall be bound to obtain a
license also firom then: own superiors, the books having been
■examined according to the form of their own statutes. But
-as to those who lend, or circulate them in manuscript, with-
out their having been first examined and approved, they shall
be subjected to the same penalties as the printers. And they
who shall have them in their possession, or shall read them,
shall, unless they discover the authors, be themselves regarded
as the authors. And this approbation of books of this kind
shall be given in writing ; and to this end it shall appear au-
thentically at the bec^inning of the book, whether the book
be written or printed ; and all this, that is, both the appro-
bation and the examination, shall be done gratis, so that
things to be approved, may be .approved, and things to be
condemned, condemned.

After these matters, wishing to repress that temerity, by
v^hich the words and sentences of sacred Scripture are turned
and twisted to all maimer of profane uses, to wit, to things
;scurrilous, fiabulous, vain, to flatteries^ detractions, supersti-

■ /. e» the printer's name and residence.

* See 0. 8, de libr. prohib. in vii., v. 4 (Leo X.).

ON OBIGINAL BIN. 21

tions, impious and diabolical incantations, divinations, easting-
of lots, nay, even hereafter defamatory libels ; [the synod]
commands and enjoins, for the doing away with this kuid of
irreverence and contempt, and that no one may hereafter
dare in any manner to apply the words of sacred Scripture to
these and such like purposes; that all men of this description,
profaners and violators of the word of God, be restrained by
the bishops by the penalties of law and of their own appoint-
ment.

umicnoTSf of the next bbssiok.

Likewise, this sacred and holy svnod resolves and decrees,
that the next ensuing session be held and celebrated on tho
Thursday after the next most sacred festival of Pentecost.

SESSION THE FIFTH.
Cdebraied on the $evenieenih day of the month qfjune, 1546.

DEORBB OONCEBinNO OBIOIKAL BUT.

That our Catholic faith, without which it is impossible t<r
please Ood^ may, errors being cleared awav, continue in its
own perfect and undefiled integrity, and that the Christian
people may not he carried about with every wind of doctrine ;^
whereas that old serpent,^ the perpetual enemy oi the human
race, amongst the very many evils by which the Church of
God is in these our times disturbed, has also stirred up not
only new, but even old dissensions touching original sin, and
the remedy thereof; the sacred and holy, oecumenical and
general Synod of Trent, lawfully assembled in the Holy
Ghost, the three same legates of the Apostolic See presiding
therein, — ^wishing now to come to the recalling of the erring,
and the confirming of the wavering, following the testimonies
of the sacred Scriptures, and of the holy fathers, and of the
most approved councils, and the judgment and consent of the
Church itself, ordains, confesses, and declares these things
touching the said original sin : —

1. If any one does not confess that the first man, Adam,
when he had transgressed the commandment of God in Para-

■ Heb. xi. 6. ^ Ephes. iv. 14. " Gen. ii.

22 • 8ESSI0K T.

dise, immediately lost, the holiness and justice in which he
had been conatitutedT and that he incurred, through the
offence of such prevarication, the wrath and indignation of
GK)d, and consequently death, which God had previously
"7 threatened to him,^ and, together with death, captivity under
the power of him who thenceforth had the empire of death,
that is to sav, the devilry and that the entire Adam, through
that offence of prevarication, waa changed aa respects the
body and soul, for the worse ; let him be anathema.

2. If any one asserts, that the prevarication of Adam in-
jured himself alone, and not his posterii?^ ; and that he lost
for himself alone, and not for us also, the holiness and justice,
received of God, which he lost ; or that he, defiled by the sin

'\.0 of disobedience, has only transftised death, and pains of the
^ body, into the whole human race, but not sin also, which is
the death of the soul, let him be anathema; inasmuch as he
contradicts the apostle, who says : Btf one man sin entered
into the worlds and hy sin death, and so death passed upon all
men, in whom all have sinned,^

3. K any one asserts that this sin of Adam, which in its
•origin is one, and being transftised into all by propagation,
not by imitation, is in each one as his own, is taken away
either by the powers of human nature, or by any other re-
medy than the merit of the one mediator, ov/r Lord Jesus
Chnst,^ who hath reconciled us to God in his own hlood, made
tmto us righteousness, sanctification, and redemption;^ or, if
he denies that the same merit of Jesus Christ is applied,
both to adults and to infants, by the sacrament of baptism
rightly administered in the form of the Church ; let him be
anathema : For there is no other name under heaven given to
men, wherehv we must he saved.^ Whence that voice : Behold
the La/mh of God, behold him who taheth oMoy the sins of the
world ;^ and that other, — As mamy of you as have heen hap-
tized have put on Christ.^

4. If any one denies that infants, newly bom from their
mothers' wombs, even though they be sprung from baptized
parents, are to be baptized ; or says that they are baptized

« Gen. ii. 17 ; ui. 17. ^ Heb. ii. 14. » Rom. v. 12.

« Ephes. ii. 18 ; Ck)los8. ii. 13 ; 1 Tim. u. 5, sq. • ^1 Ck)r. i. SO.
< Acts iv. 12. «> -/ohn i. 29. • Gal. iu. 27.

OK OBiaoTAL snr. 23

indeed /or the remission of sins, ^ but that they draw nought
of original sin from Adam, which has need to be expiated
by the laver of regeneration^ for the obtaining life everlast-
ing, — ^whence it follows, as a consequence, that in them the
form of baptism, for the remission of sins, is understood to'
be not true, but Mse, — let him be anathema. For that
which the apostle has said, By one man sin entered into the
world, and hy sin deaths and so death passed upon all men in
whom all have sinned,^ is not to be understood otherwise \
than as the Catholic Church spread everywhere hath always y
understood it. For, by reason of this rule of faith, from a tra-
dition of the apostles, even infants, who could not as yet in
themselves commit any sin, are for this cause truly hiptized
for the remission of sins, that in them that which they have
contracted by generation, mskj be cleansed away by regene-
ration. For, v/nless a man he horn again of water a/nd the
Hohf Ohost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God}

5. If any one denies, that, by the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which is conferred in baptism, the guilt of original
sin is remitted ; or even asserts that all that which has the
true and proper nature of sin is not taken away, but saya
that it is only erased,^ or not imputed, — ^let him be anathema.
For, in those who are horn again, G-od hates nothing, because,
Inhere is no condemnation to those who are truly huried toge^
ther toith Christ hy haptism into death ;^ who walk not accord-
ing to the flesh, but, putting off the old man, and putting on
the new one, who is created according to God,^ are made inno-
cent, immaculate, pure, harmless, and beloved of God, heirs
indeed of God, hut joint heirs with Christ ;^ so that theare is
nothing whatever to retard them from entrance into heaven.
But this holy synod confesses and is sensible, that in the
baptized there remains concupiscence, or an incentive [to v -
sin] ;"* which, since it is left for us to strive agamst, cannot. .,
injure those who consent not, but resist manfuUy by the ^'•**^*^

« Acts ii. 88. ' See Tit. iii. 5. f Rom. v. 12. >» John iii. 6.

' Badi, to he scraUihed otU, a metaphor taken from the ancient mode of
writing, in which the flat end of the style rubbed out the marks which
the sharp end had made upon a waxen tablet.

i Rom. viii. 1 ; vi. 4. * Ephes. iv. 22, 24. * Rom. viii. 17.

"* Vd /(miitem, I cannot help thinking this a mistake for " velut
fomitem.*'

24 8E8SI0K y.

grace of Jesus Christ ; yea, he who shall have striven lawfully
shall he crotoned.^ This concupiscence, which the apostle
sometimes calls sin,^ the holy synod declares that the Ca-
tholic Church has never understood to be called sin, as being
trul^ and properly sin in those horn ayam, but because it is
of sin, and inclines to sin. And if any one is of a contrary
opinion, let him be anathema.

This same hol^ synod doth nevertheless declare, that it is
not in its intention to include in this decree, where original
sin is treated of, the blessed and immaculate Virgin Mary,
the mother of GU)d; but that the constitutions of Pope
Sixtus IV.,P of happy memory, are to be observed, under the
pains contained in the said constitutions, which it renews.

DBOBEB OOKOEBNINO BXFOBHATIOK.

CHAPTEB I.

On the InaHtution of a Lectureship of Sacred Scripture, and of the

Liberal ArU,'^

The 'same sacred and holy synod, adhering to the pious
constitutions of the sovereign pontiffs, and of approved
councils, and embracing and adding to them ; that the
heavenly treasure of the sacred books, which the Holy Ghost
has with the greatest liberality deUvered unto men, may not
lie neglected, hath ordained and decreed, that, in those
churches where there is found to be a prebend, prestimony,^
or other stipend, under what name soever, destined for
readers" in sacred theology, the bishops, archbishops, pri-
mates, and other ordinaries of those places, shall force and
compel, even by the subtraction of the &uits, those who hold

» 2 Tim. ii. 6. • Rom. vi. 12 ; vii. 8.

P Comp. Seas. vi. can. xxiii. <i CI Seas, xxiii. § 18, etc.

' This word probably means " a fimd, or revenue, appropriated by
the founder for the subsistence of a priest, without being erected into
any title of benefice, chapel, prebend, or priory, and which is not subject
either to the pope or to the ordinary, but whereof the patron, and those
who have a right from him, are the collators, and nominate and confer
plenojure" — Encycl. Brit. v. xvii. p. 849. Hoffinan, Lex. t. iii. p. 879,
defines it — " beneficium cum aliquo onere," referring to Council of
Trent, Sess. xxiii. 18. See Du Cange, vol. v. p. 781.

■ /. e. lecturers. So at Oxford we have ''readers" of rhetoric,
anatomy, &c.

ON BEFOBMATIOK. 25

bucIl prebend, prestimonj, or stipend, unto the expounding
and interpreting of the said sacred Scripture, either person-
allj, if they be competent, or otherwise by a competent sub-
stitute, to be chosen hj the said bisnops, archbishops,
primates, and other ordinaries of those places. But, for the
niture, let no such prebend, prestimony, or stipend be
bestowed saye on competent persons, and those who can of
themselyes fulfil that office; and let the proyision made
otherwise be null and yoid. But in metropolitan, or cathe-
dral churches, if the city be distinguished or populous, and
also in collegiate churches situated in any large town, eyen
though they belong to no diocese, proyided the clergy be
numerous theie ; wnerein there is no such prebend, presti-
mony, or stipend, set aside for this purpose, let the prebend
that shall first become yacant in any way soeyer, except by
reason of resignation, and to which some other incompatible
burthen is not attached, be understood to be ipso facto ap-
pointed and set apart to that purpose for oyer. And in case
that in the said churches there should not be any, or not any
sufficient prebend, let the metropolitan, or the bishop him-
self, by the assigning thereunto of the fruits of some simple
benefice, the burthen of the obligations thereto belon&;mg
being neyertheless discharged, or by the contributions oi the
beneficiaries of his city and diocese, or otherwise, as may be
most conyenient, proyide in such wise, with the advice of his
chapter, as that the said reading of sacred Scripture be held;
yet so that what other readings soeyer there may be, whether
established by custom, or in any other way, be not by
any means therefore omitted. As to those churches, how-
ever, whose annual revenues may be slight, and where the
number of the clergy and laity is so smaU, that a readership
of theology cannot "be conveniently held therein, let them
at least have a master, to be chosen by the bishop, with the
advice of the chapter, to teach grammar gratuitously to
clerks, and other poor scholars, that so they may afterwards,
with G-od's permission, pas^ on to the said study of sacred
Scripture itself. And to this end, either let there be assigned
to that master of grammar the fruits of some simple benefice,
which he may receive so long as he continues teaching (pro-
vided, however, that the said benefice be not deprived of the
duty due to it), or let some suitable remuneration be paid

him out of the episcopal or capitular income ; or, in fine, let
the bishop himself devise some other method suited to his
church and diocese ; that so this pious, useful, and profitable
provision may not, under any colourable pretext soever,
oe neglected. In the monasteries also of monks, where it
can be conveniently done, let there be in like manner, a
lecture on sacred Scripture, wherein if the abbots be negli-
gent, let the bishops of the places, as the delegates herein of
the Apostolic See, compel them thereto by fitting remedies.
And in the convents of other regulars, in which studies can
conveniently flourish, let there in like manner be a reader-
ship of sacred Scripture ; which readership shall be assigned
by the general or provincial chapters, to the more worthy
masters. In the public colleges also, wherein a readership
so honourable, and the most necessarv of all, has not hitherto
been instituted, let it be established by the piety and charity
of the most religious princes and states, for the defence and
increase of the Gathohc faith, and the preservation and pro-
pagation of sound doctrine ; and where it has been [once
instituted, and has been neglected, let it be restored. And,
lest impiety be disseminated under the semblance of piety,
the same holy synod ordains, that no one be admitted to this
office of reaoing, whether in public or in private, who has
not been previously examined and approved of by the bishop
of the place, as to his life, conversation, and knowledge ;
which, liowever, is not to be understood of lecturers in
convents of monks. But those who are teaching the said
sacred Scripture, as long as they publiclj teach in the schools,
as also the scholars who are studying in those schools, shall
fully rejoice in and enjoy, though absent,* all the privileges
accorded by common law, as regards the reception of the
fruits of their prebends and benefices.

CHAPTER n.
On Preachen of the Word of Ood, and on Quetlon cfAlms,

But whereas the preaching of the Gospel is no less
necessary to the Christian commonwealth than the reading
thereof; and whereas this is the chief duty of bishops ; the

* In abseDtia.

OK BE70BKATI0K. 27

same holy synod hath resolved and decreed, that all bishops,
archbishops, primates, and all other prelates of the churches
be bound personally, if they be not lawfully hindered, to

E reach the holy Gt)spel of Jesus Christ. But if it should
appen that tne bisnops and others aforesaid, be hindered
by lawful impediment, they shall be bound, according to the
form prescribed br the general council,^ to ap]^oint fit men
to discharge wholesomely this o£B[ce of preachine;. But if
any one disdain to execute this, let him be subjected to
fitrict punishment.

Archpriests also, curates, and all those who in any
manner soever hold any parochial or other churches, which
bave the cure of souls, shall, at least on the Lord's days
and solemn feasts, either personally, or, if they be lawAiUy
hindered, by others who are competent, feed the people
committed to them, with wholesome words, accordmg to
their own capacity, and that of their [congregations] ; by
teaching the things which it is necessary for all to know
unto salvation, and by annoimdng to them with briefness
and simplicity of discourse the vices which they must needs
avoid, and tne virtues which they must follow after, that
they may escape everlasting punishment, and obtain the
glory of heaven. And if any one of them neglect to dis-
charge this duty, even though he may plead, on whatsoever
ground, that he is exempt from the jurisdiction of the
bishop, and even though the churches may be, in what manner
soever, said to be exempted, or perhaps annexed or united to
a monastery that is even out of tne diocese, let not the
watchful pastoral care of the bishops be wanting, provided
[those churches] really be within their diocese ; lest that
word be fulfilled ; The yotmg children have asked for bread,
and there was none to break it tmto themP- Wherefore, if,
after having been admonished by the bishop, they shall
neglect this their duty for the space of three months, let
them be compelled by ecclesiastical censures, or otherwise,
according to the discretion of the said bishop ; in such wise
that even, if this seem to him expedient, some fair remune-
ration be paid, out of the fruits of the benefices, to another

* Of Lateran. See c 15, x. de off. jud. ord, i. 31 (Cone, Lat. IV.).

* Lament, iv. 4.

28 BESsioir y.

person to discharge that o£Sce, until the principal himself,
coming to his right senses, shall fulfil his own duty. But
should there be found to be any parochial churches, subject
to monasteries which are in no diocese, if the abbots
and regular prelates be negligent in the matters aforesaid,
let them be compelled thereto by the metropolitans, in
whose provinces the said dioceses are situated, as the dele-
gates to that end of the Apostolic See ; nor let custom, or
exemption, or appeal, or reclamation, or action of recovery,
have power to impede the execution of this decree ; until by
a competent judge, who shall proceed summarily, and by
examining only mto the truth of the flEU^t, the case shall
have been taken cognizance of, and decided. But regulars,
of what order soever, may not preach even in the churches of
their own order, unless they have been examined and
approved of concerning theur life, maimers, and knowledge,
by their own superiors, and with their license ; with which
license they shaU be boimd to present themselves personally
before the bishops, and crave a blessing from them, before
they begin to preach. But, in churches which are not those
of their ovm orders, besides the license of their own
superiors, they shall be obliged to have also the license
of the bishop, without which they may not on any account
preach in the said churches which belong not to their own
orders. But the said license the bishops shall grant gratui-
tously. But if, which heaven avert, a preacher should
spread errors, or scandals, amongst the people, even though
he preach in a monastery of his own, or of another order,
let the bishop interdict his preaching:. But if he preach
heresies, let liiin proceed against hfm accordiBg to the
appointment of the law, or the custom of the place, even
though the said preacher should plead that he is exempted
by a general or special privilege : in which case the bishop
shall proceed by apostolic authority, and as the delegate of
the Apostolic See. But let bishops be careful, that no
preacher be harassed, either by false accusations, or in any
other way calumniously ; or have any just cause of com-
plaint against them. Furthermore, let bishops be on their
guard not to permit any one, whether of those, who, being
regulars in name, live nevertheless out of their cloisters,
and the obedience of their religious rules, or secular priests.

OK JtJBTmOATIOK. 29

unless tbe^ be known to them, and are approved in morals
and doctrine, to preach in their own ciiy or diocese, even
under the pretext of any privilege soever ; until the holy
Apostolic See has been thereon consulted hj the said
bishops ; from which [see] it is not likely that such privi-
leges can be extorted by unworthj persons, except by
suppressing the truth, or by uttermg falsehood. Those
who quest for alms, who are also commonly called Questors,
of whatsoever condition they be, shall not in any way pre-
sume, either of themselves, or by another, to preach ; and
those who act contrarily shall, any privileges notwithstand-
ing, be wholly restrained by opportune remedies, by the
bishops and ordinaries of the places.

Tsmanov or thb kxxt session.

The sacred and holy synod also ordains and decrees, that
the first ensuing session be held and ciBlebrated on the
Thursday after the feast of the blessed apostle James.

The session was afterwards prorogued to the thirteenth day

of the month of January^ 1547.

SESSION THE SIXTH,
Cdebrated on the thtrteenih day of ike month of January, 1547.

DBCBXB OONCEBNnrO JUSTIFICATION.

Prrfaoe,

Whereas there is, at this time, not without the casting
away of many souls, and grievous detriment to the unity of
the 'Church, acertab erroneous doctrine disseminated ^n-
ceming Justification ; with a view to the praise and glory of
Almighty God, the tranquillizing of the Church, and the
salvation of souls, the sacred and holy, oecumenical and
general Synod of Trent, lawfully assembled in the Holy
Ghost, — ^the most reverend lords, the lords Giammaria del
Monte, bishop of PalsBstrina, and Marcellus of the title of
the Holy Cross in Jerusalem, priest, cardinals of the holy
Eomish Church, and legates apostolic a latere, presiding
therein, in the name of our most holy father and lord in
Christ, Paul in., by the providence of God, Pope, — ^pur-

80 ss8sio.ir Ti.

poses to expound to all the fSuthfid of Christ the true and
sound doclrine of the said Justification ; which the sun of
righteousness/ Jesus Christ, the author and finisher of our
faitli^ taught, the apostles transmitted, and the Catholic
Church, the Holy Ghost reminding her thereof,* has con-
tinually retained; most strictly forbidding that any hence-
forth presume to believe, preach, or teach, otherwise than
as by the present decree is ordained and declared.

CHAPTEE I.
On the Inability ofNoOure and oftheZam to justify Man,

The holy synod declares first, that, for the correct and

sound understanding of the doctrine of Justification, it

behoves that each one recognize and confess, that, whereas

all men had lost their innocence in the prevarication of

Adam,y having become unclean,' and, as the apostle says, by

n/ natii/re the children of torath,^ as [this synod] has set forth

in the decree on prigmal sin, they were so far the servants of

sin}^ and under the power of the devil and of death, that

^'^ not only the G-entiles by the force of nature, but not even

the Jews by the very letter itself of the law of Moses, were

able to be liberated, or to arise, &om thence; although in

/ 1 /^them free will, attenuated and bent down as it was in its

^ powers, was by no means extinguished.

CHAPTER II.
Tofwching tht IHapentation and Mystery of the Advent of Christ,

Through the which it came to pass, that the heavenly
Father, the Father of mercies and the Ood of all comfort^
when that blessed fulness of the time was come^ sent unto
men Jesus Christ, His own Son, who had been, both before
the Law, and during the time of the Law, declared and
promised to many of the holy fii-thers, that He might both
redeem the Jews who were under the Law,* and that the

" Malach. iv. 2. * Heb. xiL 2. ' John xiv. 26.

T Rom. V. 12 ; 1 Cor. xv. 22. » la. Ixiv. 6. • Ephea. ii. 8.

»• Rom. vi. 17. « 2 Cor. i. 3. * Gal. iv. i,
• See Gal. V. 4.

OIJT JtJSTIFIOATIOir. 31

Gentiles, who followed not after justice} migbt attain to
justice, and that all might receive the adoption of sons.
Him hath Qt)d set forth m a propitiator, throttah faith in
his hloodf for owr sins; and not for our sins only, but also for
those of the whole world fi

CHAPTER in.
Who a/re justified ihrtrngh Christ,

I But, though Se died for all} yet do not all receive the
- benefit of His death ; but those only, unto whom the merit

I of His passion is communicated. Por as in truth men, if >
they were not bom propagated from the seed of Adam,
would not be bom imjust; whereas, by that propagation,
they contract through the same [Adam] when they are
conceived, injustice as their own ; so, if they were not bom )
again in Chnst, they would never be justified ; seeing that
in that new birth there is bestowed upon them, through the
merit of His passion, the grace whereby they are made just.
!For this benefit the apostle exhorts us evermore to aive
thanks to the Father, who hath made us meet to he partakers
of the inheritable of the saints in light, and hath delivered us
from the power of darkness, and hath translated us into the
hinadom of the Son of his love, in whom we have redemption,
ana remission of sins j %

CHAPTER IV.

A Descnption ie interwoven^ of the Justification of the Impiotu, qmd of the

Manner thereof wider At State of Orace.

By which words a description of the Justification of the
impious is interwoven, to the effect that it is a translation
from that state in which man is bom a child of the first Adam,
into the state of grace, and of the adoption of the sons of
God} through the second Adam, Jesus Christ, our Saviour.
And this translation, since the Qospel has been promulgated,
cannot be effected, without the laver of regeneration,^ or the
desire thereof, as it is written ; Unless a man he horn again of

' Rom. ix. 30. f Rom. iii. 25. ^ 1 John ii. 2.

> 2 Cor. V. 15. i Coloas. i. 12-14.

^ Introduced by way of digression or comment. ^ Rom. v. 23.

■ Tit. iii. 5.

32 sussioir yi.

tjoater and of the Holy Ohost^ ike cannot pnter into the king-
dom of Ood,^

CHAPTER V.

On the Neeestity ofPn^paroHon for JuatifictUion, in the case of Adtdtt,

and whence it proceeds.

[This synod] furthermore declares, that, in adults, the
beginning of the said Justification is to be taken from the
preventing^' grace of God, through Jesus Christ, that is to
say, from His vocation, by which, without the existence of
any merits on their parts, they are called ; that so they, who
through sins were turned away from God^ may, through His
quickening and assisting grace, be disposed to turn them-
selves unto their own justification, by freely assenting to,
and co-operating with that said grace : so that, while God
toucheth the heart of man by the illumination of the Holy
G-host, neither is man himself utterly inactive while he
receives that inspiration, inasmuch as he is also able to
reject it ; yet is he not able, without the ^race of God, by
his own free will to move himself unto justice in His sight.
"Whence, when it is said in the sacred writings: Turn ye
unto me, and I will tvum unto youf we are admonished of
our liberty : when we answer ; Ihim thou us, O Lordj unto
thee, and we shall he turned,^ we confess that we are pre-
vented by the grace^f God.

CHAPTER VI.

The Mcrnner of PreporcAion.

Now' they are disposed unto the said justice, when,
quickened, and assisted by divine grace, conceiving ^iV A hy
hearing,^ they are freely moved towards God, believmg those
things to be true which have been divinely revealed and pro-
mised, and this especially, that the impious is justified of God
hyHis grace, through the redemption that is' in Christ Jesus :^
and when, understanding themselves to be sinners, theiy,
through the fear of divine justice, whereby they are profitably
agitated by turning themselves to consider the mercy of God,
are raised unto hope, trusting that God will be propitious to

" John iii. 5.

® /. e, the grace of God going "before. This ia an old use of the verb
'* prevent," used as a translation oi frcevenire,
P Zach. i. 8. « Lam. v. 21. ' Rom. x. 17. ■ Rom. iii. 24.

OK JUBTIFICATIOK. 33

them for Christ's soke ; and they begin to love Him as the
fountain of all justice; and are for that reason moved against
sins by a certain hatred and detestation, that is to say, by
that penitence^ which must be performed before bap&inn : ^ \,
lastly, when they propose to receive baptism, to begin a new / ^^ /
life, and to keep the divine commandments. Concerning this
disposition it is written, Jle that cometh to God, mtist believe
that he is, and is a rewarder to them that seek him;^ and,
£e of good cheer, son, thy sins heforaiven thee f' and. The ^ i

fear of the Lbrd driveth away sinf^ and, tPo penam^e^ and he ^^ f^^^
baptized, every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the
remission of your sins, and you shall receive the gift of the
Holy Ghost ;^ and, Going, therefore, teach ye all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost ;y finally, Prepare your hearts unto the
LordJ'

CHAPTER VII.

WhaJt is the Justification of the Im^pious, and what are Us Causes,

This disposition, or preparation, justification itself follows,
which is not merely the remission of sins, but also the sanc-
tification and renewal of the inward man, through the volun-
tarj reception of the grace and gifts, whereby man firom
unjust becomes just, and from an enemy^ Mend, that so he
may be an heir according to the hope of eternal life,^

Of this justification the causes ore these : the final [cause]
indeed is the glory of God and of Christ, and eternal life ;
while the efficient cause is the merciful Ood, who gratui-
tously washes and sanctifies}* sealing, and anointing with the
holy Spirit of promise, who is the earnest of owr inheritance;^
but the meritorious cause is His most beloved only-begotten,
our Lord Jesus Christ, who, when we were enemies,^ for the
great charity wherewith he hved us,^ merited justification for
us by His most holy Passion on the wood of the cross, and
for us made satisfaction unto Gk)d the Eather ; the instru-

« Cf. Seas. xiv. 4. « Heb. xi. 6.

^ Matt. ix. 5. ^ Eccl. i. 21 (Apociypha).

Acts ii. 38. The " do penance'* (poenitentiam agite) is the Komanish
^'^iranslation of fttravori<rart, which properly signifies ** change your
? esrts, repent." r Matt, xxviii. 19.

° • 1 Sam. vii. 3. • Titus iii. 7. • * 1 Cor. vi. 11.

'-' Ephes. i. 13, 14. ^ Bom. y. 10. « Ephes. ii. 4.

D

84 1IE88X0Xr YI.

mental catuse, moreover, is the sacrament of baptism, which
is the sacrament of faith,. without which justification never
befel any man ; lastl^r, the sole formal cause is the justice of
Gk)d; not that by which He himself is just, but that by which
He maketh us Just, that, to wit, with which we, bemg en-
dowed by Him, are renewed in the spirit of our mind} and
we are not only reputed, but are l^iuy called, and are, just,
;, . ^ ; receiving justice within us, each one according to his own
measure, which the Hoh Gho9t divides to every man several^
as Setoillfi and according to each one's proper disposition
and co-operation. For, although no one can oe just, but he
. to whom the merits of the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ
/ are communicated, yet is this brought to pass in this justifi*
. ^Ji cation of the impious, when, by the merit of that same most
( / ] holy Passion, the charity of Qo4 *« ^hed abroad, by the Holy
.^ I Ghost, in the hearts^ of those who are justified, and is in-
I herent in them ; whence man, in the said justification
through Jesus Christ, into whom.he is ingrafted, receives,
I together with the remission of sins, all these things infused
Vat once, Mth, hope, and charity. Eor fiiith, unless to it be
Aadded hope and charity, neither unites [man] perfectly with
\' Christ, nor makes him a living member of His body. Por
— which reason it is most truly said, that Faith without works
is dead} and idle ;^^d In Christ Jesus neither circumcision
availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, but faith which worketh
by charity,^ This faith catechumens beg of the Church,
agreeably to a tradition of the apostles, previously to the
sacrament of baptism ; when they beg for the faith which
bestoweth life everlastmg, which, without hope and charity,
&ith cannot bestow. "Wlience also do they straightway hear
that word of Christ : If thou wilt enter info life, Jce^ the
commandments.^ Wherefore, when receiving true and Chris-
tian justice, they, immediately on being bom again, are com-
manded to preserve it pure, and sj)otless, as the first robe}
given unto them through Jesus Christ, instead of that which
Adam, by his disobedience, lost for himself and for us, that
so they may bear it before the tribunal of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and may have life- everlasting.

\ Bphes. iv. 28. » 1 Cor. xii. 11. *» Rom. v. 6.

* James ii..20. J Galat, v- 6 ; vi. 15. ^ Matt. adx. 17.

» Luke XV. 22.

OK JtJBTmCATIOK. d$

CHAPTER VIII.

In what Marnier it m\ut he undenUnyd that the Jmpmm U Justified h^ '

Faith, and freely,

Eut whereas the Apostle saith, that man is jtistified hy
faith, and freely^ those words are to be understood in that'
sense which the perpetual consent of the Catholic Church
hath held and expressed ; to wit; that we be therefore said to
he justified hy faith, because faith is the beginning of human
salvationy the foundation, and the root of all justification;
without which it is impossible to please God^ and to come unto
the fellowship of His sons ; but we are therefore said to be
justified /reew, because none of those things which precede
justification, whether feith or works, meritthe grace Itself of i
justification. For, if it he a grace, then is it no more h/
works, otherwise, as the same Apostle Bd^^, grace is no more
graced

CHAPTER IX.
Agaimst the Vain Confidence ofMeretiee,

But, although it be necessary to believe that sins neithei? V},«
are remitted, nor ever have been remitted, s&rejreely, by the / ^
divine mercy for Christ's sake ;' yet is it not to be said, thai?^
sins are forgiven, or have been forgiven, to any one who I
boasts of his confidence and certainty of the remission of hiay
sins, and rests on that alone-; since it may exist, yea, does in
our time exist, among heretics and schismatics ; and with
great earnestness is this confidence, vain, and remote from
all piety, preached up in opposition to the Catholic Churchi
But/ neither is this to be asserted, — that it behoves them
who are truly justified, without any doubting whatever, to
settle within themselves that they are justified, and that no
one is absolved from sins and justified, but he who for certain,
believes that he is absolved and justified ; and that absolution,
and justification are effected by this faith alone ; as though
whosoever believeth not this, doubts respecting the promises
of Gtod, and the eJBRcacy of the death and resurrection of
Christ. Eor, as no pious person ought to doubt respecting
the mercy of God, the merit of Qinst, and the virtue! and ^^•♦^

» Rom. iii. 24, 28. " Heb, xi. 6. ^ Rom. xLt: .

J) 2 <

"^

[

\

86 8£SSI0K YI.

efficacy of tlie sacraments, so each one, when he regards him-
self, and his own peculiar weakness and indisposition, may
entertain fear and apprehension concerning his own grace ;
inasmuch as no one can know with a certainty of faith, which
cannot be subject to mistake, that he has obtained the grace
of GK)d.

CHAPTER X.
On the I'Mveaae of Jmtijication received.

Having, therefore, been thus justified, and made the
Mends and of the household of Qod,"^ ad\&ncmgJrom stren^h
to gtrerMthfl they are renewed^ as the Apostle says, day hy
day ;^ that is, hy mortifying the members^ of their own flesh,
and by yielding tliem as instruments of righteousness unto
holinessy^ they, through the observance of the commandments
of God and of the Church, faith co-operating with good
works, increase in the justice received through the grace of
Christ, and are still more justified, as is written, — He that is
righteous, let him he made righteous still ;^ and again, Be not
afraid to he justified even to death ;^ and also. Ye see how that
by works a man is justified, qnd not hy faith only,"^ And this
increase of justification, the Holy Church begs, when she
prays, " Give unto us, O Lord, increase of faith, hope, and
charity."*

CHAPTER XI.

On the Keeping of the Commandmevta, and on tJie Necessity aohd

Possibility tfiereof,

fBut no one, how much soever justified, ought to think
himself :&ee from the observance of the commandments; no
one ought to make use of that rash saying, prohibited by the
Withers under an anathema ; that the commandments of God
are impossible for one that is justified to observe. For God
: ; commands not impossibilities, but, by commanding, admo-
! nishes thee both to do what thou art able, and to pray for
>! what thou art not able,y and aids thee that thou mayest bo

» Ephes. ii. 10. •» Pa. Ixxxiii. 8 (Ixxxiv. 7). ' 2 Cor. iv. 16.
* Colosa. iU. 5« ' Rom. vi. 13, 19. * Apoc. xxii. 11.

V Eocl. xvlil. ^2. " Defer not until death to be justiaed."
^ Jameq ii. ^4. * Dom. 13 post Pentecost.
7 See SL Aug. de Nat. et Gr. c. 43.

OK JXJSTiriCATIOK. 37

able ; whose commandmenis are not grievous ;* whose yoJee is
sweet and whose burden lights For whosoever are the sons
of Ood, love Christ; but they who love him, as Himself doth/|
testify, keep his commandments ;^ which, assuredly, with thell
divine assistance, they can do. For, although in this mortal
life, men, how holy and just soever, at times fall into at least 1 ^
light and daily sins, which are also called venial ; yet they do
not therefore cease to be just. For that cry of the just,
JEhrgive us our trespasses,^ is both humble and true ; whence
it happens, thejust themselves ought to feel themselves the \}J
more obliged to walk in the way of Justice, in that, being J\t
already freed from sins, but made serwmts unto Q-od,** they
are able, living soberly, righteously, and godly, ^ to proceed
onwards through Jesus Christ, by whom they have heid access
unto that grace f For God deserts not those who have been
once justified by His grace, unless he be first deserted by
them. Wherefore, no one ought to flatter himself upon faith I :^^
alone, deeming that by faith alone he is made an heir, and /
will obtain the inheritance, even though he suffer not with
Christ, that so he may be also glorified togetlier [with him"],^
For even Christ Himself, as the Apostle saith, though he was
the son of Qt)d, learned obedience by the things which he
suffered, and being made perfect}^ he became the cause of eternal
salvation unto ail who obeu him} For which reason the same
Apostle admonishes the justified, saying : Know ye not that
they which run in the race, run all indeed, but one receiveth
the prize f So run, that ye may obtain, I therefore so run,
not as uncertainly: so fight I, not as one that beateth the air;
hut I chastise my body, and bring it into subjection ; lest that
by any means, when l have preached toothers, I myself should
become a cast-away) So also the prince of the apostles^
Peter : O^ie rather give diligence, that by good works ye may
make sure your calling and election. For tfye do these things^
you shall not sin at any time}- Whence it is certain, that
those who are opposed to the orthodox doctrine of leHgion,^
who say that the just man sins, venially at least, in every /

* 1 John V. 3. • Matt. xi. 80. * John xiy. 15.

e Literally, "debts j" Matt. vi. 12. «» Rom. vi. 18.

« Titus ii. 12. ' Bom. v. 2. » Rom. viii. 17.

^ Ck>nsummatu8. * Heb. v. 8, 9. M Cor. iz. 24, 26, 27.

^ 2 Peter i. 10.. > See below, Canon 25.

•

B8 SESSION TI.

good work : or, which is still more insupportable, that he
merits eternal punishments ; as also those who state,"^ that
the just sin in all their works, if in those [works] they, in
order to stimulate, their own sloth, and to encourage them-
selves to run in the cov/rse^ besides this chief aim, that G-od
be glorified, regard also the eternal reward ; whereas it is
written, I have inclined my heart to do all thy justifications
for the ireward:^ and, concerning Moses, the Apostle saith,
that he had respect tmto the reward.^

CHAPTER XII.

. • "I

. 27uU a jRash Presvmptwn in regard to PredestincUion is to he 4ivoided.

. ..No one, moreover, so long as he exists in this mortal
§tate, ought so far to presume concerning the secret mystery
of divine predestination, as to determine for certain that he
Iq ^suredly in the number of the predestinated; as if it
were true, that he who is justified, either cannot sin any
Jnore, or if he do sin, that he ought to promise himself a
certain repentance; for except by a special revelation, it
^iannot be imown whom God hath chosen unto Himself.

CHAPTEEXIII.
Touching the Gift of Perwvercmce,

> In like manner touching the gift of perseverance, of which
it is written, Se that shall endure to the end, he shall be
'^avedfi — ^which [gift] cannot indeed be obtained from any
other save Him, who is able to establish him who standeth,^
that he stand persev^ringly, and to restore him who falleth :—
let no one promise himself anything as certain with absolute
^certainty ; though all ought to place and repose the most
firm hope in God's help. For God, unless men themselves
1)0 wanting to His grace, as he has beaun the good work, so
avill he jperfect it, working [in them J to mil and to do^
^Nevertheless, let those who think they stand, take heed lest
they fall,* and, with fear and trembling work out their salva^

^ See Canon 81.

•» Pa. oxviii. 112 (" to perform thy statutes alway, even wnto the end,"
cxix. 112). ° Heb. xi. 26.

. > Matt, ocxiv. 18. <^ See Eom. xiv. i.

' Philipp. i. 6 ; ii. 18. • 1 Cor. x. 12.

OK . JUBTOIOATIOV. 39

tion,^ in labours, in watching, in almsgivings, in prayers und
oblations, in fastmgs and m chastity. Eor, knowmg that y
they are bom again unto a hope of glorjr,^ and not as jetf ;
unto glory, they ought to fear for the combat which remams^
with the flesh, with the world, with the devil, wherein they j
cannot be victors, tmless they, with Gk)d*s grace, obey the j ;
apostle, who says ; We are debtors^ not to the fleshy to live
after the flesh ; for if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die;
hut if ye through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the fleshy
ye shall live J

CHAPTER XIV.

On tJie Fallen, and HieirJleaUyi'aHon.

But those who through sin have fallen away from the ,
received grace of justification, may again be Justified, when, '
Gk)d exciting them, through the sacrament of penance, they,
by the merit of Christ, shall have obtained the recovery of |
the grace lost. For this manner of justification is unto the|
fallen the reparation, which the holy fathers have aptly called'
a second plimk after the shipwreck of grace lost.^ ^'or, on
behalf of those who after baptism fall into sins, Christ Jesus
instituted the sacrament of penance, when He said, Beceive
ye the Sohf Ghost; whosesoever sins ye shall remit, they are
remitted unto them, and whosesoever stns ye shall retain, they
are retained^ Whence it is to be taught, that the penitence
of a Christian man after his fall, is very different from that
at his l)aptism ; and that therein are included hot only ^
cessation iGrom sins, and a detestation thereof, or, a contrite
and humble hearty but also the sacramental confession of the
£ame sins, at least in desire, and to be made in its season,
and sacerdotal absolution ; and likewise satisfaction by fasts,
almsgivinffs, prayers, and the other pious exercises of a
spiritual me; not indeed for the eternal punishment, which
•is, together with the guilt, remitted, either by the sacra-,
ment, or by the desire of the sacrament ; but for the tem-
poral punishment, which, as the sacred writings teach, is not
always whoUy remitted, as is done in baptism, unto those
who, ungrateful to the grace" of God -which they have 3re-

• Philipp. ii. 12. « Cf; 1 Peter i. 8.

7 IBom. yiii. 12« 18. ^ See Hieron. Ep, ad-Demetr.

«.Johnxx.:22,23. . ^ iPs. 1. 19 ai. 17).

ceived, have grieved the Soh Spirit f and have not feared to
defile the temple of Ood.^ Concerning which penitence it is
written : Hememherfrom whence thou art fallen; do penance,
and do the first toorks.^ And again : The sorrow that is ac-
cording to God worketh penance steadfast unto salvation.^
And again : JDo penance^ and bring forth fruits wortliy of
penance.^

CHAPTEBXV.

ThtU, ly eoery Mortal Sin, Cfraoe is lott, hU w4 Faith.

In opposition also to the cunning wits of certain men,
who, hy good works and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of
the innocent,^ it is to be maintained, that the received grace
of justification is lost, not onlv by infidelity, in which even
faith itself is lost, but also oy any other mortal sin so-
ever, though &ith be not lost ; thereby defending the doc-
trine of the divine law, which excludes from the kingdom of
God not only the imbelieving, but also the fiuthful who are
fornicators, adulterers, effeminate, abusers of themselves with
mankind, thieves, covetous, drunkards, revilers, extortioners}
and all others who commit deadly sins ; from which, with the
help of divine grace, they are able to refrain, and on account
of which they are separated from the grace of Christ.

CHAPTER XVI.

On ike Fruit of Justification, that is, on the Merit of Good Works and on

tJie Maimer of that same Merit,

Unto men, therefore, who have been justified after this
manner, whether they have preserved uninterruptedly the
grace received, or have recovered it when lost, are to oe set
the words of the Apostle : Abound in every good work, knovj*
ing that your labour is not in vain in the Lord;i for God is
not unrighteous to forget your work, and the love which ye
have showed in his name;^ and, cast not away your confidence,

■ Ephes. iv. 30. • 1 Cor. iii. 17.

* Apoc. ii. 6, * * repent im d do." &c.
e " Worketh r^pS^^T^Cor. vii. 10.

' Matt. iii. 2; Luke iii. 8, with the cu^itpiP4ry mistTaoalation 4>f
uiraifortiraTi, '^ ' • Rom. xvi. 18. .

' 1 Cor. vi. 9, 10. s 1 Cor. xv. 58. ^ Heb. vi. 10.

OK JtJBTlPIOATIOK. 41

which hath a areat reeompetue} And, for this cause, unto i ;
them who work well unto the end,i and hoping in God, life 1
eternal is to be pronosed, both as a grace mercifully pro- I
mised to the sons of God through Jesus Christ, and as a
recompense which is to be faithfmly rendered ^ their good
works and merits according to the promise of God Himself.
For this is that croum of righteousness which the Apostle
asserted was, after his^A^ and course^ laid up for him, to he
given to him hy the righteous judge, and not only to him, hut
unto all that love hts coming,^ For, whereas Jesus Christ n
Himself, as the head into the members, and the vine into the '
branches, continually causes his yirtue to flow into the said
justified, which virtue always precedes and accompanies and
follows after their good works, and without which jt could £f^*
not in anywise be ^easing and meritorious before God, we
must needs believe that to the justified nothing further is
wanting, but that they be accounted to have, by those very
works which have been done in Gt)d, ^My satisfied the
divine law according to the state of thisme, and truly to
have merited etenuu life, to be obtained also in its due time ;
if so be, however, that they shall have departed in grace :
forasmuch as Christ, our Saviour, saith : If any one shall
drink of the wtUer that I shall give him, he shall not thirst for
ever ; out it shall hecome in him a well of water springing up
into everlasting life} Thus, neither is our own righteousness
established as our oton^ as from ourselves ; nor is the right-
eousness of God denied or repudiated : for that righteous-
ness which is called ours, because we are justified u*om its
being inherent in us, that same is [the righteousness] of
God, because it is infused into us of Gt)d, through the merit
of Christ. Nor is this to be omitted, that, although, in the
sacred writings, so much is attributed to good works, that
Christ promises, that even he that shall give a drink of cold
water to one of his least ones, shall not lose his reward;^ and
the Apostle bears witness that. That which is at present hut
for a moment and light of our tribulation, worketh for us a
far more exceeding eternal weight of glory ;° nevertheless
far be it that a Cliristian man should either trust or glory in

> Heb. X. 35. J Mstt. x. 22. ^2 Tim. iv. 8.

> John iv. 18, 14. ■ Rom. x. 3. » Mstt. x. 42.
• 2 Cor. iv. 17.

l/

42 . SESBIOlf TI.

•

himself, and not in {he Lordf whose go<ldness towards all
men is so great, that He will have the things which are His
own gifts to be their own merits.^ And whereas in many
things we all offend^ each one ought to have before his eyes,
as weU severity and judgment, as mercy and goodness;
neither ought any one io judge himself^ even though he be
not conscious to himself of anything ;" inasmuch as the
whole life of man is to be examined and judged, not by the
judgment of men, but of G-od, who will bring to light the hid"
den things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of
the hearts, and then shall every man have praise of God,^ who,
as it is written, tvill render to every man according to his
works,^

After this Cajfcholic doctrine on justification, which who-
soever receiveth hot faithftdly and m*mly cannot be justified,
it hath pleased the holy synod to subjoin these canons, that
all may know noi only what they ought to hold and follow,
but abo what to ^void and shun.

ON JUBTIFIOATIOK.

Gakon I. If any one shall say, that man may be justified
before Q-pd by his own works, whether done through the
strength of human nature, or through the teaching of thp
law, without the divine grace through Jesus Christ ; let him
be anathema.

Canon II. If any one shall say, that the divine grace
through Jesus Christ [is given only unto this, that pian may
more easily be able to live justly, and to merit eternal life,
as if, by free will without grace, he were able [to do] both,
though hardly and with difficulty ; let him be anathema.

Canok in. If any one shall say, that without the prevent-
ing inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and his help, man can
beueve, hope, love, or be penitent, as he ought, so that th^
grace of justification may be conferred upon him ; let him be
anathema.

Canon it. If any one shall say, that the free will of man
moved and excited by God, by assenting to God exciting
and calling, nowise co-operates to the end that it should dis-

^ 1 Cor. i. 81 ; 2 Cor. x. 17. *» Ep. Coelost. i., c. 12.

.' James iii. 2. • 1 Cor. iv. 8, 4.

* 1 Cor. iv. 6. " Matt .xvi. 27. .

OIJT . TUBTHICATIOTS. 43

pose and prepare ifeelf far obtaining the gpce of juBtifica-
tion; and I that it cannot refuse consent, if it would, but
that, like something inanimate, it does nothing whatevery
and is merely in a passive state ; let him be ananiema. /

Cahok y. If any one shall say, that; since Adam's sin, the
&ee wiU of man is lost and extinguished ; or, that it is a
thing with a name only, yea, a title without a reality, a fig-
ment, in fine, brought into the Church by Satan ; let him be
anathema.

CAJSfON Ti. If an^ one shall say, that it is not in the power
of man to make ms ways evil, but that God worketli'the ]y
works that are evil as well as those that are good, not by
permission only, but properly, and of Himself in such wise
that the treason of Judas be no less His own proper work
than the calling of Paul ; let him be anathema.

Canon vn. If any one shall say, that a ll , works y rhich are ^ ? ) '
done _before justification, in what maimer soever ^hey_ be c-
done, ar^ truly siiu4 of deserve^'Che "hatred of GoA ; or that,
y the Ifiore earnestly one strive to dispoEip himself for grace,
^ 80 much the more grievously he sins ; 4et him be anathema.

Canok vin. If any one shall say, that the fear of hell,
through which, by grieving for our sins, we flee unto the
mercy of God, or refrain from sinning, is a sin, or makes
Binners worse ; let him be anathema.
^ Cakon IX. If any one shall say, that by faith aloiie the Si^^
impious is justified; so as to mean that nothing else is re- i
quired to co-operate in>brder untp the obtaining the grace' ' ^
of justification, and that it is not in any respect necessaiyV ^
that he be prepared and disposed by the movement of his -^
own WiU ; let hL be anathema. ^

Canon X. If any one shall say, that men are justified
without the righteousness of Christ, by which He merited ^
for us to be justified; or that it is by that [justice] itself
that they are formally just ; let him be anathema.

Cakok XI. If any one shall say, that men are justified
(either by the sole imputation of the righteousness of Christ,
or by tne sole remission of sins, to the exclusion of the
grace and the charity which is shed abroad in their hearts hy
the,Soly Ghost^ and is inherent iniihem ; or even that the

(cUa

/

^ . . ▼ Bom. V. '6,

44 8ESSI0K YI.

grace, by which we are justified, is only the &your of God ;
let him he anathema.
i/^ Canon XII. K any one shall say, that justifying faith is
nought else but conndence in the oiyine mercy which remits
sins for Christ's sake ; or that it is this confiaence alone by
which we are justified ; let him be anathema.

Cakok xm. K any one shall say, that it is necessary unto
eyery one, for the obtaining the remission of sins, that he
belieye for certain, and without any hesitation arising £rom
his own infirmity and indisposition, that his sins are remitted
unto him ; let mm be anathema.

Cakok xiy. If any one shall say, that man is absolyed
from his sins and justified, because that he assuredly be-
lieyed himself to be absolyed and justified ; or that no one is
truly justified saye he who belieyes himself justified ; and
that, by this fidth alone, absolution and justification are per-
fected ; let him be anathema.
y" Cakok xy. If any one shall sajr, that a man, who is bom
again and justified, is bound of faith to belieye that he is
assuredly in the number of the predestinated ; let him be
anathema.

Cakok xyi. K any one shall say, that he will for certain,
of an absolute and infallible certainty, haye that great gifb of

Eerseyerance unto the end, unless that he haye learnt this
y a special reyelation ; let him be anathema.
J Cakok xyii. If any one shall say, that the grace of justi-
fication only befaUeth those who are predestined unto life ;
but that all others who are called, are called indeed,' but
receiye not grace, as being, by the diyine power, predestined
unto eyiL ; let him be anathema.

Cakok xyin. If any one shall say, that the command-
ments of God are, eyen for a man that is Justified and consti-
tuted in grace, impossible to keep ; let hun be anathema.

Cakok xix. If any one shall say that nothing besides
faith is commanded in the Gt)spel; that other things are
indifferent, neither commanded nor prohibited, but &ee ; or,
that the ten commandments in nowise appertain to Chris-
tians ; let him be anathema. ^
. / Cakok xx. If any one sliall say, that a man who is jus-
^ tified and how perfect soeyer, is not bound to the obseryance
of the commandments of God and of the Church, but only

OK JITBTIFICATIOK. 45

to believe ; as if, forsooth, the Gospel were a bare and abso-
lute promise of eternal life, without the condition of obser-
Tation of the commandments ; let him be anathema.
^ Gakoit XXI. If anj one shall saj, that Christ Jesus was
given of Gt)d unto men, as a redeemer, in whom they should I
trust, and not also as a l^;islator, whom they should obej ;
let him be anathema.

Gakok xxn. If any one shall say, that the justified is
able either to persevere, without the special assistance of
Ood, in the justice received ; or that, witn that [assistance],
he is not able ; let him be anathema.
c/ GhJROiR xxni. If any one shall say, that a man once
justified can sin no more, nor lose grace, and that therefore
he that fiUls and sins was never truly justified ; or, on the
other hand, that he is able, throughout his whole life, to avoid
all sins, eten those that are venial, except by a special privi-
lege from Gk)d, as the Church holds respecting the Blessed
Virgin ;^ let him be anathema.

CjLNOifr xxiT. If any one shall say, that the justice received
is not preserved, and also increased in the sight of God v
through good works ; but that the said works are merely the
fruits and signs of justification received, but not a cause of
the increase thereof; let him be anathema.

Canon xxt. If any one shall say, that, in every good
work, the just sins veniaily at least, or, which is still more ^
intolerable, mortally, and therefore deserves eternal punish-
ments ; and that it is only for this cause he is not damned,
because God does not impute those works unto damnation ;
let him be anathema.

Canon xxvt. K any one shall say, that the just ought
not, for their good works which have been done in God, to ^
expect and hope for an eternal recompense from God,
through His mercy and the merit of Jesus Christ, if they
persevere unto the end^ in well doing and in keeping the
divine commandments ; let him be anathema.

Canon xxvn. K any one shall say, that there is no deadly
sin but that of infideli^ ; or, that grace once received is not '
lost by any other sin, however grievous and enormous, save
only by that of infidelity ; let him be anathema.

^ See Seas. v. 5, sub fin. « Matt. xxiv. 18.

46 . BEBSIOK yi. . .)

Caitok xxvm. If any one shall say, that, grace being lost
through sin, fsdth also is always lost with it ; or that the faith
which remains is not a true &ith, though it be not a lively
faith ; or, that he, who has faith without charity, is not a
Christian ; let him be anathema.

y ^ Canon xxix. If any one shall say, that he, who has fallen
after baptism, is not able by the grace of Gk)d to rise again ;
ot, that ne' is able indeed to recover the justice lost, but by

a faith alone, without the sacrament of penance, contraiy to
what the holy Boman and universal Church, instructed by
Christ and his apostles, has hitherto professed, observed and
taught ; let him be anathema. . «

^ Canoit XXX. K any one shall say, that, after the grace of
justification received, imto every penitent sinner the guilt is
so remitted, and the penalty^ of eternal punishment so blotted
out, that there remains not any penally of temporal punish-
ment, to be discharged either in this world, or in the next in
purgatory,' before the entrance to the kingdom of heaven
can be laid: open ; let him be anathema.

Canon xxxi. If any one shall say, that the justified sins
when he doeth good works with a view to an eternal recom^
pense ; let him pe anathema.

Canon xxxii. Jf any one shall say, that the good works
of a man that is justified are in such wise the gifts of God, as
that they are not also the good merits of him that is justified ;
or, that the said justified, by the good works which are per-
formed by him through the grace of God and the ment of
Jesus Cmist, whose living member he is, does not truly merit
increase of grace, eternal life, and the attainment of that
eternal life, 3* so be, however, that he depart in grace, and,
moreover, an increase of glory ; let him be anathema.

Canon xxxin. If any one shall say, that, by this Catholic
doctrine touching justification, set forth by this holy synod in
this present decree, aught is derogated from the glory of
Gt)d, or the merits of our Lord Jesus Christ, and not rather
\ that the truth of our fiiith, and the glory in fine of God
and of Christ Jesus are rendered illustrious ; let him be
^ anathema.

7 HeatuB.. * See ^esB« xxv. sub init.

ON .BBFOBMATIOK. 47

DBOBEE TOUGHIHO BEFOSHATIOir. .

CHAPTER I.

It {$ fiUmg thai Prelates retide in (heir own Chwchei ; if they tihaU do
otherwise, ^ PendUies of the Ancient Law are renewed against ihem^
and new ones decreed.

The same sacred and holj synod, — ^the same Wates of the
Apostolic See presiding, wishing to gird itself unto the
restoring of ecclesiastical discipune, which is exceedingly
relaxed, and to amending the depraved manners of the Chns-
tian clergjy and people, has thought fit to begin with thos^
who preside over the greater chtirches ; for the integrity of
those in authority is the safety of those in subjection.
Trusting, therefore, that through the mercj of our Lord and
Gk)d, and the provident care of His own vicar upon earth, it
will surely come to pass that those who are most worthy, and
whose previous life and whole career from their early infancy
to their riper years, having been laudably passed in the ex-
ercises of ecclesiastical discipline, bears testimony in their
favour, will be taken unto the government of churches^
according to the venerable ordinance^ of the fathers, since
it is a burden to be dreaded even by angels ; [the synod]
admonishes all those who, under whatsoever name and title^
are set over any patriarchal, prunatial, metropolitan, and ca-
thedral churches, and accounts all such admonished,^ that,
taldng heed to themselvesy and to the whole flock, over the
which the Soly Ghost hath placed them to rule the Church of
Gody which he hath purchased with his own hlood^ they watch,
as the Apostle enjoins, that they labour in all things, and
fulfil their mioistry.^ But let them know, that they cannot
fulfil it, if, after the manner of hirelings,^ they abandon the
flocks committed to them, and apply not to the keeping of
their own sheep, whose hlood will be required at their nands^
by the Supreme Judge ; since it is most certain that, if the
wolf have devoured the sheep, and the shepherd knew not
thereof, the shepherd's excuse will not be a^nitted.

And nevertheless, whereas some are to be found at this
time, who, as is earnestly to be lamented, forgetful even of

• Mbnitos esse vult, *» Acts xx. 28. * See 2 TKm. iv. 5*

^ SeeJohn x. 12. * Ezek.,xxxm. 6.c

their own salvation, and preferring earthly things to heavenlj
and human things to divme, wander about in various court
or, their fold forsaken, and the care of the sheep committ i
to them neglected, keep themselves busied with the carcF •
temporal affairs ; it hath seemed fit to this sacred and holy
synod to renew, as by virtue of the present decree it doth
renew, the ancient canons promulgated against non-resi-
dents, which [canons] have, through the msorders of the
times and of men, almost fallen into desuetude ; and further-
more, in order to the more fixed residence of the same, and
for the reforming of manners in the church, it hath seemed
good to ordain and sanction in the manner following : —

If any one, by what dignity, degree, and pre-eminence
soever he may be distinguished, shall, by remaining six
consecutive months out of his own diocese, all lawful im-
pediment, or just and reasonable causes being wanting, be
absent from a patriarchal, primatial, metropolitan, or cathe-
dral church, under whatsoever title, cause, name, or right
committed to him, he shall, by virtue of his conduct,' incur
the penalty of the forfeiture of a fourth part of one year's
fruits, to be applied, by an ecclesiastical superior, to the
fabric of the church and to the poor of the place. But if he
continue in such like absence during six other months, he
shall, by virtue of such conduct,^ forfeit another fourth part
of the fruits, to be applied in like manner. But if the con-
tumacy increase, — to the end that he may be subjected to a
severer censure of the sacred canons, the metropolitan shall
be obliged to denounce his absent suffragan bishops, and the
oldest resident suffragan bishop to denounce his absent
metropolitan, to the Boman pontiff, either by letters or by
messenger, within the space of tluree montns, under the
penalty, to be by such conduct ^ incurred, of being inter-
dicted from entering into the church; who,* by the authority
of his own supreme see, may animadvert upon the said
absentees, according as the greater or less contumacy of each
may require, and provide the said churches with moi'e useful
pastors, as he shall know in the Lord to be salutarily expe-
dient.

' Ipso jure, by the state of the case, by the very £su3t itself, urespective
of other considerations.
V £o ipso. ^ Ipso facto. * /. e, the Koman pontiff.

OK BEYOBICATIOK. 49

CHAPTER II.

It is not lawful for any one holding a Benefice requiring penonal rendence
to he ahsenif eave for a just cause to he approved of hythe Bishop, who
even then shaU, for the cure of souls, iAstitute a Vicar in his stead,
ioitlidrawing a portion of the fruits.

Those inferior to bishops, who hold by title, or in commen"
dam) any ecclesiastical benefices requiring personal residence
whether by law or custom, shaU be compelled, by their ordi-
naries, by suitable legal remedies, to reside as shall seem
expedient to them for the good government of the churches
and the advancement of divine worship, considering; the
character of the places and persons ; and to no one shaU any
perpetual privileges, or indults, in favour of not residing, or
of receiving the miits during absence, be of avail : temporary
indulgences, however, and dispensations, granted solely for
true and reasonable causes, and which are to be legitimately
proved before the ordinary, remaining in force : in which
cases, nevertheless, it shall be the office of bishops, as dele-
gated in this matter by the Apostolic See, to provide that,
by the deputing of competent vicars, and the assigning to
them of a suitable portion of the fruits, the cure of souls be
in nowise neglectect ; no privilege in this respect, or exemp-
tion whatever, being of avail to any. ,

CHAPTER in.

The Excesses of Secular Clerks and of Regulars who live out of (Jteir Monas
teries shcUl he corrected hy the Ordinary of tlie place.

The prelates of the churches shall apply themselves pru-
dently and diligently to correct the excesses of those in
subjection ; and no secular clerk, under pretext of a personal
[privilege], or any regular, living out of his monastery, shall,
under pretext of a privilege of his order, be accounted, if he
transgress, exempt fipom being visited, punished, and cor-
rected, according to the canonical ordinances, by the ordinary
of the place, as delegated hereunto by the Apostolic See.

' I,e.m their own care, until such benefice be provided with a regular
incumbent. Commenda is thus defined by Spehnan : " custodia eccle«
siastici beneficii, qua ad certum tempus alicui conceditur." — Glossar.
p. 144.

E

0Q . SSSSION TI.

CHAPTER IV.

BuHuojA aiu2 other greater Prelatea ehall visit amy Churchea soever , as often
. as there shall be need; everything which might hinder this decru being
removed.

The chapters of cathedral, and other greater churches, and
the members thereof, shall, by no exemptions, customs,
judgments, oaths, concordates, which only bind the authors
thereof^ — ^not also their successors, — ^be able to protect
themselves from being capable and liable to be, according to
the canonical ordinances, visited, corrected, and amende<^ as
often as shall be needful, even with apostolical authority, by
their own bishops, and other greater prelates, by themselves
alone, or with those whom it shall seem fit to them to have
joined with them.

CHAPTER V.

Bishops shaU nMuT exercise Pontifical Ftmctions nor Ordain in another

Diocese,

•

, It shall not be lawful for any bishop, imder the plea of
any privilege soever, to exercise pontifical functions in the
diocese of another, save only by the express permission of
the ordinary of the place, and in regard of those persons
only who are subject to that same ordmary. If the contrary
shall have been done, the bishop [shall be suspended] from
the exercise of pontifical functions, and those so ordained by
the very fact,^ shall be similarly suspended from the exercise
of their orders.

INDICnON OF THE NEXT SESSION.

Doth it please you, that the next ensuing session be
celebrated on Thursday, the fifth day after the first Sunday
of the approaching Lent, whicW will be the third day of the
month of March P

They answered : It pleaseth.

^ Ipso jure. * /. e, Thursday.

OK THE BAOBAlOUfTB IN GEinSSiX. 5^

SESSION THE SEVENTH,
CdebraJUd on the third day of the month of March, 1547t

DSGBXE OONGERNINO THB SAdBAMEirTS.

■ I

Prtface,

Por the consimmiatioii of the salutary doctrine on Justi'^
Scation, which was promulgated in the last preceding session
with the unanimous consent of the Pathers, it hath seemed /
fitting to treat of the most holy Sacraments of the Churchy
through which all true justice either hegins, or being begun
is increased, or being lost is repaired. "Wherefore, the
sacred and holy, oecumenical and general Council of Trent,
lawfully assemoled in the Holy Ghost, the same legates ot
the Apostolic See presiding therein, — in order to destroy the
errors and to extirpate the heresies, which hare appeared iii '
these our days respecting the said most holy sacraments, a^
well those which have been revived from the heresies con*
demned of old by our fathers, as also those newly invented^
which are exceedingly prejudicial to the punty of the
Catholic Church, and to the salvation of souls,— [the afore-
said council] adhering to the doctrine of the holy Scriptures^
to the apostolic traditions, and to the consent oi other
<X)uncils and of the Pathers, has thought fit to establish and
decree these present canons ; intendmg, the divine Spirit
aiding, to publish hereafter the remaining canons which are
wantmg for the completion of the work begun. •

TOUOmNO THE SACRAMENTS IN GENERAL.

Caitok I. If any one shall say, that the sacraments of the
"N&w Law were not all instituted by Jesus Christ, our Lord ;
or, that they are more, or less than seven, to wit, Baptism^
Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penance, EiLtreme Unction^
Orders, and Matrimony; or even that any one of thes^
seven is not truly and properly a sacrament ;. let him J be
anathema. , . t

Cahtok II. If any one shall say, that these said sacrariients
of the New Law ao not differ from the sacraments of the
Old Law, save that the ceremonies are different^. and;th6
outward rites different ; let him be anathema.

Cai^ost ni. If any one shall say, .that these seven sacra-

e2

/

52 BESSIOK YII.

ments are equal to each other in such wise, as that one is
not in any way more worthy than another; let him he
anathema.

GjlSO'S iy. K any one shall say, that the sacraments of
the New Law are not necessary unto salvation, hut super-
fluous, and that without them, and without the desire
thereof, men, through &tith a^one, ohtain of God the grace
of justification ; though all [the sacraments] he not neces-
sary for every individual ; let him be anathema.

Canon y. If any one shall say, that these sacraments
were instituted for the sake of nourishing faith alone ; let
him he anathema.

Canon yi. If any one shall say, that the sacraments of
the New Law do not contain the grace which they signify ;
; or, that they do not confer that grace on those who do not
place an obstacle in the way ; as though they were merely
outward signs of grace or righteousness received through
faith, and certain marks of the Christian profession, by which
the believers are distinguished amongst men from the un-
believers ; let him be anathema.

Canon yit. If « any one shall say, that grace, as far as
concemeth God's part, is not given through the said sacra-
ments, always, ana to all men, even though they rightly
receive them, but [only] sometimes, and to some persons ;
let him be anathema.

Canon yiii. If any one shall say, that by the said
sacraments of the New Law grace is not conferred through
the act performed,"^ but that faith alone in the divine
promise suffices for obtaining grace ; let him be anathema.

Canon ix. If any one shall say, that, in the three sacra-
ments. Baptism, to wit, Confirmation, and Orders, there is
not imprinted on the soul a character, that is, a certain
spiritual and indelible sign, on account of which they cannot
be repeated ; let him be anathema.

Canon x. If any one shall say, that all Christians have
power to administer the word, and all the sacraments ; let
nim be anathema.

Canon xi. If any one shall say, that, in ministers, whilst
they effect, and confer the sacraments, there is not required

■■ Ex opere operate. See Gomm. on Article the 26th.

OK TIUB SACBAHEKTB IJS OSKSBAL. 53

the intention at least of doing what the Church doejs ; let
him be anathema.

Cakon XII. K any one shall say, that a minister, being
in deadly sin, proyided that he observe all the essentials
which belong to the performance or conferring of the sacrar
ment, neither performs nor confers the sacrament ; let him
be anathema.

Canon xiii. If any one shall say, that the received and
approved rites of the Catholic Church, wont to be used in
the solemn administration of the sacraments, may b0 con.-
temned, or without sin omitted at pleasure by the ministers,
or be changed by any pastor of the churches into other new
ones ; let mm be anathema.

TOUCmKO BAFTISH.

Cakon I. If any one shall say, that the baptism of John
had the same force with the baptism of Christ ; let him he
anathema.

Canon ii. If any one shall say, that true and natural
water is not of necessity for baptism, and, on that account,
wrests to some sort of metaphor those words of our Lord
Jesus Christ ; Except a man he horn again of water and the^
Soly Ghost ;^ let bun be anathema.

Canon in. K any one shall say, that in the Bomish
church, which is the mother and mistress of all churches,
there is not the true doctrine concerning the sacrament of
baptism ; let him be anathema.

Canon it. If any one shall say, that the baptism which
is also given by heretics in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, with the intention of doing
what the Church doth, is not true baptism; let him be
anathema.

Canon t. If any one shall say, that baptism is free, that
is, not necessary unto salvation ; let him be anathema.

Canon tt. If any one shall say, that one who has been
baptized cannot, even if he wish, lose grace, let him sin ever
so much, unless he vnll not believe ; let him be anathema.

Canon vii. If any one shall say, that the baptized are, by #
baptism itself, made dehtors but to faith only, and not to the
observance of the whole law of Christ ; let mm be anathema*

" John iii 5,

a BESSIOK TU.

• Cakon ym. If any one shall say, that the baptized are
freed &om all the precepts of the holy Church, whether
'written or transmitted, so that they are not bound to observe
them, imless they, of their own accord, have chosen to
submit themselves to them ; let him be anathema.

Cakon IX. If any one shall say, that men are so to be
recalled unto the remembrance of the baptism which they
have received, as that they must understand that all vows
iwhich are made after baptism are void, bv virtue of the
promise already made in that baptism ; as if, by those [vows]
ihej both derogated from that £edth which they have pro-
fessed, and from baptism itself; let him be anathema.

Canok X. If any shall say, that, by the sole remembrance
and faith of the baptism received, all sins which are com-
:pntted after baptism are either remitted, or made venial;
let him be anathema.

Gakok XI. If any one shall say, that baptism, true, and
xightly conferred, ii to be repeated for him whJ, amongBt
Xofidels, has denied the faith of Christ, when he is converted
imto penitence ; let him be anathema.

Canon xii. If any one shall say, that no one is to be
• ba'ptized save at that age at which Christ was baptized, or
at the very point of death ; let him be anathema.

Canon xiii. If any one shall say, that infants, for that
they have not actual faith, are not, after having received
baptism, to be reckoned amongst the* faithful, and that, for
this reason, they are to be rebaptized, when they have
iarrived at years of discretion ; or, that it is better that the
baptism of such be omitted, than that .they, while not
believing by their own act, should be baptized in the faith
lilone of the Church ; let him be anathema.

Canon xrv. If any one shall say, that those who have
been* thus baptized when infSuits, are, when they have grown
up, to be questioned whether they will ratity what their
sponsors promised in their name when they were baptized ;
iuid that, in case that they answer they will not, they are to
b^ left to their own will ; and are not meanwhile to be com-
pelled to a Christian life by any other penalty, save that
they be excluded from the participation of the Eucharist,
iind of the other sacraments, imtil they repent ; let him be
unathema.

OK BEFOBHATtOK. 5$

TOUCHINO C0N7IB1CATI0N*

GAiiTOK I. K any one shall say, that the confinnation of
those who have been baptized is an idle ceremony, and not
rather a true and proper sacrament ; or that it was formerly
nothing more than aWd of catechism, whereby they who
were near years of discretion,® declared an account of their
&ith in the face of the Church ; let him be anathema.

Canok u. J£ any one shall say, that they who ascribe any
yirtue to the sacred chrismP of confirmation, do an injury to
the Holy Ghost ; let him be anathema.

Canon hi. If any one shall say, that the ordinary mi-
nister of holy confinnation is not the bishop only, but any
simple priest soeyer ; let him be anathema.

DECREE CONCEBNINa BEFOEHATION.

The same sacred and holy synod — ^the same legates also
pre^din^ — ^purposing to prosecute, unto the praise of Qt)d,
and the mcrease of the Christian religion, the wotk which
it hath begun respecting residence and reformation, has
thought good to ordain as follows; sa^dng always, in all
things, the authority of the Apostolic See.

caaAPTER I.

Wh4> is eapaiie of the Oovemment of Calthjedral Chwcka,

No one shall be assumed unto the goyemment of cathe-
dral churches, but one that is bom^ of a lawful wedlock, is
of mature age, and endowed with grayity of manners, and
akill in letters, agreeably to the constitution of Alexander
in., which begins, Quum in cunctis, promulgated in the
Council of Lateran.

CHAPTER n.

Th/^ who holduveral Cathedral Ohurchet are commanded to raign aUhut

one, in a given Manner md Tim/e,

No one, by what dignity, grade, or pre-eminence soeyer
distinguished, shall presume, contranr to the institutes of
the sacred canons, to receiye and to hold at the same time
several metropolitan or cathedral churches, whether by title,

• * Adolei^centise proximi* * * ' '■ /. e. unction, anointing.

or in commendanif or under any other name whatsoever ; see-
ing that he is to be accounted, exceedingly fortunate, to
whose lot it has fallen to rule one church well and fruitfully,
and unto the salvation of the souls committed to him. But
they who now hold several churches contrary to the tenor of
the present decree, shall be bound, retaining the one which
they may prefer, to resign the rest, within six months if they
belong to the free disposal of the Apostolic See, in other
cases within the year; otherwise those churches, the one
last obtained only excepted, shall, by the very fact [of their
non-resignation] be deemed vacant.

CHAPTER III.
Benefices ihaU be conferred only xtpon competent Pa'sons.

Inferior ecclesiastical benefices, especially those which
have the cure of souls, shall be conferred upon persons
worthy and competent, and who can reside on the spot, and
exercise personally the said cure ;. according to the constitu-
tion of Alexander III., in the Council of Lateran, which
begins. Quia nonnulli ; and that other of Gregory X., pub-
lished in the general Council of Lyons, which begins. Licet
Canon, A collation, or provision, made otherwise, shall be
rendered wholly null : and let the ordinary collator know,
that he will himself incur the penalties in the constitution of
the general council,^ which begins, Qrave nimis,

CHAPTER IV.

Tlie Retainer of eeverod Beneficee cotUrai'y to the Canons tJiaU he deprived

thereof,

"Whosoever for the future shall presume to receive, or to
retain at the same time several cures, or ecclesiastical bene-
fices otherwise incompatible, whether by way of union for
life, or in perpetual commendam, or under any other name or
title soever, contrary to the appointment of the sacred
canons, and especially of the constitution of Innocent III.,
beginning, De multa^ shall be by the very fiict' deprived of
the said benefices, according to the disposition of the said
constitution, and also by virtue of the present canon.

^ Of Lateran, c. 19, x. de pneb. iii. 5. , ' Ipso jure.

OK. BErOBMATIOK. 57

CHAPTER V.

I7iote who hold teveral Benffica with Cure [of SouU] shall exhilnt their
DispenMotions to the Ordinary, who shall provide the Churches with a
Vicar f assigning a Suitable Portion of the Fruits.

The ordinaries of the places shall strictly compel all those
who hold several cures, or ecclesiastical benefices otherwise
incompatible, to exhibit their dispensations ; and they shall
otherwise proceed according to the constitution of Gre-
gory X., published in the p;eneral Council of Lyons, which
begins Ordinarii, which this same holy synod thinks should
be renewed, and doth renew; adding, moreover, that the
said ordinaries must by all means provide, even by the
deputing of fit vicars, and the assigning of a suitable portion
of the fruits, that the cure of soms be in no wav neglected,
and that the said benefices be nowise defrauded of the ser-
vices due to them: no appeals, privileges, or exemptions
soever, even with a deputation of special judges, ana inhi-
bitions from the same, being of avail to any one in the
matters aforesaid.

CHAPTER VI.

What Unions of Benefices shall be accownted Valid*

Unions in perpetuity, made within forty years, may be
examined into by the ordinaries, as delegated by the Apos-
tolic See, and such as shall have been obtained by surreption
or obreption shall be declared null. Now those which,
having been granted within the aforesaid period, have not as
yet been carried into effect wholly, or in part, as also those
which shall henceforth be made at the instance of any per-
son soever, must be presumed to have been obtained by
surreption, imless it shall be certain that they have been
made for lawful, or otherwise reasonable causes, to be veri-
fied before the ordinary of the place, those persons being
summoned whose interests are concerned: and therefore
[such unions-], unless the Apostolic See shall have declared
otherwise, shall be altogether of no force.

58 • 6S88I0K yn.

CHAFTEB Vn.

United EeduUuttical Bemficu shaU be vuUed : the Cure of SouU ihaU he
exereieed even by Perpeiual Vieart; of whom there ehaU be a Deputation
Ihereimto with a PorHon to be amgned, even vpon a Specific Property,

Ecdesiastical benefices with cures, which are found to
have been alwajrs united and annexed to cathedral, collegi-
ate, or other churches, or to monasteries, benefices, or col-
leges, or other pious places of what sort soeyer, shall be
visited every year by the ordinaries of those places ; who
shall take care sedulously to provide that the cure of souls
be laudably exercised by competent vicars, and those even
perpetual, imless it shall seem to the said ordinaries to be
otherwise expedient for the good of the churches, which
[vicars] shall De deputed thereunto by them, with a provision
consisting of a third part of the fruits, or of a greater or less
proportion, at the discretion of the said ordinaries, which is
to be assigned even upon a specific property ; no appeals,
privileges, exemptions, even with a deputation of judges, and
mhibitions from the same, being of any avail in the matters
aforesaid,

CHAPTER Yin.
Churchet ehaU be repamd. The Cure of SouU shall be eeduUmty diecharged.

The ordinaries of the places shall be boimd to visit every
year; with apostolic authority, all churches soever, in what
manner soever exempted; and to provide by suitable
legal remedies, that whatever matters need repair, be re-
paired ; and that they be not in any way defrauded of the
cure of souls, if any such be annexed thereunto, or of the
other services due to them ; all appeals, privileges, customs,
even those prescribed from time immemorial, deputations
of judges, and inhibitions from the same, being utterly set
aside.

CHAPTER rx.

The Rite of Coneecratum not to be delayed.

Those who have been promoted to the greater churches
shall receive the rite of consecration within the time or-
dained by law, and any delays granted beyond the period of
six months, shall be of no avail to any one.

OK.SErOBMATIOK. 59

• CHAPTER X.

When a See 18 Vacant, Qhapt&n ihaU not grant ** Beverends" to any one,
unless straitened heca/use of a Benefice obtained, or abotU to be obtained :
varums Penalties on Contranmers.

It shall not be lawM for cliapters of churches, when a see
is vacant, to grant, whether by ordinance of common law, or
by virtue of any privilege or custom soever, a license for
ordination, or letters dimissory, or " reverend," as some call
them, within a year from the day of that vacancy, to any
one who is not straitened,* by occasion of some ecclesiastical
benefice received, or about to be received. If it shall be
otherwise, the contravening chapter shall be subjected to an
ecclesiastical interdict ; and the persons so ordained, if they
have been constituted in ihinor orders, shall enjoy no clerical
privilege, especially in criminal causes. But those consti-
tuted in the greater orders shall be, by the fact itself, sus-
pended firom^he exercise thereof, according to the pleasure
of the next prelate.

CHAPTER XI.

^acidtiesfor Promotion shall not, vnthout a Jttst Cause, a/vaU anij one.

faculties, for being promoted by any one soever, shall
be of no avail but to those who have a lawful cause, why
thev cannot be ordained by their own bishops, which is
to De expressed in their letters ; and even then they shall
not be ordained but by a bishop residing in his own diocese,
Or by him who exercises the pontifical functions for him, and
after a previous careful examination.

CHAPTER Xn.
Faculty for not being promoted shall not exceed a Year,

Faculties granted for not' being promoted shall avail
only for a year, except in the cases expressly mentioned by
law.

■ Arctatus, "pressed for time."

CO . SESSION yn.

CHAPTER Xin.

Persons, hy whomsoever presented, shaU not he instituted toitJuyut tlie prevums
Examination and Ajftproval of by the Ordinary : with certain Exceptional

Persons presented, or elected, or nominated hj any eccle-
siastical parties soever, even by nuncios of the Apostolic
See, shall not be instituted, or confirmed in, or admitted to
any ecclesiastical benefices soever, even under the plea of
any privilege soever, or custom, even if prescribed from time
immemorisd, unless they shall first have been examined, and
found fit, by the ordinaries of the places. And no one shall
be able to protect himself, by means of an appeal, from
being bound to undergo the examination. Those, however,
are to be excepted, who are presented, elected, or nominated
by universities, or by colleges for general studies.

•

CHAPTER XIV.

What OvoU Causes of Exempted Persons may he taken cognizance of hy

Bishops,

In the causes of exempted persons, the constitution of
Innocent IV., beginning Volentes, published in the general
Council of Lyons, shall be observed, which [constitution]
this sacred and holy synod hath thought ought to be re-
newed, and doth hereby renew ; adding furthermore, that, in
civil causes relative to wages, and to distressed persons,
clerks, whether seculars, or regulars, who live out of their
monasteries, howsoever exempted, even though they may
have upon the spot a special judge deputed by the Apostolic
See ; and in other [causes], if they have no such judge, may
be brought before the ordinaries of the places, and be forced
and compelled by course of law to pay what they owe ; no
privileges, exemptions, deputations of conservators, and in-
hibitions therefrom, being of any force whatever in opposition
to the aforesaid [regulations].

CHAPTER XV.

Ordinaries shall take cm*e that all manner of Hospitals, even those exempted,
hefaithfuUy governed by their Administrators,

The ordinaries shall take care that all hospitals whatsoever
be faithfully and diligently governed by their own adminis-

FACTXLTT TO TBAKSFEB THE COITKCIL. 61

trators, by what names soever thej be called, and in wbat
manner soeyer exempted: observins the form of the Consti-
tution of the Council of Yienne, which begins quia contingit,
"Wliich constitution this same holy synod hath thought fit to
renew, and doth hereby renew, together with the derogations
contained therein.

INDICnON OF THE KXXT SBSSIOK.

This sacred and holy synod hath also resolved and decreed
that the next ensuing session be held and celebrated on
Thursday, the fifbh day after the coming Sunday in Albis}
which will be the 21st of the month of April of the present
year, 1547.

BULL OF FAOni/TT TO TRAKBFEB TmB COUNCIL.

Paul, Bishop, servant of the servants of God, to our vene-
rable brother Giammaria, bishop of Palsestrina, and to our
beloved sons, Marcellus, of the title of the Holy Cross, in
Jerusalem, priest, and Beginald, of Saint Mary in Cosmedin,
deacon, cardinals, our legates a latere^ and those of the
Apostolical See, health and apostolical benediction.

We, by the appointment of God, presiding over the
government of the universal church, though with merits
unequal thereunto, deem it a part of our office that, if any-
thing of more than usual moment have to be settled touching
the Christian commonweal, it be done not only at a suitable
Bcason, but also in a convenient and fitting place. Where-
fore, whereas we lately, with the advice and consent of our
venerable brethren the cardinals of the Holy Roman Church,
upon hearing that peace had been made between our most
dear sons in Christ, Charles, the Emperor of the Eomans,
ever august, and Francis, the most Christian King of the
Erench, after we had taken off and removed the suspension
of the celebration of the sacred oecumenical and universal
council, which we had on another occasion, for reasons then

* Lt. Low Sunday. "In Latm, it is called Dominica in AUns, or
niherpost Albcu (sc. depositcu), as some ritualists call it, t. e. the Swnday
ofjpultimg off the chryaoms ; because those that were baptized on Easter-
eve on tliis day laid aside those white robes, or chrysoms, which were
put upon them at their baptism, and which were now laid up in the
churches, that they might be produced as evidences against them if they
should afterwards violate or deny that fitith which they had professed in
their baptism.** — ^Wheatly on the Common Prayer, ch. y. sec. ziz.

62 8£SBIQ]^T^.^ .

declared, indicted, wit£ the like advice and. consent^ at the
city of Trent, and which waa, for certain other reasons at
that time also declared suspended, with the like advice and
consent, unto another more opportune and convenient time,
to be declared by us : being ourselves unable, since we were
at that time lawfully hindered, to repair ta the aforesaid cily
in person, and to be present at that council, we, by the same
advice, ordained and deputed you as our Ugatet a latere^ and
those of the Apostolic See, in that council ; and we sent you
unto that same city as angels of peace, as in divers our letters
thereupon is more fullv contained: We, wishing to provide
opportunely that so holy a work as the celebration of such a
council may not be hinaered or unduly delayed, through the
inconvenience of the place, or otherwise in any manner, we,
of our own proper motion,* and certain knowledge, and the
plenitude of apostolic authority, and with the aforesaid advice
and consent, ao, by the tenor of these presents, with apostolic
authority, concede to you all together, or to two of you, the
other being detained by lawful impediment, or perchance
absent therefrom, full and free power and &culty, to transfer
and change, whensoever it shall seem fit to you, the aforesaid
council from the same city of Trent, to any other more con-
venient, opportune, or safe city, respecting which it shall
also seem fit to you, and to suppress and dissolve that
[which is held] in the said city of Trent ; as also to inhibit,
even under ecclesiastical censures and pains, the prelates
and other members of the said council, from proceeding to
any frurther measures therein in the said city of GDrent ; and
also to continue, hold,, and celebrate the same council in any
other such city unto which it shall happen to have been
transferred and changed, and to summon thereunto the
prelates and other members of the said Council of Trent,
even under the pain of perjury, and of the other penalties
mentioned in the letters of mdiction of that council ; to pre^-
side and proceed, in the councU thus translated and changed,

* '' Motu proprio, *' a- phrase reBetnbling tHe old English formula '' ex
mero motu/' appliea to what the king does upon his own responsibility.
Du Cange states, that "its authority was &r less than that of bulls, but
that it was afterwards inserted in the bulb also, in order to signify that
the pope promulgated them himself without consulting the council of
cardinals, and at no one's request" (vol. iv. p. 1604).

OK THE TBAKSXtATION OF THE COITNCIL. 68

in the name and anthoriiy aforesaid^ and to pecrfonn, institute;
ordain, and execute the other things, as above mentioned^
and the things thereunto necessary lind opportune, according
to the contents and tenor of the previous letters which have
been on other occasion addressea unto jou : [and] We will
hold as ratified and pleasing whatsoever by you shall have
been done, instituted, ordamed, or executed, in the matters
aforesaid, and will, with God's help, cause it to be inviolably
observed ; any apostolical constitutions and ordinances, and
other things whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding.
Wherefore, let it be lawftd to no one- soever to infringe this
letter of our grant, or with rash daring go contrary thereto.
But if ODJ one shall presume to attempt this, let him know
that he will incur the indication of Almighty Gbd, and of
the blessed Peter and Fau^ His apostles.

Given at Eome, at St. Peter's, in the year of the Lord's
Incarnation, 1547, on.the 8th of the calends of March,^ in
the eleventh year of our pontificate.

Pab. Bisn. OF Spol.

B. MOTTA.

SESSION THE EIGHTH,
CfiUbraUd on the eleventh day of the month of Marck, 1547.

DECREE COKGERKINa THE TRANSLATION OF THE COUNCIL.

Doth it please you to decree and declare^ that, from the
aforesaid and other allegations, it is so plainly and notoriously
certain, respecting a disease of the kind stated, that the
prelates cannot without danger of their lives remain in this
city, and that therefore they cannot and ought not against
their wills to be detained therein. And considering also the
withdrawal of many prelates since the session last held, and
considering the protests made in the general congregationa
by very many otner prelates, wishing by all means to depart
hence through fear of the said disease, who cannot justly be
detained, and by whose departure the council woiud either
be dissolved, or, from the small number of the prelates, its
beneficial progress would be hindered ; and, considering also

^ February 22nd.

the imminent danger to life, and the other notoriouslj true
and lawful reasons alleged in the said congregations by
certain of the fathers ; doth it please you, in like manner,
to decree and declare, that, for the preservation and prose-
cution of the said council, and for the safety of the lives of
the said prelates, this council be transferred, for a season, to
the city of Bologna, as being a place more ready, healthy,
and suitable, and that the translation have effect from tms
day forth, and that the session, already indicted for the 21st
day of April ought to be celebrated, and be celebrated, there,
on that appointed day ; and that the further matters be pro-
ceeded with in order, until it shall seem expedient to our
most holy lord and to the sacred council, that the said
council may, and ought, to be brought back to this, or to
some other place, thereupon taking counsel also with the
most invincible emperor, the most Christian king, and with
the other Christian kings and princes ?
They answered : It pieaseth.

SESSION THE NINTH,
CdebraUd at Bologna, on the twenty-firtt day of the month of April, 1547.

DECREE FOB THE FBOBOOATTON OF THE SESSION.

This sacred and holy, oecumenical and general synod, which
was lately assembled in the city of Trent, and is now lawfully
assembled together in the Holy Qhost at Bologna, the same
most reverend Lords Giammaria del Monte, bishop of Falaes-
trina, and MarceUus, of the title of the Holy Cross in Jeru-
salem, I priest, cardinals of the holy Eoman Church, and
legates apostolic a latere, presiding therein in the name of
our most holy Father in Christ, and Lord, Paul III., by the
providence of God, Pope, considering that, on the lltn day
of the month of March of the present year, in a general
public session celebrated in the said city of Trent, and in the
usual place, all the formalities being observed according to
custom ; [the s3mod,] for causes then pressing, urgent, and
lawful, and with the interposition also of the authority of the
holy Apostolic See, specially also granted to the said most
reverend presidents, aecreed and ordained, that the council
should be transferred, as it did transfer it, from that place to

DECBEE PBOBOOUIKO THE SESSION. 65

this city, and likewise that the session, indicted there for this
21 st day of April, that canons touching the matters of the
sacraments and of reformation, concerning which it had pur-
posed to treat, might be sanctioned and promulgated, ought
to be celebrated in this city of Bologna ; and considering that
some of the fathers who have been accustomed to be present
at this council, being some engaged in their own churches
during these latter days of the great week,^ and of the
Paschal solemnity, and some ako detained by other hin-
drances, have not as yet come hither, who nevertheless, it is
to be hoped, will shortly be present ; and that, from this
reason, it has come to pass that the said matters of the sacra-
ments and of refonnation could not be examined and .dis-
cussed in such an assembly of prelates as the holy synod
desired : wherefore, to the end that all things may be done
with mature deliberation, with due dignity and gravity, [the
synod] hath considered, and doth consider, that it is good,
opportune, and expedient, that the aforesaid session, which,
as has been said, was to have been celebrated on this day, be
deferred and prorogued, as it now defers and prorogues it,
to the Thursday within the approaching octave of Pentecost,
imto the expediting of the matters aforesaid ; which day it
has deemed, and deems to be, most opportune for the business
to be transacted, and most convenient especially for the
&thers who are absent ; adding this, however, that this holy
synod may and can, even in a private congregation, restrict
and abridge the said term, at its will and pleasure, as it shall
think expedient for the business of the council.

SESSION THE TENTH,
Celebrated at Bologna, on the second day of the month of June, 1547*

DECREE FOR THE PROROGATION OP THE SESSION.

Although this sacred and holy, oecumenical and general
synod hath decreed, that the session which was to have been
celebrated in this illustrious city of Bologna, on the 21st day
of the month of April just past, on the subject of the sacra-

"^ I. f . of Lent.

r

66 gsssiOK X.

ments and of reformation, according to the decree promul-
gated in public session in the city of Trent, should be aeferred
and j^rorogued to this present day, for certain causes, and
especially on account or the absence of some of the fathers,
who it was hoped would in a short time be present ; ^islung,
however, even yet, to deal kindly with those who have not
come, the same sacred and holy cmiod, lawfully assembled in
the Holy Ghost, the same cardinals of the holy Eoman
Church, and legates of the Apostolic See, presiding therein,
ordains and decrees, that the said session, wmch it had decreed
to celebrate on this the 2nd day of the month of June of this
present year, 1547, be deferred and prorogued, as it doth
hereby defer and prorogue it, unto the Thursday after the
feast of the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin Maiy, which will
be the 16th of September next, for the expediting of the
aforesaid and other matters ; so, however, that the prosecu-
tion of the discussion and examination, both of those things
which [appertain] to dogmas, and of those which appertain to
reformation, shall not meanwhile be suspended; ana that the
said holy synod freely may and can, at its will and pleasure,
even in a private congregation, abridge or prorogue the said
term.

On the \4dh day of September^ 1547, in a general CongrC'
gation held at Bologna, the Session, which was to have taken
place on the following dag, was prorogtied during the good
pleasure of the sacred Council,

BULL FOR THE RBSUBfPTION OF THE OOUNOIL OF TREliT, UKDEB THE

SOVEREIGN PONTIFF JULIUS III.

Julius, Bishop, servant of the servants of God, for the
future memory hereof.

Whereas, in order to remove the dissensions respecting
our religion, which for a long time have prevailed in Ger-
many, not without the disturbance and scandal of the whole
Christian world, it seems good, opportune, and expedient, as
also our most dearly beloved son m Christ, Charles the em-
peror of the Eomans, ever-august, has caused to be signified
to us by his letters and ambassadors, that the sacred,
oecumenical, general council indicted by a\xr predecessor,
Pope Paul III., of happy memory, and begun, ordered, and
continued by us, who then occupied the honour of the car-

dinalate, and jointlj with two other cardinola of the holy
Eoman Churcn, presiding in the name of our said prede-
cessor in the saia council, wherein several public and solemn
sessions were held, and several decrees promulgated as well
on the subject of faith as of reformation, and also many
matters pertaining to both subjects examined and discussed
— should be brought back to the city of Trent : We, unto
whom, as Sovereign Pontiff for the time, it appertains to
indict and direct general councils, that, unto the praise and
glory of Almight;^ God, we may procure the peace of the
Church, and the increase of the Christian faith, and of the
orthodox religion, and may, as i&T as lies in us, consult with
fiitherly care lor the tranquillity of Germany, which province
indeed, in times past, was never second to any in Christendom
in cultivating true religion, and the doctrine of the sacred
councils and holy fathers, and in exhibiting due obedience
and reverence to the sovereign pontiffs, the vicars on earth
of Christ our Redeemer; hoping that, through the grace
and kindness of God, aU Christian kings and princes will
approve of, favour, and aid our just and pious wishes in this
matter : "We, by the bowels of the mercy of our Lord Jesus
Christ, exhort, require, and admonish our venerable brethren
the patriarchs, archbishops, bishops, and our beloved sons
the abbots, and all and each of the others, who of right, or
custom, or privilege, ought to be present at general councils,
and whom our said predecessor, in his letters of indiction,
and in any others soever drawn up and published on this-
subject, wiUed to be present at the council, to convene and
assemble together, lawful impediment being wanting, in the
same city of Trent, and to apply themsekes without any
delay whatever to the continuation and prosecution of the
said council, on the next ensuing calends of May,^ which day
we ordain and declare, after mature deliberation previously,
and of our own certain knowledge, and the plenitude of
apostolic authority, and with the advice and consent of our
venerable brethren the cardinals of the said holy Eoman
Church, for resuming and prosecuting the said council in
the state wherein it is now found. For we shall take espe-
cial care, that, at the same time, in the same city, our

« May Ist.
r2

legates be always present, through whom, if we shall be
unable, on account of our age and state of health, and the
necessities of the Apostolic See, to be personally present,
we shall, under the direction of the Holy Ghost, preside
over the said council; any transhition and suspension of
the said council, and any other things soever to the con-
trary notwithstanding, and especially those things which it
was the will of our same predecessor should not cause any
obstacle, as expressed in his letters aforesaid, which, with all
and each of the clauses and decrees contained therein, we
will and decree to contiiiue in their own force, and we do,
as far as there is need thereof, hereby renew them ; declar-
ing, nevertheless, null and void whatsoever may chance to be
attempted, wittingly or ignorantly, by whatsoever person,
or by whatsoever authority, against these [presents]. Let
it be lawful for no one, therefore, to infidnge this our letter
of exhortation, requisition, monition, statute, declaration,
renewal, wiU, and decrees, or with rash daring to go contrary
thereunto. But if any one shall presume to attempt this,
let him know that he will incur the indignation of Almighty
God, and of His blessed apostles Peter and Paul.

Given at Rome, at St. Peter's, in the year 1548 y of our
Lord's Incarnation, on the 18th of the calends of December,*
in the first year of our Pontificate.

. M. Cahdikal Ceescek.

EOM. AMASiBUS.

SESSION THE ELEVENTH OF THE COUNCIL OF TRENT,

Bang the first held widen* tlu Sova^eign Pontiff Julim III,, celebrated on

tlie calends of May, 1551.

DECBEE TOUCmNa BESUMINQ THE COUNCnj.

Doth it please you, unto the praise and glory of the holy
and undivided Tnnity, Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost,
mito the increase and exaltation of the Christian faith and
religion, that the sacred, oecumenical, and general Council of
Trent be resumed, according to the form and tenor of the

y MDLXYIII. in the Leipsic edition I use, is evidently a typogra-
phical error. * November 14th.

DEOBEE EOB FBOBOOUIKO THE 8E88IOK. 69

letters of our most holy lord, and tliat further matters be
proceeded with ?

They answered : It pleaseth.

INOIOnOK OF THE NEXT SESSIOK.

Doth it please you that the next ensuing session be held
and celebrated on the ensuing calends of September P
They answered : It pleaseth.

SESSION THE TWELFTH,

Being tlie second under the Sovereign Pontiff Julius III,, celebrated on the

first dag of September, 1661.

DECBEE FOR THE FBOBOOUIKa OF THE SESSION.

The sacred and holy, oecumenical and general Synod of
Trent, lawfully assembled in the Holy Ghost, the same legate
and nuncios of the Apostolic See presiding therein, — having,
in the session just past, decreed, that this next session
should be celebrated on this day, and that further matters
were to be proceeded with ; whereas it has hitherto delayed
to proceed, on account of the absence of the illustrious Ger-
man nation, whose interests it principally concerns, and on
account of the assemblage of the fatners not [being] nu-
merous ; at this very time rejoicing in the Lord, and giving
deserved thanks to that same Almighty God, for the arrival,
a little before this day, of our venerable brethren and sons in
Christ, the archbishops of Mavence and Treves, electoral
princes of the holy Eoman empire, and also of several other
bishops of that and of other provinces ; and conceiving a
firm hope that very many other prelates, both of Germany
itself and of other nations, will, moved by the requirement
of their oiBce and by this example, arrive in a few davs,
[the synod] indicts tne next session, from the fortieth day
from this present, which will be the eleventh of the next
month of October ; and prosecuting the said council in the
state wherein it is now found, whereas in the preceding
sessions definite rules were laid down* touching the ^even
sacraments of the new law in general, and on baptism and

' Definitum fuerit.

confirmation in particular, it resolves and decrees, that it
must discuss ana treat of the sacrament of the most holy
Eucharist, and also, as regards reformation, of the other
matters which pertain to the more easy and conyenient resi-
dence of prelates. And it admonishes and exhorts all the
fathers, that, meanwhile, after the example of our Lord Jesus
Christ, they giye themselyes to fastings and prayers, as far
at least as human weakness will permit, that so God, who is
blessed for eyermore, being at length appealed, may deign
to bring back the hearts of men to the acknowledgment of
His own true faith, to the unity of holy mother Church, and
to the rule of liying righteously. ^

SESSION THE THIRTEENTH,

Being the third under the Sovereign Pontiff Jiditu TIL, cdebrated on Hhe

eUvein£h day of October 1 1551.

DBOBSK TOUOmNO TmB MOST HOLT BACBAUENT OF THE BUOHARIST.

The sacred and holy, (Ecumenical and general Synod of
Trent, lawfully assembled in the Holy Ghost, the same legate
and nuncios of the Apostolic See presiding therein, — al-
though it was unto this end that it assembled, not without
the special guidance and goyemance of the Holy Ghost [to
wit], that it might set forth the true and ancient doctrme
touching faith and the sacraments, and that it might proyide
a remedy for all the heresies, and the other most grieyous
troubles with which the Church of God is now most misera-
bly agitated, and rent into many and yarious parts; yet,
eyen from the outset, this especially has been the object of
its desires, that it might pluch up by the roots those to/res^
of execrable errors and schisms, which the enemy hath, in
these our calamitous times, sown in the doctrine of the
faith, in the use and worship of the sacred and holy Eucha-
rist, which our Sayiour, notwithstanding, left in His Church
as a symbol of that unity and charity in which He would
£Eun haye all Christians be mutually joined and united to-
gether. Wherefore, this same sacred and holy synod, here
deliyering, on this yenerable and diyine sacrament of the

b MaU. xiii. 28, 30.

OK THE HOLY XITOHABIST. 71

Eucharist, that sound and genuine doctrine, which the
Catholic Church, instructed by our Lord Jesus Christ Him-
self, and hj His apostles, and taught by the Holy Ghost,
who day hj day brings to her remembrance all truth,^ has
always retainecl, and will preserve even to the end of the
world, forbids all the faithful of Christ, lest they should
henceforth presume to believe, teach, or preach concerning
the holy Eucharist, otherwise than as is explained and defined
in this present decree.

. CHAPTER I.

On the Real Preamce of (yar Lwd Jam Chrxtt «it (he most holy Saerameni

of the Bucharitt,

In the first place, the holy synod teaches, and openly and
simply professes, that, in the sacred^ sacrament of the holy
Euchanst, after the consecration of the bread and wine, our
Lord Jesus Christ, true Qod and man, is truly, really, and"*]
substantially contained under the species of those sensible
things. For neither are these things mutually repugnant,
that our Saviour Himself ever sitteth at the nght hand of
the Pather in heaven,® according, to the natum mode of
existing, and that, nevertheless. He be, in many other places,
sacramentally present unto us in his own substance, by that
manner of existing, which, though we can scarcely express it
in words, we yet can, by the understanding illuminated by
faith, suppose, and ought most faithfuUy to believe, to be
possible unto God.^ For thus all our rorefathers, as many
as were in the true Church of Christ, who have discoursed
of this modt holy sacrament, have most openly professed,
that our Eedeemer instituted this so admirable a sacrament
at the last supper, when, after the blessing of the bread and
wine, He bore witness, in distinct and clear words,8 that
He gave them His own very Body, and His own JBlood ;

' See Luke xii. 12 ; John xiv. 26 ; xvi. 13.

^ " Almo," a word commonly used as an epithet of various heathen
deities, with a reference to the power of providing nourishment, and hence
" beneficial, " "kindly." We have no equivalent word in our lan-
guage. The Bev. J. Waterworth has rendered it "august" in his
translation.

* See the Symbol in Sess'. iii.

' Cf. Matt. xix. 26 ; Luke xviii. 27.

ff Matt. xxvi. 26-28 ; Mark xix. 22-24 ; Luke xxii. 19, seq.

72 SS88IOK xm.

'wqrdB which, recorded by the holy Evangelists, and after-
waijrds repeated by St. Paul,'' whereas they carry \vith them
that proper and most manifest meaning accordmg to which
they were understood by the fathers, it is indeed a crime the
most imworthy that they should be wrested, by certain con-
tentious and wicked men, unto fictitious and imaginary
figures of speech,* whereby the verity of the flesh and blood
of Christ is denied, contrary to the universal sense of the
Church, which, as tJie pillar and stay of truth) has detested,
as satanical, these inventions devised by impious men ; she
recognizing, with a mind ever grateful, and remembering,
this most excellent benefit of Chnst.

CHAPTER II.
On iJie Reason of the Institution of this most Jioly Saci*anient,

Our Saviour, therefore, when about to depart from this
world unto the Eather, instituted this Sacrament, in which
He, as it were, poured forth the riches of His divine love
towards man, making a remembrance of his wonderful works ;^
and He commanded us, in the participation thereof, to
venerate His memory^ and to show his death until He come^
to judge the world. And He also willed that this sacrament
should be received as the spiritual food of souls, whereby
may be nourished and strengthened those who live "v^ith His
life, who said, He that eateth me, he also shall live hy me ;^

(and as an antidote, by the which we may be freed from daily
faults, and preserved from mortal sins. He willed, further-
more, that it should be a pledge of our glory to come, and
of everlasting happiness, and thus be a symbol of that one
body of which He is the head, and to which He would fain
have us, as members, be united by the closest bond of faith,
hope, and charity, that we might all speak the same thing^
and there might he no schisms amoTig usJ^

^ 1 Cor. xi. 24, sqq. * Tropos. J 1 Tim. iii. 15.

^ Ps. ex. 4 (cxi. 4). * Luke xxii. 19 ; 1 Cor. xi. 26.

« John vi. 68. » 1 Cor. i. 10.

ON THB HOLY EUCHABI8T. 78

CHAPTER HI.

On the ExceUency of the most holy Eucheaisi above the rest qf the

Sacramenli.

This indeed is common to the most holy Eucharist with
the rest of the sacraments, that it is a symbol of a sacred
thing, and is a visible form of an invisible grace ; but there
is found in the Eucharist this excellent and peculiar thing,
that the other sacraments have then first thepower of sancti-
fying, when one uses them, whereas in the Eucharist, before
the use, there is the Author Himself of sanctity. For the^
apostles had not as yet received the Eucharist from the hand
of the Lord, when, nevertheless. Himself truly afiirmed that
to be His own body which He presented. And this faith
has ever been in the Church of God, that, immediately after
the consecration, the very Body of our Lord, and His very
Blood, together with His soul and divinity, exist under the
species of bread and wine ; but the Body indeed under tho
species of bread, and the Blood under the species of wine,
by the force of the words ; but the body itself under the
species of wine, and the blood under the species of bread,
and the soul under each, by the force of that natural con-
nexion and concomitancy by which the parts of Christ our
Lord, who hath now risen from the dead, to die no more^ are
united together ; and the divinity, furthermore, on account
of that admirable hypostatical union thereof with His body
and soul. "Wherefore it is most true, that as much is con-^
tained under either species as under each ; for Christ whole \
and entire is under the species of bread, and under any r
part soever of that species ; likewise the whole [Christ] is 1
under the species of wine, and under its parts. \

CHAPTER IV.

On TransvhstanticUion.

But because Christ, our Redeemer, declared that which
He offered under the species of bread to be verily His own
body, therefore has it ever been a firm belief in tne Church
of God, and this holy Synod doth now declare it anew, that,

<* Rom. vi. 9.

hj the consecration of tlie bread and of the wine, a conver-
sion takes place of the whole substance of the bread into
the substance of the body of Christ our Lord, and of the
whole substance of the wine into the substance of His
blood. Which conversion is, by the holy Catholic Church,
conveniently and properly called Transubstantiation.

CHAPTER V.
On the Worsfiip^ and Veneration to he shown to thie most holy Sacrament.

•

There is, therefore, no room left for doubting, that all the
fSuthfiil of Christ, according to the custom ever received in

I the Catholic Church, exhibit in veneration the worship of
latria,^ which is due to the true God, to this most holv
sacrament. Eor it is not the less to be worsliipped on this
a<ccount, that it was instituted by Christ, the Lord, to be
received. Por we believe that same God to be present
therein, concerning whom the eternal Eather, when intro-
ducing him into tne world, says ; And let all the a/ngeh of
Qod adore him ;' whom the MAgif falling doton, worahwped;^
who, in fine, as the scripture beareth witness, was worshipped
by the apostles in Galilee.*

The holy Sjnaod declares, moreover, that very piously and
religiously was this custom introduced into the Cnurch, that

f this most sublime and venerable sacrament should be, with
special veneration and solemnity, celebrated, every year, on
a certain day, and that a festival ; and that it should be

\ borne reverently and with honour in processions through the
streets, and public places. For it is most just that there be
certain stated holy days, when all Christians may, with a
special and unusual demonstration, testify that their minds
are grateful and mindful towards their common Lord and
Bedeemer for so ineffable and truly divine a benefit, whereby
the victory and triumph of His death are represented. And
so indeed did it behove victorious truth to celebrate a triumph
over falsehood and heresy, that thus her adversaries, at the

p Cultu.

^ I. e. worship of the highest order. The Romanists make a distinc-
tion between the degrees of worship.

' Ps. xcvi. 7 (xcvii. 7). Cf. Heb. i. 6. ■ Matt. ii. 11.

* See Matt, xxviii. 17 ; Luke zxiv. 52.

OK THS HOLT EUOHABIST. 75

sight of 80 mucH splendour, and placed in the midst of so
great joy of the universal Church, may either pine away,
weakened and broken; or, touched with shame, and con-
founded, at length repent.

CHAPTER VI.

On Raervvng the Sacrament of (he sacred Eucharid and learing it to the

Sick.

The custom of reserving the holy Eucharist in the sacra-
rium* is so ancient, that even the age of the Council of
Nicsea^ recognized it. Moreover, as to the carrying the
sacred Eucharist itself to the sick, and carefully rescrvmg it
unto this purpose in churches, besides that it is conformm)le
with the highest practice, equity and reason, it is also found
enjoined in nxunerous councils,^ and observed according to
the most ancient of the Catholic Church. "Wherefore, this
holy synod ordains, that this salutary and necessary custom
be by aU means retained.

CHAPTER VII.

On the PrqHxratum which is to he given that one may worthUy receive the

eaered Eucharitt,

If it becometh not for any one to approach any of the
sacred functions, unless [he approach] holuy ; assuredly, the
more the holiness and divinity of tlus heavenly sacrament
be imderstood by a Christian man, so much the more
diligently ought he to take heed that he approach not to
receive it but with great reverence and holiness, especially
as we read in the apostle those words fuU of terror ; J9Je
that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh
judgment to himself.^ "Wherefore, by him who would com-
municate, must the precept of the apostle be recalled to

^ A part of tlie altar, witli a kind of box or case in which the Eucharist
was kept. " Pars altaris, ubi reponitur pyxis^ in qua sacra Eucharistia
asservatur, nostris yulgo Tabernacle" — Du Cange. See Hoffinann's
Lexicon^ vol. iv. p. 18. The word is sometimes used for the space
enclosed by the altar-rails, the chancel.

^ See Cone. Nicsen. I. c. 18.

^ See, for instance, Concil. Ancyr. c. 5 ; Concil. Agath. c. 15*

«lCor. xi. 29.

(mind ; Let a man prove himself, y But ecclesiastical usage
declai*es that necessary proof to be, thatlno one, conscious
to himself of deadly sin, how contrite soever he may seem
to himself, ought to approach the sacred Eucharist without
sacramental confession preceding^ This the holy synod hath
decreed is to be perpetually observed by all Christians, even
by those priests on whom by their office it may be incumbent
to celebrate, provided the opportunity of a confessor fail
them not. Butjif, necessity Tbeing urgent, a priest should
celebrate without previous confession, let him confess as
soon as possible.)

CHAPTER VIII.
On the Use of this admiralle Sacrament.

Now as regards the use, our Fathers have rightly and
wisely distinguished three ways of receiving this holy sacra-
ment. Por they have taught that some receive it sacra-
mentaUy only, to wit, sinners : others spiritually only, those,
to wit, who eating in desire that heaveidy bread which is set
before them, are, by the lively faith which woi*keth hy love,^
made sensible of the fruit and utility thereof: whereas the
third receive it both sacramentally and spnitually ; and
these are they who so prove and prepare themselves before-
hand, that they approach this divine table clothed with the
wedding garments Now as to the reception of the sacra-
ment, it was always the custom in the Church of God, that
laymen should receive the commimion from the priests ; but
that the priests when celebrating should communicate them-
selves ; which custom, as coming down from an apostolical
tradition, ought with justice and reason to be retained. And
finally, this holy synod with fatherly affection admonishes,
exhorts, entreats, and beseeches, by the bowels of the mercy
of our God, that all and each of those who are reckoned
under the Christian name, would now at length join and
agree in this sign of unity, in this bond of charity, in this
symbol of concord; and that, mindful of the so great
majesty, and the so exceeding love of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who gave unto us His own beloved soul as the price of our
salvation, and gave unto us His own flesh to eat, they would

y 1 Cor. xi. 28. » Gal. v. 6. • Matt. xxii. 11, 12.

ON THE nOLT EUCHABIST. 77-

believe and venerate these sacred mysteries of His body and
blood with such constancy and firmness of faith, with sucb
devotion of soul, with such piety and worship, as to be able
to receive frequently that supersubstantial oread, and that
it may be to them truly the life of the soul, and the per-
petufi health of their mind ; that, by the stren^h thereof,
oeing invigorated, they may, after the journeying of this
miserable pilgrimage, be atle to arrive at their heavenly
country, to eat, without any veil, that same bread of angels
which they now eat under the sacred veils.

But whereas it is not enough to declare the truth, if
errors be not laid open and repudiated, it hath seemed good
to the holy synod to subjoin these canons, that all, the
Catholic doctrine being already recognized, may also under-
stand what are the heresies against which they ought to
guard and avoid.

CONCERNINO THE HOST HOLT SACBAMENT OF THE EUCHARIST.

Canon i. If any one shall deny, that, in the sacrament of
the most holy Eucharist, are verily, really, and substantially
contained the body and blood, together with the soul and
divinity, of our Lord Jesus Christ, and consequently the
whole Christ ; but shall say that He is only therein as in a
sign, or in figure, or virtue ; let him be anathema.

Canon ii. If any one shall say, that, in the sacred and
holy sacrament of the Eucharist, the substance of the bread
ana wine remains conjointly with the body and blood of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and shall deny that wonderful and
singular conversion of the whole substance of the bread
into the Body, and of the wliole substance of the wine into
the Blood, the species only of the bread and wine remaining,
which conversion indeed the Catholic Church most aptly
calls Transubstantiation ; let him be anathema.

Canon hi. If any one shall deny, that, in the venerable
sacrament of the Eucharist, the whole Christ is contained
under each species, and under every part of each species,
when separated ; let him be anathema.

Canon iv. If any one shall say, that, after the consecra-
tion is completed, the body and blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ are not in the admirable sacrament of the Eucharist,
but [are there] only duriug the use, whilst it is being taken,

78 BESsioK zm.

and not either before or after ; and that, in the hosts, or
consecrated particles, which after communion are reserved or
remain, the true body of the Lord remaineth not ; let him
be anathema.
^^ Can GIT V. If any one shall say, either that the chief fruit
I di the most holy Eucharist is the remission of sins, or, that
from it other effects do not result ; let him be anathema.

Canok yi. If any one shall say, that, in the holy sacra-
ment of the Eucharist, Christ, the only begotten Son of God,
is not to be adored with even the worship external of latria,^
and is, consequently, neither to be venerated with a special
festive celebration, nor to be solemnly borne about in pro-
cessions, according to the laudable and imiversal rite and
custom of the holy Church ; or, is not to be proposed publicly
to the people to be worshipped, and that the worshippers
thereof are idolaters ; let him be anathema.

Canok tii. If any one shall say, that it is not lawful for
the sacred Eucharist to be reserved in the 9acrarivm^ but
that, immediately after consecration, it must necessarily be
distributed amongst those at hand ; or that it is not lawful
that it be carried honourably to the sick ; let him be ana-
thema.

CAifOK vni. If any one shall say, that Christ, presented in
the Eucharist, is eaten spiritually only, and not also sacra-
mentally and really ; let him be anathema.

Canoit IX. If anv one shall deny, that all and each of
Christ's feithful of both sexes are bound, when they have
attained to years of discretion, to communicate every year,
at least at Easter, in accordance with the precept of Holy
Mother Church ; let him be anathema.

Cakok X. If any one shall say, that it is not lawful for the
priest celebrating to communicate himself ; let him be ana-
thema.

Cakok XI. If any one shall say, that faith alone is a
sufficient preparation for receiving the sacrament of the
most holy Eucharist ; let him be anathema. And, lest so
great a sacrament should be received unworthily, and so unto
death and condemnation, this holy synod ordains and de-
clares, that sacramental confession, when a confessor is to be

^ See note^ page 74.

OK BETOBKATIOir. 79

obtained, is of necessity to be made beforehand, by those
whom the conscience oi deadly sin burthens, how contrite
even soever they may deem themselves. But if any one shall
presume to teach, preach, or obstinately assert, or even by
publicly disputing, defend the contrary, he shall be by the
very act exconmiimicated.

DECREE TOUOHINO BEFOBMATION.

CHAPTER I.

BUivopB shall prudenUy apply theTntdves to rrform the Af aimers of their
Suljects : from dCnr Correction there shall be no Appeal.

The same sacred and holy Synod of Trent, lawfully assem*
bled in the Holy Ghost, the same legate and nuncios of the
Apostolic See presiding therein, — ^intending to ordain certain
thmgs which relate to the jurisdiction of bishops, in order
that they may, in accordance with the decree of the last
session, so much the more willingly reside in the churches
committed to them, by how much the more easily and conve-
niently they shall be able to rule and to keep in propriety of
life and manners, those subject unto them, thmks it meet that
the bishops be first of all admonished to remember, that they
are pastors, and not strikersy^ and that they ought so to pre-
side over those in subjection to them, as not to lord it over
them,^ but to love them as sons and brethren; and to strive, by
exhorting and admonishing, to deter them from what is un-
lawful, that they may not be compelled, should they trans-
fress, to coerce them by due punishments. Should they,
owever, happen to sin in any maimer through human fraQty.
that precept of the apostle is to be observed by them, that
they reprove^ entreat, rebuke them in all kindness^ and pa-
tience, siuce benevolence towards those to be corrected often
effects more than austerity, exhortation more than menacing,
charity more than power. But if, on account of the griev-
ousness of the transgression, there be need of the rod, then
is rigour to be used with gentleness, judgment with mercy,
severity with lenity ; that so discipline, sfiutary and neces-
sary for the people, maybe preserved without harshness; and
that they who are chastised may be amended ; or, if they be

« Htus i. 7. •> Luke xxii. 25. • 2 Tim. iv. 2.

nnwilling to repent, that others, by the wholesome example
of their punishment, may be deterred from vices ; since it is
the office of a pastor, at once diligent and kind, first to apply
gentle fomentations to the disorders of his sheep, afterwards,
when the grievousness of the distemper may require them, to
proceed to sharper and more painM remedies ; but if not
even these are effectual in removing those disorders, then is
he to free the other sheep at least trora the danger of conta-
gion. Whereas, therefore, those guilty of crimes, for the
most part, in order to avoid punishment, and to evade the
judgments of their bishops, pretend to have subjects of com-
plaint and grievance, and, under the subterfuge of an appeal,
impede the process of the judge, [this synod,] in order to
prevent a remedy, which was instituted for the protection of
innocence, from being abused to the defence of iniquity, and
that this their craft and tergiversation may be met, nath thus
ordained and decreed : In causes respecting visitation and
correction, or competency or incompetency, as also in cri-
minal causes, there shall be no appeal, before the definitive
sentence, from the bishop or his vicar-general in spiritual
matters, from any interlocutoiy sentence, or otlier grievance'
soever; neither shall the bishop, nor his vicar, be bound
to defer to any such appeal, as being frivolous; but they may
proceed to ulterior measures, that appeal, or any inhioition
whatsoever, emanating from a judge of appeal, as also every
usage and custom even immemorial, to the contrary not-
withstanding ; except that the said grievance cannot be
repaired by the definitive sentence, or that there is no appeal
from the said definitive sentence ; in which cases the statutes
of the sacred and ancient canons shall remain untouched.

CHAPTER II.

When an Appeal in Mminal Catueafrom Hie Bisliop is to he committed to
die Meti*opolitanf wJien to one of the nearest Bishops,

A case of appeal, where there is room for appeal, from the
sentence of the bishop, or that of his vicar-general in spiritual
matters, shall, if it shall happen to be committed by apostolic
authority to judges on the spot, be referred to the metro-

' /. e. any alleged grievance.

OK BEFOBMATIOir. 81

politon, or even to his vicar-general in spiritual matters ; or
if he be for some cause suspected, or be distant more than
two days' journey, as settled by law,K or if the appeal be
made from him, it shall be committed to one of the nearest
bishops, or to their vicxufl, but not to inferior judges.

CHAPTER III.

Hue Acts of the First Jnttavice shaU, vntJiin Thirty Dayt, he given gratui*

toudy to the Accused AfpeUant,

The accused who is in a criminal cause an appellant from
the bishop, or from his vicar-general in spiritual matters,
shall absolutely produce, before the judge to whom he has
appealed, the acts of the first instance ; and the judge, with-
out having seen them, sliall by no means proceed to the
absolution of the accused. But he, from whom the appeal is
made, shall furnish, on the demand [of the appellant], the
said acts gratuitously within thirty days; otherwise such
case of appeal shall be terminated without them, in the way
that justice may recommend.

CHAPTER IV.

•

In wJiat manner Clerics^ m'e, on accowU of Grievous Crimes, to he

degraded from Ildy Orders,

But whereas crimes so grievous are sometimes committed
by ecclesiastical persons, that, on account of the atrocity
thereof, they must be deposed from holy orders, and delivered
over to a secular court : in the which case a certain number
of bishops is, according to the canons,* required ; and, should
there be a difficulty in assembling them all, the due execu-
tion of the law would be delayed ; and, should they on any
occasion be able to be present, their residence would be
interrupted, — therefore hath the synod ordained and decreed,
that it shall be lawful for a bishop, by himself, or by his
vicar-general in spiritual matters, even without the presence
of other [bishops], to proceed against a clerk, even against

ff Legales dictas.

^ I use the word "clerk" to denote one in any ecclesiastical office.
See Du Cange and Junius.

* Concil. Hispal. II. c. 5.
• O

82 . SESstOK zm.

one- wlio is constituted in. the sacred orders of the priest^
hood, even unto his condemnation, as also to his verbal de-
position ; and he shall hj himself be able to proceed even to
actual and solemn degradation from the said ecclesiastical
orders and degrees, in the cases wherein the presence of
other bishops, in a definite niunber, is required by the
canons ;J abbots, however, who have the right of using the
mitre and crozier by apostolic privilege, if so be that they
can be found in the city, or diocese, and can conveniently be
present, being called in, and assisting him in this matter ; or,
m their default, other persons constituted in ecclesiastical
dignity, who are of weight by their age, and recommended
by their knowledge of law.

CHAPTER V.

The Bishop shall take Summary Cognizance of Oraces rrfeiring to die
remission of a Sin, or a Pvmshment,

And because it sometimes happens that, imder false pleas,
which yet seem probable enough, certain persons artMly get
possession of ^ graces, by which the punishments inflicted
upon them by the just severity of the bishops are either
wholly remitted, or are mitigated ; whereas it is a thing not
to be borne, that a lie, which is so exceedinglv displeasing to
God, should not only itself go unpunished, but even obtain
the pardon of another crime for him thatteUsit; [the synod]
hath for this cause ordained and decreed as follows : — ^A
bishop, residing at his own church, shall of himself, as dele-
gate of the Apostolic See, even summarily take cognizance of
the surreption or obreption of any grace, obtained under
feigned pleas, for the absolution of any public crime or
delinquency, concerning which he himself had commenced
inquiry, or for the remission of a punishment to which the
criminal had by himself been condemned ; and he shall not
admit the said grace, after that it shall have been lawfrdly
evinced, that it was obtained by the statement of a falsehood,
or by the suppression of the truths

J Or ** in a number defined by the canons."
•» Extorqueant.

OK SEJOSHATIOK. 83

CHAPTEB VI.

A Biskop BkoiU not he cited in person, tave in a Ccae of Depontion or

Deprivation,

But whereas those subject unto a bishop, even though
they have been justly chastised, do nevertheless often bear
him violent enmity, and, as though they had suffered some
wrong, are wont to object false charges against him, in order
that they may annoy him by what means soever lie in their
power, the fear of which annoyance doth for the most part
render him more backward in inquiring into and punishins^
their delinquencies ; therefore, lest a bishop be compelled,
both to his own great inconvenience and that of his church,
to abandon the flock intrusted to him, and that he may not be
forced, to the diminution of the episcopal dignitv, to wander
about, [the svnod] hath thus ordained and decreed: — ^A
bishop, even though he be proceeded against ex ojfficioy or by
way of inquiry, or denunciation, or accusation, or in any
other way soever, shall not be cited or admonished to appear
in person, except for a cause for which he might come to be
deposed from, or deprived of his oj£ce.

CHAPTER Vn.
The Qualifications of Witnesses against a Bishop are described.

The witnesses in a criminal cause shall not be received
against a bishop, whether for information or proofs, or in dny
other way touching the leading points of the case, unless
their testimonies agree, and they be of good converse, esteem,
and reputation ; and if they shall have made any deposition
througn enmity, rashness, or motives of interest, they shall
be mulcted in grievous penalties.

CHAPTER vm.

Irnportant Episcopal Cataes shaU he taken cogniionce of by the Stipt'cme .

Pontiff,

The causes of bishops, when, on account of the quality of
the crime objected, they have to appear [in person], must
be brought before the sovereign pontiff| and by him be
decided.

a2

84 . SESSioK xm.

DECBEE FOB FBOBOOUINO THE DEFINITION OF FOUB ABTICLES TOUCHING
THE 8ACBAMENT OF THE EUOHABIST, AND FOB GIVING A SAFE-CONDUCT
TO FBOTESTANTS.

The same holy synod, desiring to pluck, like thorns, out of
the field of the Lord, all the errors which have sprung up
anew touching this most holy sacrament, and wishing to
provide for the salvation of all the faithful, her daily prayers
being piously offered up to Almighty Gk)d, amongst the other
articles pertaining to this sacrament, which have been treated
of with the most diligent inquiry into Catholic truth, ver}'
many and most accurate disputations, according to the weigh-
tiness of the matters, having been held, and the opinions also
of the most eminent theologians having been ascertained ;
has likewise treated of these. Whether it be necessary unto
salvation, and prescribed of divine right, that all the faithful
of Christ should receive the said venerable sacrament imder
both species. And, whether he receives less, who communi-
cates under either species, than he who communicates under
both. And, whether Holy Mother Church hath erred, in
communicating, under the species of bread only, the lait^,
and priests when not celebrating. And, whether little chd-
dren also are to be communicated.^ But, because those of
the most noble province of Germany, who call themselves
Protestants, desire to be heard by the holy synod upon these
articles before they are defined, and for this reason nave soli-
cited from it the public faith, that they may be permitted to
come hither in safety, and dwell in this city, and speak freely
and propound their opinions before the synod, and afterwards
depart when they please ; this holy synod, although it has,
with great longing, looked forward for many months past for
their coming, nevertheless, as an affectionate mother that
groaneth and is in travail, most especially desiring and
labouring after this, that, among those who are reckoned
under the Christian name, there majr be no schisms, but that,
even as all acknowledge the same Grod and Eedeemer, so all
may speak the same tiling^ believe the same, think the same,

1 I must remark, once for all, that the verb commvnicare is used both
of the person who communicates and of the priest who administers the
sacrament. Hence the application of '* communicandos" in the present
passage. ™ 1 Cor. i. 10.

BAFE-C02n)UCT TO PBOTESTAITTS. 85

tmsting in the mercy of God, and hoping that it \nll come
to pass, that they may be brought back to the most holy and
salutary concord of one faith, hope, and charity, yielding will-
ingly to them herein, [the said synod] hath, as far as concerns
itseLT, given and granted, agreeably to their request, a public
security and fiuth, which they adl a safe-conduct, of the
t«nor which will be written down below ; and for their sakes
it hath postponed the definition of those articles until the
second next session, which, that they mjy conveniently be
present thereat, it hath indicted for the festival day of the
conversion of Saint Paul, which will be on the 25th day of
the month of January of the ensuing year. And it furtner-
more ordains this, that the sacrifice of the mass, on account
of the close connection between both subjects, shall be treated
of in the same session ; and that it will meanwhile treat of
the sacraments of penance and extreme unction in the next
session. But this it hath decreed to be holden on the festival
of Saint Catharine, virgin and martyr, which will be the
25th of November; and that at the same time, in both
[sessions], it shall proceed with the matter of reformation.

SAFE-CONDUCT GRANTED TO TfflS PROTESTANTS.

The sacred and holy general synod of Trent, lawfully
assembled in the Holy Ghost, the same legate and nuncios
of the holy Apostolic See presiding therein, — ^grants, as far
as regard the holy synod itself, imto all and each one
throughout the whole of Germany, whether ecclesiastic or
secular persons, of whatsoever degree, estate, condition, and
quality they be, who may wish to repair to this oecumenical
and general council, so that on those thin^ which are to be
treated of in the said synod, they may be aole and shall have
the power in all liberty to confer, make proposals, and treaty
to come freely and safely to the said oecumenical council, and
there remain and abide, and propound therein, as well in
writing as by word, as many articles as to them shaU seem
good, and to confer and dispute, without any abuse or con*
tumely, with the fathers, or with those who may have been
selected by the said holy synod ; as also to withdraw when*
soever it shall please them, the public faith and full security,
which they call a safe-conduct, with all and each of the
necessary and suitable clauses and decrees, even though the7

ought to be expressed specifically, and not in general termsy
whicH it is its wish to be considered as expressed. It hath
furthermore pleased the holy synod, that ii, for their greater
liberty and security, they desure that certain judges be de-
puted on their behalf, in regard of crimes whether committed,
or that may be committed by them, they shall themselyes
nominate those who are well disposed towards them, even
though the said crimes should be ever so enormous, and
should savour of heresy.

SESSION THE FOUKTEENTH,

^dng the fovrth wnder the Sovereign Pontiff JtHivs III., celebrated on the

twenty-fifth of NovemheTf 1551.

DOCTBIKE TOUCmNO THE HOST HOLY BAOBAUENTS OF FENANCE AND

EXTBEME UNCTION.

The sacred and holy, oecimienical and general Synod of
Trent, lawfully assembled in the Holy Ghost, the same
legate and nuncios of the holy Apostolic See presiding
therein, — although, in the decree touching justification, there
lias been, through certain reasons of necessity, arising from
the connection of the subjects, much discourse introduced
touching the sacrament of penance ; so great, nevertheless,
in these our days, is the multitude of (fifferent errors con-
cerning this sacrament, that it wiU be of no small public
utility to have delivered a more exact and fuller definition
thereof, wherein all errors, under the protection of the Holy
Ghost, having been pointed out and extirpated. Catholic
truth may be rendered clear and distinct ; which this holy
synod doth now set before all Christians to be perpetually
retained.

CHAPTEE I.

Of the Necessity and Instittttion of the Sacrament of Penance.

If, in all the regenerate, such were their gratitude towards
God as that they constantly preserved the righteousness
j'eceived in baptism by His bounty and grace ; there would
not have been need that another sacrament, besides that of
baptism itself, should be instituted for the remission of sins.

OK THE SAC&AJiBKT QT PENANCE. 87

But because Gk)d, rich in mercy, Jcnoweth our frame f^ lie
hath bestowed a remedy of life even upon those who, after
baptism, may have delivered themselves up to the servitude
of sin and the power of the devil, the sacrament, to wit, of 1)9|,
penance, by which the benefit of Christ's death is applied to / ' *
those who have fallen after baptism. Penitence was indeed
ever necessary, in order to attain to grace and justice, for all
men who had defiled themselves by any deadly sin, even for
those who had begged to be washed by the sacrament of
baptism ; that so, their perverseness cast aside and amended,
they might, with a hatred of sin and a pious sorrow of mind,
detest so great an offence of God. Whence the prophet
saith : Be turned^ and do penance from all yowr imqmties,
and iniquity shall not he yoti/r ruin.^ The Lord also said, —
Except ve do penance, ye shall all liketoise perish.^ And
Peter, the prince of the apostles, recommending penitence to
sinners who were about to be initiated by baptism, said. Do
penance, and he haptized every one ofyou.^ Nevertheless, 1
neither before the coming of Christ was penitence a sacra-
ment, nor is it such, since his coming, to any one previously
to baptism. But the Lord then especially instituted the ^
sacrament of penance, when, being raised from the dead, He
breathed upon His disciples, saying, Beceive ye the Holy'
Ghost; whose sins ye shall remit, they are remitted unto them,\
and whose sins ye shall retain, they are retained,^ By which
action so signal, and words so clear, the consent of all the
fathers has ever understood, that the power of remitting and
retaining sins was communicated to the apostles and their |
lawful successors, unto the reconciling of the faithful who
have fallen after baptism. And the Novatians," who of old
pertinaciously denied the power of forgiving, the Catholic
Church with great reason repudiated , and condenmed as
heretics ; wherefore this holy synod, approving and receiving
as most true this meaning of those words of our Lord, con-
demns the laboured interpretations of those who,, contrary to
the institution of this sacrament, falsely wrest those words to

» Ps. cii. H (ciii. 14). » Ezek. xvui. 80.

P Luke xiii. 5. I may observe that all these passages are misrepre-
^nted, " penance" being substituted for "repentance.

1 Acts ii. 38. ' John xx. 22, sq.

' Sep Euseb. Hist. Eccl. vi. 8.

88 8ESSI0K XIY.

the power of preaching the word of God, and of announcing

the Gospel of Christ.

CHAPTER II.

On the Diffei*ence letween the Sacrament of Penance and that of Baptism.

But this sacrament is clearly perceived to be different from
haptism, for many reasons. P or, besides that it is very far
different indeed in matter and form, by which the essence of
a sacrament is made up, it is certainly known that the
minister of baptism need not be a judge, since the Church
exercises judgment on no one who has not first entered
therein through the gate of baptism. Por, What have J,
saith the Apostle, to do to judge them that are without /* It
is otherwise with those w^io are of the houselwld offaith^
whom Christ our Lord has once, by the laver of baptism,
made the members of His own body.^ For these, it they
should afterwards have defiled themselves by any crime. He
would no longer wiU that thev be cleansed by a repetition of
baptism, that being nowise lawful in the Catholic Church,
but be placed as criminab before this tribunal ; so that, by
the sentence of the priests, they might be freed, not once
only, but as often as, being penitent, they should, from their
sins committed, flee thereunto. Purthermore, one is the
fruit of baptism, and another that of penan6e. For, by bap-
tism putting on Christy we are therein made entirely a new
creature, obtaining a full and entire remission of all sins ;
unto which newness and entireness, however, we are in no
wise able to arrive by the sacrament of penance, without
many tears and labours on our part, the divine justice de-
! manding this ; so that penance has with reason been styled
1 by holy fathers a laborious kind of baptism. And this sacra-
i ment of penance is necessary unto salvation for those who
1 have fallen after baptism ; even as baptism itself is for those
who have not as yet been regenerated.

CHAPTER III.
On the Parte and Fruits of this Sacrament,

The holy synod furthermore teacheth, that the form of the
sacrament of penance, in^ which its force chiefly consist?,

* 1 Cor. V. 12. » Gal. vi. 10.

' Cf. 1 Cor. xii. 12, sq. " Gal. iii. 27.

ON THE BA0BAME5T OF PENANCE. 89

18 placed in those words of the minister, I absolve tlieey &c. ;
to which words indeed certain prayers are, according to the
custom of holy Chiu-ch, laudably joined ; which, nevertheless,
by no means regard the essence of that form, neither are
they necessary unto the administration of the sacrament^
itself. But the acts of the penitent himself, to wit, contri-U
tion, confession, and satisfaction, are as it were the matter <
of this sacrament. 'VVTiich acts, inasmuch as they are, from '
God's institution, required in the penitent for the integrity \\
of the sacrament, and for the full and perfect remission of/';
sins, are for that reason called the parts of penance. But
the thing indeed, and the effect of this sacrament, as far as
appertains to its force and efficacy, is reconciliation with God,
which sometimes, in pious persons, who receive this sacra-
ment with devotion, is wont to be accompanied by peace and
serenity of conscience, with earnest consolation of spirit.
The holy synod, delivering these matters touching the parts
and the effect of this sacrament, at the same time condemns • ,
the opinions of those who contend, that, the terrors which
smite the conscience,^ and faith, are the parts of penance.

CHAPTER IV.

On Contrition,

Contrition, which possesses the iBrst place amongst the
aforesaid acts of the penitent, is a sorrow of mind, and a
detestation for the sin committed, with the purpose of not
sinning for the future. Now this movement oi contrition
was at every time necessary for obtaining the pardon of sins ;
and, in a man who has fallen after baptism, it thus at length
prepares for the remission of sins, if it be united with con-
fidence in the divine mercy, and with the desire of perform-
ing the other things which are required for rightly receiving
this sacrament. The holy synod therefore declares, that this
contrition not only contains a cessation from sin, and the
purpose and beginning of a new life, but also a hatred of the
old, according to that saying : Cast away from you all your
iniquities^ in which you have transaressea^ and make to your^
selves a new heart and a new spirit J And assuredly ho who

* Incussos conscientiae. ^ Ezek. xviii. 31,

90 asssioH xiY.

has considered those cries of the saints : Against thee only have
I sinned, and have done eml in thy sight,^l am weary with my
groaning y every night I will wash my hed,^ I will recount to
thee all my years, in the bitterness of my soul;^ and others
of this kind, will easily understand that they flowed from a
^certain vehement hatred of their past life, and from a great
r detestation of sins. [The synod] teaches ftirthermore, that,
although it may sometimes happen that this contrition is
I perfect through charity, and reconciles man with Gk)d before
\ this sacrament be actually received, the said reconciliation,
nevertheless, is not to be ascribed to that contrition, without
l^the desire of the sacrament which is included therein. And
"1^8 to that imperfect contrition, which is called attrition, be-
cause it is commonly conceived either from the consideration
of the turpitude of sin, or from the fear of hell and of
punishments, it declares that if, with the hope of pardon, it
exclude the will to sin, it not only does not make a man a
hypocrite, and a greater sinner, but that it is even a gift of
God, and an impulse of the Holy Ghost, who does not in-
deed as yet dwell in the penitent, .but only moves him,
whereby tne penitent being assisted, prepares a way for him-
self unto justice. And although this [attrition] cannot of
itself, without the sacrament of penance, bring the sinner
unto justification, yet does it dispose him to obtain the
grace of God in the sacrament of penance. For, profitably
stricken with this fear, the Ninevites, at the preaching of
Jonah,*' did penance ftill of terror, and obtained mercy from
the Lord. Wherefore falsely do some calumniate Catholic
writers, as though they had. stated that the sacrament of
penance confers grace without good motion on the part of
those who receive it : a thing which the Church of God
never taught or thought. Aad falsely also do they teach
that contrition is extorted and compelled, not free and
voluntary.

CHAPTER V.

On dynfeisUm.

Erom the institution of the sacrament of penance already
explained, the universal Church has always understood, that

» Ps. 1. 6 (li. 4). • Pa. vi. 6.

^ Is. xxxviii. 15, ''recogitAbo tibi omnes annos meos in amaritudine
animae mese." ^ See Jonah iii. 5.

ON THS BJLCRAMSST 07 PEKAKOB. 91

the entire confession of sins was also instituted by the Lord,
and is of divine right necessary to all who have fallen after
baptism ; because that our Lord Jesus Christ, when about
to ascend from earth to heaven, left priests His own vicars,
as presidents and judges, before whom all the mortal crimes,
into which the faithful of Christ may have fallen, should be
brought, to the end that, according to thb power of the
keys, they may pronounce the sentence of remission or
retention of sins. Eor it is certain, that priests could not
have exercised this judgment, the cause being unknown;
neither indeed could they have observed equity in enjoining
punishments, if they should have declared their sins in
general only, and not rather specifically, and singly. Hence
it is gathered that all the deadly sins, of which, after a dili-
gent examination of themselves, they have consciousness,
must needs be enumerated by penitents in confession, even
though those sins be most hidden, and committed only
against the two last precepts of the decalogue;* whicn
sometimes wound the soul more grievously, and are more
dangerous, than those which are committed outwardly, Por
venial sins, by which we are not excluded from the grace of
God, and into which we more fi«quently fall, although they
be rightly and profitably, and without any presumption
declared in confession, as the custom of pious persons
shows, yet may be passed over without guilt, and be expiated
by many other remedies. But whereas, all mortal sins,
even those of thought, render men children of wrath,^ and
enemies of Gk)d, it is necessary to seek also for the pardon
of them aU from God, with an open and modest confession*
Wherefore, while the faithful oi Christ are anxious to con-
fess all the sins which occur to their memory, they without
doubt lay them all open before the mercy of Gk)d to be for-
given, feut they who act otherwise, and knowingly keep
back certain [sins], set nothing before the divine bounty to
be remitted through the priest. Por if the sick be ashamed
to display his wound to the physician, his medical art cures
not that which it knows not. It is ftirthermore inferred, that"^
those circumstances also, which change the species of the
sin, are to be explained in confession, because that, without

<> See Deut. v. 21. • Ephes. ii. 8.

them, the sins are neither entirely set forth by the peni-
tents, nor are they known [fully] to the judges ; and it can-
not be that they can rightly estimate the grievousness of the
crimes, and impose on the penitents the penalty which
ought to be inflicted, on account of them. Whence it is
unreasonable to teach that these circumstances have been
devised by idle men ; or, that one circumstance only is to be
confessed, to wit, that one has sinned against a brother.
But it is also impious to say, that confession, enjoined to be
made in this manner, is impossible, or to call it a slaughter-
house of consciences : for it is certain, that in the Church
nothing else is required of penitents, but that, after each
has examined himself diligently, and examined all the folds ^
and recesses of his conscience, he confess those sins by
which he shall remember that he has in a deadly manner
offended his Lord and God : whilst the other sins, which do
not occur to him after diligent considering, are understood
to be included as a whole in that same confession ; for which
sins we confidently say with the prophet : From my secret
[faults] cleanse me O Lord.^ Now the very difficulty of such
a confession, and the shame of laying bare one's sins, might
indeed seem grievous, if it were not alleviated by the so
many and so great advantages and consolations, which are
most assuredly conferred by absolution upon all who worthily
approach this sacrament. But, as to the manner of confess-
ing secretly to a priest alone, although Christ has not for-
bidden that a person may, in punishment of his own sins,
and for his own humiliation, as well for an example unto
others as for the edification of the offended Church, confess
his sins publicly ; nevertheless this is not commanded by a
divine precept, neither would it be altogether prudent if it
should be enjoined by any human law, that sins, especially
such as are secret, should be laid open by a public con-
fession. "Wherefore, whereas the secret sacramental con-
fession, the Holy Church hath used from the beginning,
and doth still also use, has always been commended by the
most holy and the most ancient fathers with great and
unanimous consent, the vain calumny is manifestly refuted
of those, who are not ashamed to teach, that confession is

' Sinui, f Pa. xviu. 13 (xix. 12).

OK TUE BACBAMENT OF FEKAKCE. 93

alien from the divine command, and i^ a human invention,
and that it took its rise from the fathers assembled in the
Council of Lateran : for the Church did not, through the
Council of Lateran, ordain that the faithful of Christ should
confess, a thing which it knew to be necessary, and insti-
tuted of divine right, but that the precept of confession
should be fulfilled, at least once a year, by all and each,
when they should have attained to years of discretion.
Whence, throughout the universal Church, to the great
benefit of the souls of the faithful, the salutary custom is
now observed of confessing at that most sacred and most
acceptable time of Lent, which custom this holy synod most
highly approves and embraces, as pious, and with reason to
be retained.

CHAPTER VL

Tottching the Ministi-y of this Sad'amtTU, and AbsoltUion.

But, as respects the minister of this sacrament, the holy
synod declares aU these doctrines to be false, and utterly
alien from the truth of the Gospel, which perniciously ex-
tend the ministry of the keys to any other men soever,
besides bishops and priests ; supposing that those words of
our Lord, Whatsoever ye shall hind on ea/rthy shall he hound
also in heaven, and tohatever ye shall loose on earth shall he
loosed also in heaven;^ and. Whose sins ye shall remit, they
are remitted unto them, and whose sins ye shall retain, th^
are retained;^ were in such wise adctessed indifferently
and indiscriminately to all the faithful of Christ, as that
eveiy one has the power of remitting sins, contrary to the
institution of this sacrament, public sins, to wit, by rebuke,
provided he that is rebuked shall acquiesce, but secret sins
by a voluntary confession made to any person soever. It ^
also teaches, that even priests, who are held in deadly '^
sins, through the virtue of the Holy Ghost bestowed in j
ordination, exercise the function of remitting sins, as the i
ministers of Christ ; and that they think erroneously who /
contend that this power exists not in bad priests. But J
although the absolution of the priests is the dispensation of
another's bounty, yet is it not a bare ministry only, whether

^ Matt. XYiii. 18. > John xx. 23.

of announcing the Oospel, or of declaring that sins are re-
mittedy but is after the manner of a judicial act, which by
sentence is pronounced by the priest as by a judge. And
therefore the penitent ought not so to flatter himself con-
cerning his ovm personal faith, as to think that, even though
there be no contrition on his part, or no intention on the
part of the priest acting seriously and absolving truly, he is,
neyertheless, truly, and in the eyes of God absolved, on
account of his faith alone. Eor neither would faith without
penance bestow any remission of sins; nor would he be
otherwise than most negligent of his own salvation, who
should know that a priest but absolved him in jest, but
should not earnestly seek for another who would, act in
earnest.

CHAPTEE VIL

On the BeurvaUon of Oatea.

Since, therefore, the nature and character of a judgment
require this, that sentence be passed only on those who are
subject thereunto, it has ever been a persuasion in the Church
^ of God, and this synod confirms it as a thing most true,
/ that that absolution, which a priest pronounces upon one
f over whom he has not either an ordinary or a sub-delegated
/ jurisdiction, ought to be of no moment soever. And to
our most holy Fathers it hath seemed to appertain greatly
to the discipline of the Christian people, that certain more
atrocious and more grievous crimes should be absolved, not
by all priests, but only by the highest : whence the Sovereign
Pontiffs, by virtue of the supreme power delivered to them
in the universal Church, were, with reason, able to reserve
certain more grievous cases of crimes for their special judg-
ment. Since, moreover, all things that are from God are
well ordered, it is not to be doubted, but that this same may
1 lawfolly be done by all bishops, each in his own diocese, unto
I edification, however, not unto destruction, by virtue of the
authority, above that of the other inferior priests, delivered
to them over their subjects, especially as fiir as concerns
those crimes to which the censure of excommunication is
annexed. But it is consonant to the divine authority, that
this reservation of cases should have effect, not merely in
external polity,, but also in the sight of God. Nevertlieless,

OK THE SAGBAIOEKT Of PEKAKCE. 05

lest any Bhould perisH on this very account, it has always
been very piously observed in the said Churcb of God, tliat
there be no reservation at the point of death, and therefore,
that all priests may [then] absolve all penitents whatsoever
from all manner soever of sins and censure: and whereas, i
save only at that point [of death], priests have no influence
in reserved cases, let them endeavour to persuade penitents
to this alone, to repair to superior and lawful judges for the
benefit of absolution.

CHAPTER VIII.
On the Neoemty <md Fruit of SaUrfacHon.

Lastly, as concerns satisfaction, which as it has, above all
the parts of penance, been at all times recommended to the
Christian people by our Fathers, so is it the one especially
which in our age is, under the highest pretext of piety,
impugned by those, who have a form of godliness, hut hwe
denied the power thereof 'A the holy synod declares, that it isYlf;
absolutely false, and alien from the word of God, that the] V
guilt is never remitted by the Lord, without the whole/ [
punishment also being pardoned. For clear and distinctLJ
examples are found in the sacred writings, by which, besides
by divine tradition, this error is refuted in the plainest
manner possible. And, in good truth, the nature oi divine
justice seems to demand, that m one manner,^ they, who
through ignorance have sinned before baptism, be received
into grace ; and in another, those who, alter having been
freed from the servitude of sin and of the devil, and having
received the gift of the Holy Ghost, have not feared, know-
ingly to defile the temple of God} and to grieve the Soly
Spirit,^ And it becomes tne divine clemency, that sins be
not in such wise remitted unto us without any satisfaction,
as that, occasion being obtained, thinking sins less grievous,

i 2 Tim. iii. 5.

* The phrase " aliter ab eo/* foUowed By " alitor vero," seems extra-
ordinary Latinity even for the middle ages. I cannot help thinking that
the reading should be " aliter a Deo." A similar mistake has occurred
twice in the Benedictine and other editions of St. Gregory's Homilies on
the Gospels, but I have not my translation at hand, and cannot point
out the precise passages.

* 1 Cor. iii. 17. » Ephes. iv, 80.

we, having done as it were an insult and a despite unto the
Holy Ohost^ should fall into more grievous sins, treasuring
up torath against the day of wraths* For, without doubt,
these satisiactory piuushments greatly recall from sin, and
restrain as it were with a bridle, and make penitents more
cautious and watchful for the futiu*e ; they also furnish
remedies for the remains of sin, and, by opposite acts of the
virtues, they remove the vicious habits acquired by evil
living. Neither indeed was there any way ever in the
Church of Q-od accounted surer to turn away the punish-
ment impending at the hands of the Lord, than that men
should, with true sorrow of mind, frequently practise these
works of penitence. It adds ftirther to these things, that,
whilst we, by making satisfaction, suffer for our sins, we are
made conformable to Christ Jesus, who satisfied for our
sinSjP from whom all our sufficiency is ;^ thence, having also
a most sure pledge, that if we suffer with him, we shall aho
he glorified with him,^ But neither is this satisfaction,
which we discharge for our sins, so much our own, as not to
be through Jesus Christ. Eor we who can do nothing of
ourselves, as of ourselves, can do all things. He co-operatmg,
who strengthens us.' Thus, man has not wherein he should
glory, but all our glorying is in Christ -} in whom we live ;
in whom we merit; m whom we satisfy; hanging forth
fruits xoorthy of penance^ which from him derive tlieir virtue;
by him are offered unto the Father ; and through him are
accepted by the Father. Therefore the priests of the Lord
ought, as far as the Spirit and prudence shall suggest, to
enjoin salutary and fitting satisfactions, according to the
quality of the crimes and the ability of the penitents ; lest,
if by chance they connive at sins, and deal too indulgently
^'ith penitents, by enjoining certain very light works for the
most grievous cnmes, they be made partakers of other men's
sins. But let them have before their eyes, that the satisfac-
tion which they impose be not only unto the presentation of
a new life, and a medicine for infirmity, but also unto the
avenging and punishiag of past sins. For likewise, the

■ Heb. X. 29. » Horn. ii. 5.

P Cf. 1 John ii. 2. ^2 Cor. iii. 5.

' Rom. viii. 17. ■ Cf. 2 Cor. iii. 5 ; PhU. iv. 13.

« Acts xvii. 28. « Matt. iii. 18.

''K.

OK 9XTBEMI VKOTIOK. , ^^7

ancient fathers both believe) and teach, that the keys of the
priests were given, not to loose only, but also to hind. But
not, therefore, did they suppose that the sacrament of
Penance is a court^ of wrath or of punishments ; even as no
Catholic ever thought, that, by this kind of satisfactions on
our part, the virtue of the merit and of the satisfaction of
our Lord Jesus is either obscured, or to any extent lessened:
wliich, whHe the innovators wish to understand, they in such
wise teach that a new life is the best penance, as to take
away the entire virtue and use of satisfaction.

CHAPTER IX.
Concerning Warhs of Satirfaction,

[This synod] teaches furthermore, that so great is the
liberality of the divine munificence, that we are enabled
through Jesus Christ to make satisfaction with God the
Pather, not only by punishments voluntarily undertaken of
omrselves for the punishment of sin, or by those imposed at
the discretion of the priest, according to the measure of our
delinquency ; but also, which is the greatest proof of love,
by the temporal scourges inflicted of God, and endured
patiently by us.

ON THE BACRAMEKT OF SXTBEHB UNCHON.

It hath, moreover, seemed good to the holy synod, to
subjoin to the preceding doctrine on penance the one follow-
ing touching the sacrament of Extreme Unction, which was
regarded by the Fathers as the completion, not only of
penance, but also of the whole Christian life, which ought
to be a perpetual penance. First, therefore, concerning its
institution, it declares and teaches, that our most clement
Bedeemer, who would have his servants at all times provided
with salutary remedies against all the weapons of all their
enemies, like as, in the other sacraments. He prepared the
greatest aids, by the which, during life. Christians may pre-
serve themselves yrhole from every more grievous evil oi the
spirit, so did He guard the close of life by the sacrament of
Extreme Unction, as with a most firm defence. For although
our adversary seeks and seizes opportunities throughout our

^ Forum.
H

08 eOBSsioH xrv.

whole life, to be able in any way to devour our souLs ; yet^
there is no time wherein he more vehemently strains idl the
powers of his cunning to ruin us utterly, and, if he possibly
can, to make us fall even from trust in the divine mercy,
than when he perceives the end of our life to be impending.

CHAPTER I.
Concerning the InstUtUion of the Sacrament of Exiremt Unction.

Now, this sacred miction of the sick was instituted by
Christ our Lord, as truly and properly a sacrament of the
new law, hinted at indeed in Mark,^ but recommended and
promulgated to the faithful by James the apostle, and
brother of the Lord. Is anVy he saith, sick among you ? .Let
Mm bring in the elders of the Church, and let them pray over
him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord; and the
prayer of faith shall save the sick; and the Lord shall raise
him up; and if he he in sins, they shall he forgiven him,^ In
which words, as the Church hath learned from apostolic
tradition, received from hand to hand, he teaches the matter,
the form, the proper minister, and the effect of this salutary
sacrament. For the Church hath understood the matter
thereof to be oil blessed by a bishop, seeing that the unction
most aptly represents the grace of the Holy Ghost, with
which tlie soul of the sick person is invisibly anointed ; and
furthermore, that those words, " By this unction,** &c. are
the form.

CHAPTER II,
On the Effect of this Sacrament,

Moreover, the thing [signified], and the effect of this
sacrament, are explained in those words ; And the prayer of
faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up, and
if he he in sins, they shall he forgiven him. Por this thing
is the grace of the Holy Ghost ; whose anointing cleanses
away sins, if there be any stDl to be expiated, and the
remains of sin ; relieves and strengthens the soul of the
sick, by exciting in him a great confidence in the divine
mercy ; whereby the sick being relieved, bears more easily

^ See Mark vi. 13. * James v. 14, 15.

ON SXTBEHE TJKOTIOK. 99

the inconveniences and pains of sickness ; and more readily
resists the temptations of the devil, who lies in wait for his
]^1r;T and sometimes obtains bodily health, when it is
e^^edient for the welfare of the soul.

CHAPTER III.

On the Minister of this Sacrament, and on the Time when it ought to he

administered.

And now, as pertaiiis to the prescribing who ought to
receive, and who to administer this sacrament, this also was
only obscurely delivered in the words aforesaid. For it is
also shown there, that the proper ministers of this sacrament
are the elders of the Church; bv which name are to be
understood, in that place, not the elders by age, or the
foremost amongst the jpeople, but, either bishops, or priests
by them rightly ordamed hif the laying on of hands hy the
presbytery.^ It is also declared, that this unction is to be
applied to the sick, but especially to those who lie in such
danger as to seem placed at their departure from thislilel
\^hence, also, it is called the sacrament of the departing.
But if the sick should recover, after having received this
unction, they may again be aided by the succour of this
sacrament, when they fall into another like danger of death.
"Wherefore, they are on no account to be hearkened unto,.
whOy contrary to so manifest and clear a declaration of the
apostle James, teach that this unction is either a human
figmenfc^or is a rite received from the &thers, which neither
hath a command from God, nor a promise of grace : nor
those who assert that it hath already ceased, as though it
were only to be referred to the grace of healing in the
primitive church ; nor those who say that the rite and usage
which the holy Eoman Church observeth in the administra-
tion of this sacrament is repugnant to the declaration of the
apostle James, and that it is, therefore, to be changed into
some other : nor finally, those who affinn that this Extreme
Unction may without sin be contemned by the faithful : for
all these things are most manifestly at variance with the
distinct words of so great an apostle. Neither, assuredly,

7 Gen. iii. 15. « 1 Tim. iv. 14.

h2

100 BESSIOK ziy.

does the Boman Church,^ the mother and mistress of all
others, ^bserve aught else' in administering this imction, as
regard^ those things which make up the substance of this
sacrament, but what the blessed James has prescribed.
Nor indeed can the contempt of so great a sacrament be
without a heinous sii;!, and an injury to the Holy Ghost
himself.

These are the things which this holy oecumenical synod
professes and teaches, and proposes unto all the faithml of
Christ, to be belieyed and held, touching the sacraments of
Penance and Extreme Unction. But it deliyers the follow-
ing canons to be inyiolably observed ; and, perpetually con-
demns and anathematizes those who assert the contrary.

' ON THE MOST HOLY SACRAMENT OF PENANCE.

Canon i. If any one shall say, that in the Catholic Church
penance is not truly ^nd properly a sacrament, instituted by
Christ our Lord for reconciling the fiiithful unto God, as
often as they fall into sin after baptism; let him be ana-
thema.

Canon n. If any one, confounding the sacraments, shall
say, that baptism is itself the sacrament of Penance, as
though these two sacraments were not distinct, and that
therefore penance is not rightly called '* a second plank after
shipwreck ;" let him be anathema.

CAJfON III. If any one shall say, that those words of the
Lord the Saviour, Beceive ye the Holy Ohost, whose sins ye
shall remit, they are remitted unto them, and whose sins ye
shall retain, they are retained,'^ are not to be understood of
the power of remitting and of retaining sins in the sacrament
of Penance, as the Catholic Church has always from the
beginning understood them ; but wrests them, contrary to
the institution of this sacrament, to the power of preaching
the Oospel ; let him be anathema.

Canon ly. If any one shall deny, that, unto the entire and
perfect remission of sins, three acts in the penitent, which
are as it were the matter of the sacrament of Penance, are
required, to wit, contrition, confession, and satisfaction,
which are called the three parts of penance ; or saith that
there are only two parts of penance, to wit, the terrors which

» John XX. 22, 23.

OK THB BAORIHEKT OF PEKAKOI. 101 i

smite the conscience upon being convinced of sin, and the
faith, conceived by the Gospel, or by^ the absolution, whereby
one believes that his sins are remitted unto him through
Christ ; let him be anathema.

Gakok y. If any one shall say, that the contrition which is
acquired by means of the examination, collection, and detesta-
tion of sins, whereby one thinks aver his years in the hitter*
ness of his soul^ by pondering on the grievousness, the
multitude, the foulness of his sins, the loss of eternal
blessedness, and the having incurred eternal damnation,
joined] with the purpose of a better life, is not a true and
profitable sorrow, doth not prepare unto grace, but maketh a
man a hypocrite and a greater sinner ; finally, that this is a
forced and not a free and voluntary sorrow ; let him be
anathema.

: Cakok te. If any one shall deny, either that sacramental
confession was instituted, or is necessary unto salvation, of
divine right ; or shall say, that the manner of confessing
secretly to a priest alone, which the Catholic Church hath
ever observed from the beginning, and doth observe, is alien
from the institution and command of Christ, and is a human
invention ; let him be anathema.

Canon VII. If any one shall say, that, in the sacrament of
Penance, it is not, of divine right, necessary unto the remis-
sion of sins, to confess all ana individually the deadly sins,
the memory of which, after due and diligent previous medi-
tation is held, even those which are secret, and those which
are opposed to the two last commandments of the Decalogue,
as also the circumstances which change the species of a sin ;
but [saith] that such confession is only useful to instruct
and console the penitent, and that it was of old only observed
in order to impose a canonical satisfaction ; or shall say, that
they, who strive to confess aU their sins, wish to leave no-
thing to the divine mercy to pardon ; or, finally, that it is not
lawful to confess venial sins; let him be anathema.

Cakon VIII. If any one shall say, that the confession of all
sins, such as the Church observes, is impossible, and is a
human tradition, to be abolished by the pious ; or that all
and each of the faithful of Christ, of either sex, are not

• ^ Is. xxxviii, 15.

102 BEsaiOK

obli£;ed thereunto once a year, according; to the constitution
of the great Council of Lateran, and that, on this account,
the faithful of Christ must not be persuaded to confess dxuring
Lent ; let him be anathema.

■ Canon ix. If anj one shall say, that the sacramental abso-
lution of the priest is not a judicial act, but a bare ministry
of pronouncing and declaring sins to be remitted unto him
who confesses ; provided only he believe himself to be ab-
solved, or [even if] the priest absolve not in earnest, but in
joke ; or saith, that the confession of the penitent is not re-
quired, in order that the priest may be able to absolve him ;
let him be anathema.

Canon x. If any ope shall say, that priests, who are in
deadly sin, have not the power of binding and of loosing ; or,
that not priests alone are the ministers of absolution, but
that imto all and each of the faithM of Christ is it said :
Whatsoever ye shall hind upon earth, shall he hound also in
heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose upon earthy shall he
loosed also in heaven ;^ and, whose sins ye shall remit, they shall
he remitted unto them ; and whose sins ye shall retain, they
i^re retained;^ by virtue of which words every one is able to
absolve sins, to wit, public [sins] by rebuke only ; provided
the person rebuked yield thereto, and secret [sins] by a
voluntary confession ; let him be anathema.
, Canon xi. If any one shall say, that bishops have not the
right of reserving cases to themselves, except as regards ex-
ternal polity, and that therefore the reservation of cases
hinders not but that a priest may truly absolve from reserved
cases ; let him be anathema.
/ Canon xii. If any one shall say, that the whole punish-
^ ment is always remitted by God, together with the guilt, and
that the satisfaction of penitents is no other than the faith
whereby they learn that Christ hath made satisfaction for
them ; let him be anathema.

Canon xiii. If any one shall say, that satisfaction for sins,
as regards their temporal punishment, is in no wise made to
God, through the merits of Christ, by the punishments in-
flicted by Him, and patiently borne, or by those enjoined by
the priest, nor even by those voluntarily undertaken, as by

« Matt, xviii. 18. . . ** John xx. 23,

ON TUS SACBAiqSKT 07 X^CTBEME VKOTION. 103

fastings, prayers, almsgiyings, or bj other works also of piely ;
and that, therefore, the best penance is merely a new life;
let him be anathema.

Canon xiy. If any one shall say, that the satisfactions, ,by
which penitents redeem their sins through Christ Jesus, are
not a worship of God, but traditions of men, obscuring
the doctrine of grace, and the true worship of God, and.
^e benefit itseS of the death of Christ; let him be.
anathema.

Canon xy. If any one shall say, that the keys are given,
to the Church, only to loose, not also to hind; and that,,
therefore, priests, when they impose punishments on those
who confess, act contrary to the end designed by the keys,
and contrary to the institution of Christ ; and that it is a
fiction, that, after eternal punishment has, by virtue of the
keys, been removed, there for the most part remains a tem-
poral punishment to be discharged ; let him be anathema.

ON THB SACRAMENT OF EXTBEMB UNCTION.

Canon i. If any one shall say, that extreme unction is not

truly and properly a sacrament, instituted by Christ our

Lord, and promulgated by the blessed apostle James, but only

^'S/rite received from the fathers, or a human invention^ let

vliimbe anathema. '^"^

Canon n. If any one shaU say, that the sacred imction of
the sick does not confer grace, nor remit sins, nor aUeviate
the sick ; but that it has already ceased, as though the grace-
of cures were of old only; let hmi be anathema.

Canon iii. If any one shall say, that the rite and usage of
extreme unction, which the holy Koman Church observes, isi
repugnant to the declaration of the blessed apostle James,
^d that it is therefore to be changed, and that it may, without
sin, be contemned by Christians ; let him be anathema.

Canon iv. If any one shall say, that the presh/ters of the
Church, whom the blessed James exhorts to be brought to
anoint the sick, are not the priests ordained by a bishopy
but the seniors in years in each community, and that for this
^ason a priest alone is not the proper minister of extreme
\inction ; let him be anathema^ .

104i BBBSIOK

DEOBEE TOUOBINO BBFORMATIOV.

Prtface,

It tithe Ofioe ofJBi^opa to adfiunUth their SuhjeeU, etpeciaUy thoee
appointed unto the cure of eoule, of Aeir duty,

WHereas it is properly the office of bishops to rebuke the
vices of all who are subject to them, this will have to be
principally their care, that clerks,^ especially those appointed
unto the cure of souls, be blameless, and that they do not,*
with their connivance, lead an unseemly life. Eor if they
Buffer them to be of evil and corrupt manners, how shall they
reprove the laity for their vices, who can themselves be by
one word silenced by them, in that they suffer clerks to l>e
worse than they P And with what freedom shall priests be
able to rebuke laymen, when they have to answer silently
to themselves, that they have committed those very same
things which they rebuke P Bishops shall therefore charge
their clerks, of what rank soever they be, that they be a guide
unto the people of Ood committed to them, in discourse^
conseifyation, and knowledge ; being mindful of that which is
written ; Be holy, for I too am holyf And, according to
the words of the apostle : Let them give no offence unto any
many that their ministry be not blamed; but in all things let
them approve themselves as the ministers of Ood,^ lest that
saying of the prophet be fulfiUed in them, Thepinests of God
profane the holy things, and violate the law,^ But, in order
that the said bishops may be able to execute this with greater
freedom, and may not be hindered therein under any pretext
soever, the same sacred and holy, oecumenical and general
Synod of Trent, — the same legate and nuncios of the Apostolic
See presiding therein, — has thought fit that these canons
following be ordained and decreed.

CHAPTER I.

Jf any, being prohibited, or interdicted, or auepended, advance unto Orders,

they shaU bepunithed,

'Whereas it is more beseeming and safe for one that is
subject, by rendering due obedience to those set over him, to

• Or "clergy." ' 1 Peter i. 16.

f 2 Cor. vi. 8, 4. ^ Ezek. xzii. 26.

OK .UBTOAMATIOir. 105 !

serre in an inferior ministry, than, to the scandal of those *
set over him, to aspire to the dignify of more exalted
degrees; to him, unto whom the ascent to sacred orders
sh^ have been interdicted by his own prehite, from what
cause soever, even on account of some secret crime, or in
what manner soever, even extra-judiciaUy ; or [to him] who
shall have been suspended from his own orders, or degrees^
or ecclesiastical dignities ; no license, conceded against the
will of the said prelate, for causing himself to be promoted,
nor any restoration to former orders, degrees, dignities, or
honoiu*s, shall be of anyavaiL

CHAPTER n.

If a JBiskop shall confer any Orders soever on one not mtjed to him, he he
evenhie own Domestic, wWwui the express consent of [that persont^ proper
PreUae, both shall he subjected to a itaied Punishment,

And inasmuch as certain bishops of churches which are in
partibm infldeliwm} being destitute either of clergy or Chris-,
tian people, and being little else than wanderers, and having
no fixed see ; seeking not the things of Christ, but others*
sheep, without the knowledge of their own proper pastor,
when they find themselves prohibited by this holy synod
from exercising pontifical functions in the diocese of another
without the express permission of the ordinary of the place,
and then only m reference to persons who are subject to the
said ordinary, do, in evasion and contempt of the law, of
their own rashness, choose as it were an episcopal throne, in
a place which is of no diocese, and presume to mark with the
clerical character, and 'to promote even unto the sacred
orders of the priesthood, any that resort to them, even though,
they have no commendatory letters from their own bishops
or prelates ; by the which it for the most part comes to pass,
that, persons being ordained who are but little fit, and are
uneducated and ignorant, and who have been rejected by.
their own bishop as incompetent and imworthy, they are
neither able rightly to perform the divine offices, nor to.
administer the sacraments of the Church : none of the
bishops, who aro called titular, even though they may reside,
or be tarrying in a place within no diocese, even though it be

' /. tf. in places or districts inhabited hj unbelievers.

106 . 8X88IOK ZIT.

exempted, or in a monastery of what order soever, shall, bj'
force of mj priyilege granted them to Dromote di^ i
certain time such as come unto them, be ajble to promote or
to ordain to anj sacred or minor orders, or even to the first
tonsure, the subject of another bishop, even under the
pretext of his being his domestic, fed continually at his
own table, without express consent, or letters demissorj
from [that person's] own bishop. He who doeth contrary
thereunto shall be by the very fact suspended during a year
from the exercise of pontifical functions ; and the person so
promoted shall in like manner be suspended from the exercise
of the orders so received, for as long as shall seem fit to his
own prelate.

CHAPTER III.

JTlc Bishop may suspend his Clergymen, who have been improperly pr&nwted

hy am/oiheTf if he find them, incompetent.

The bishop has the power of suspending, for the time that
shall seem fit to him, from the exercise of the orders re-
ceived, and may interdict from ministering at the altar, or
in any order, a^y of Lis dergjmen, especi^y those who aro
in holy orders, who have been, without his previous exami-
nation and commendatory letters, promoted by any authority
soever; even though approved as competent by him by
whom they have been ordained, but whom he himself shall
find but little fit and competent to celebrate the divine
offices, or to administer the sacraments of the Church.

CHAPTER IV.

No CUrk shall he exempt from the Correction of the Bishop, even ovJtofihe

Time of Visitation,

All prelates of the churches, who ought diligently to
attend to the correction of the excesses of their subjects,
and from whomi, by the statutes of this holy synod, no clerk
is, under the pretext of any privilege soever, considered pro-
tected, so that he be not able to be visited, punished, and
corrected, according to the sanctions of the canons (pro-
vided those prelates be resident in their own churches),

^ /. e.. from the exeroifle of whose authority.

OK XEFOBICATIOK. Wf

shall have power, as dele^tes of the Apostolic See unto this
end, to correct and chastise, even out of the times of Tisita-
tion, all secular clerks, howsoever exempted, who would*
otherwise be subject to their jurisdiction, for their excesses,
crimes, and delinquencies, as often as, and whensoever there
shall be need; no exemptions, delarations, customs, sen-
tences, oaths, concordates, which onlv bind the authors
thereof, being of any avail to the said clerks, or to their
relatives, chaplains, domestics, proctors, or to any others
whatsoever, in view and in consideration of the said exempted
derks.

CHAPTEB V.
The JtfnscUction of Comervaiors is confined t»khiin certain Limits.

Moreover, whereas certain persons, who, under the plea
that divers wrongs and annoyances are oiSered them in
their goods, possessions, and rie^hts, obtain that certain
judges be deputed by means oil letters conservatory, in
order to protect and defend them from such annoyances and
wrongs, and to maintain and preserve them in possession, or.
quasi-possession, of their goods, property, and rights, and
not to suffer them to be molested therein ; [and whereas]
they pervert these letters, in many ways, unto an improper
meanmg, in many respects opposed to the intention of the
donor ; therefore, these letters conservatory, with whatsoever
clauses or decrees, and under what judges soever deputed, or ,
under what other pretext or colour soever they may have
been granted, shall not avail any one, of what dignity and
Condition soever he may be, even though a chapter, so as, in
criminal and mixed causes, to protect the parfy from being
capable of being accused and summoned, and from being
subjected to inquiry and proceeded against before his own
bishop, or other ordinary superior ; or to prevent him from*
being freely liable to be summoned befere the ordinary
judge, in regard to any rights which may be pleaded^ as hia '
from having been conceded [to himl. In civil causes also,
if he himself be the plaintiff, it shall in no wise be lawful
for him to bring up any one for judgment before his own
judges conservatory. -Aiid if, in those causes, in which' he'

^ Ei ex conoessione competierint.

108. BSSSIOK XIY.

Bliall be the defendant, it shall happen that the conser-
vator chosen by him shall be declared by the plaintiff to
be one suspected hy him, or if any controversy shall have
arisen between the judges themselves, [that is to say,] the
conservator and the ordinary, concerning competency of
jurisdiction, the cause shall not be proceeded with, untu by
arbitrators, chosen in legal form, a decision shall have been
made relative to the said suspicion, or competency of juris*
diction. Neither to the saia party's domestics, who are in
the habit of screening themselves imder these letters conser-
vatory, shall they be of any avail, save to two only, and this
provided they live at his own proper cost. Nor shall any
one enjoy the benefit of such letters longer than for five
years. It shall also be unlawful for conservatory judges to
have any fixed tribunal.

But in causes relating to wages and to persons in a state
of poverty, the decree of this holy synod thereupon shall
remain in its full force. But general universities, and col-
leges of doctors or scholars, places belonging to regulars, as
also hospitals actually exercising hospitality, and persons
belonging to the said universities, colleges, places, and hos-
pitals, are not [to be understood as] included in this present
canon, but are, and are to be considered wholly exempted.

CHAPTER VI.

A Penalty is decreed against Ckrhs who, heing in Holy Orders or holdmg
Benefices, do not wear the Dress beseeming their Order,

But forasmuch as, although the habit doth not make the
monk,^ it is nevertheless needful that clerks always wear a
dress suitable to their proper order, that by the decency of
their outward apparel they may show forth the inward cor-
rectness of their morals ; but, m these days, to such a pitch
has the rashness of some, and their contempt of religion
grown, as that, making but little account of their own
dignity, and of the clerical honour, they wear even in public
the dress of laymen, setting their feet m different paths, one
divine, the other of the flesh ; for this reason, all ecclesias-
tical persons, howsoever exempted, who are either in holy

* The usual proverb is ** cucullus non &cit monachum."

Oy BXTOBICATIOK. 109

orders or who possess any manner of dignities, personates,
or other offices, or benefices ecclesiastical ; if, after that thej
have been admonished by their own bishop, even by a pubhc
edict, they shall not wear a becoming clencal dress, suitable
to their order and dignity, and agreeably to the ordinance
and mandate of the said bishop, they may, and ought to be,
compelled thereunto, by suspension from their orders, office,
and benefice, and from the fruits, revenues, and proceeds of
the said benefices ; and also, if after having been once re-
buked, they ofiend again herein, even by deprivation of the
said offices and benefices ; the constitution of Clement Y.,

Eublished in the Council of Yienne, and beginning Quaniam,
eing hereby renewed and enlarged.

CHAPTER VII.

Voluntary ffomicidet are never to he ordained : in uhai Maimer Acddmtal

[Homicidet are to he ordained].

Whereas too, Jie toho hath on set purpose slain his neigh*
hour, and hy lying in wait for him, is to he taken away from
the altar^ because he has of his own will perpetrated a
homicide ; even though that crime have neither been proved
by ordinary legal process, nor be in other wise public, but ia
secret, such an one can never be promoted unto sacred
orders ; nor shall it be lawful for any ecclesiastical bene-
fices to be conferred upon him, even though they have no
cure of souls ; but he shall be for ever destitute of every
ecclesiastical order, benefice, and office. But if the homicide
be alleged to have been committed not on set purpose, but
by accident, or while repelling force by force, that he might
defend himself from death, in such wise that, by a kind of
right, a dispensation ought to be granted, even for the
mmistry of holy orders, and of the altar, and for any kind of
benefice whatever and dignity, the case shall be committed to
the ordinary of the place, or, if there be reason, to the metro-
politan, or to the nearest bishop ; who shall not be able to
oispense, without having taken cognizance of the case, and
proved the prayers and allegaticms, and not otherwise.

"» Exod. xxi. 14: " If a man csome presumptuously upon his neighbour,
to slay him with guile ; thou shalt take him from mine aJtar, that he
die."

110 BESBION ZIT.

CHAPTER Vm.

It shaU he latrfidfor no one, Iw Vtrtu/tcfamy PrwiUge, toptmUh the

Clait of anotMr,

Furfcbermore, inafimucb aa there are certain persons, some
of whom even are true pastors, and have theur own sheep,
who seek also to rule over the sheep of others, and at times
give their attention in such wise to the subjects of others, as
to neglect the care of their own ; whosoever there may be,
even though of episcopal dignify, who may have the privilege
of punishing the subjects of another, shall bj no means pro-
ceed against clerks not subject to him, especiallj against
such as are in holy orders, be they guilty of even atrocious
crimes ; except with the intervention of the proper bishop of
the said clerks, if that bishop be resident in liis own church,
or of a person to be deputed by the said bishop : otherwise,
the proceedings, and all the consequences thereof, shall be
wholly without force.

CHAPTER IX.

The Ben^cte of one Dioceae ehdU wider no Pittence he vmted to the

Benefices of (mother.

And inasmuch as it is with the best reason that dioceses
and parishes^ have been made distinct, and to each flock
their proper pastors assigned, and to inferior churches their
rectors, each to take care of his own sheep, that ecclesias-
tical order may not be confounded, or one and the same
church in a manner belong to two dioceses, not without
grievous inconvenience to those who are subject thereunto ;
the benefices of one diocese, be they even parochial churches,
perpetual vicarages, simple benefices, prestimonies, or pres-
timonial portions, shall not be united in perpetuity to a
benefice, or monastery, or college, or even to a pious place,
of another diocese, not even with the view of augmenting
divine worship, or the number of beneficiaries, or for any
other cause soever ; thus explaining the decree of this holy
synod touching such unions.

■ Parochise.

OK SElfOlBMATlOHf. Ill

CHAPTER X.

Meffular JBeiufiees ahaU he cortferred on RegvJUxn,

Benefices of regulars that have been wont to be granted
in title to professed regulars, when it shall happen that they
become vacant by the death of the incumbent in title, or by
his resignation, or otherwise, shall be conferred on religions
persons of that order only, or on those who shall be abso-
lutely bound to take the habit, and make that profession,
and upon none others, that they fitay not wear a garment
woven of woollen and linen together P

CHAPTER XL

ThoK TrcmdaJUd to cmoiher Order thaU remain under obediencein endowre,
and shall be incapahU of Secular JBenijfioes*

But inasmuch as regulars, after being translated from one
order to another, are wont to obtain permission easily from
their superior to remain out of theur monastery, wnereby
occasion is given of their wandering about and apostatizing ;
no prelate or superior of any order shall be allowed,
by mrce of any faculty soever, to admit any one to the
habit and to professiou, except on the condition that he
shall remain perpetually in enclosure under obedience to his
own superior, in the order itself to which he is translated ;
and one so translated, even though he be one of the canon
regulars, shall be wholly incapable of secular benefices, even
t)f cures.

CHAPTER Xn.

No one akaU obtain, a Right of PaJtrmmge except through a Fotmdation, oi*

an Endotment.

No one, moreover, of whatsoever ecclesiastical or secular
dignity, can, or ought to acquire or obtain a right of patron-
age, for any other reason soever, but that he has founded,
and built anew, a church, benefice, or chapel; or that he
has competently endowed, out of his own proper and patri-
monial estate, one already erected, which, however, is with-
out a sufficient endowment. But in case of such founda-

^ Deut. zzii, 11.

.'112 . 8XSBI0K XT.

tion or endowment, the institution [thereof] shall be reserved
to the bishop, and not to some other inferior person.

CHAPTER Xni.

Tki PretenUUton ahaU le made to the Ordinary ; otherwue the PreaentoHM

and Institution thaU he NuU,

Furthermore, it shall not be lawM for a patron, under
pretext of any privilege soever, to present any one, in
any manner, to tne benefices which are under his right of
patronage, except to the ordinary bishop of the place, to
whom the providing for, or the institution to, the said
benefice would, that privilege ceasing, belong of right;
otherwise the presentation and institution, which may hap-
. pen to have followed, shall be, and shall be understood to
be, null.

CHAPTER XIV.

The holy synod furthermore declares, that, in the next
session, which it has already decreed to be holden on the
25th day of January, of the ensuing year, 1652, it will, to-
gether with the sacrifice of the Mass, ^so apply to, and treat
of the sacrament of Orders, and that the subject of reforma-
tion will be pursued.

SESSION THE FIFTEENTH,

Being the fifth under the Sovereign Pontiff Jullv>» III., cdebroted on Hie

twenty-fifth day of January, 1552.

DEOBEE f OB FB0B06UIN0 THE SESSION.

Whereas, in pursuance of what was decreed in the last
sessions, this holy and universal synod has, during these
days, most accurately and diligently treated of the things
rehtting to the most holy sacrifice of the Mass, and to the
sacrament of Orders, with the view that, in the session this
day held, it might publish, as the Holy Ghost should have
suggested, decrees on these subjects ; and, furthermore, the
four articles pertaining to the most holy sacrament of the
Eucharist, which had been finally deferred to this session ;
and, whereas, it thought that in the interim, those would

PBOBOOATIOK 01* THE BESSIOIT. 113

have presented themselves at tlus sacred and holj council,
who call themselves Protestants, for whose sake it had
deferred the publication of those articles, and to whom it
had given the public faith, or a safe-conduct,P that they
might come freely and without any hesitation ; nevertheless,
since they have not yet come, and petition in their name
has been made to the holy synod, that the publication which
was to have been made on this day, be deferred until the
following session, an assured hope being held out that they
wiU certainly be present long berore that session, meanwhile,
upon receivmg a safe-conduct in a more ample form : The
same holy synod, lawfully assembled in the Holy Ghost/—
the same legate and nuncios presiding, — desiring nothing
more ardently than to remove Irom amongst the most noble
nation of Germany, all dissensions and schisms touching
religion, and to provide for its rest, peace, and repose ; beine^
ready, should they come, both to receive them kindly, and
to listen to them with good-will, and trusting that they
will come, not with the design of obstinately opposing the
Catholic £a.ith, but of learning the truth, and that they will
at last, as becomes those earnest after evangelical 4Tuth,
acquiesce in the decrees and discipline of holy Mother
Church ; [this synod] has deferred the next session for the
publishing and promtdgatinff of the matters aforesaid, till
the festival of St. Joseph, which will be on the nineteenth
day of the month of March ; in order that they may have
sufficient time and leisure, not only to come, but also to
propose, before that day arrives, what things soever they may
wish. And, that it may take from them all cause for further
. delaying) it freely &;ives and grants them the public faith,
or a safe-conduct, of the tenor and form which wiU be here-
after set down. But it ordains and decrees, that, in the
mean time, it will treat of the sacrament of Matrimony, and,
in addition to the publication of the above-named decrees,
it will give its decision thereon, in the same session, and
wiU pursue the subject of Eeformation.

SAFE-CONDUCT GIVEN TO THE PROTESTANTS.

The sacred and holy, oecumenical and general Synod of
Trent, lawfully assembled in the Holy Ghost, — the same

f See Sess. ziii.

Il4 SBSsioN xr.

legate and nuncios of the Apostolic See presiding therein,*—
a&ering to the safe-conduct given in the last session but
one, and enlarging it according to the tenor following below,
pledges faith to all men, that by the tenor of these presents,
it grants and wholly concedes the public faith, and the
fullest and most true security, which they call a safe-con-
duct, unto all and each, the priests, electors, princes, dukes,
marquises, counts, barons, nobles, soldiers, common people,
and to all other men soever, of what state, condition, or
• quality soever they be, of the province and nation of Ger-
many, and to the cities and other places thereof, and to all
other ecclesiastical and secular persons, especially those of
the Confession of Augsburg, who shall come, or shall be
sent with them, to tlus General Council of Trent, and to
those that shall set out, or have already come hither, "*■
what name soever they are entitled, or may be designated, * •
come freely to this city of Trent, and there to remain, tarry,
sojourn, propose, speak, treat of, examine and discuss, any
matters whatsoever together with the said synod, and freely
to offer and set forth all things whatsoever may seem fit to
them, and any articles whatsoever, either in writing, or by
word of mouth, and to explain, confirm, and prove ttiem by
the holy Scriptures, and by the words, opinions, and reasons
of the blessed Fathers, and, if it be needful, even to answer
the objections of the general council ; and to dispute in a
Christian manner, or to confer in charity, without any
hindrance, with those who may have been chosen by tlie
council, all opprobrium, railing, and contumely being utterly
discarded ; and in particular, that the controverted matters
shall be treated of in the aforesaid Council of Trent, accord-
ing to sacred Scripture, and the traditions of the apostles,
approved councils, and the consent of the Catholic Church,
and the authorities of the holy fathers ; this further being
added ; that they shall not be punished under pretence of
■ religion, or of offences already committed, or that may be
committed, in regard thereof; as also, that there shall be
no interruption to the divine offices on account of their
presence, either upon the journey, or in any place during
their progress, stay, or return, or in the city of Trent itself;
and that, these matters being concluded or not concluded,
whensoever such is their pleasure, or the command and leave

SAFE-COKDTJOT.IIBAKTEJ) TO PBOTESTAKTS. 115

of their supe'riorSjr^ if tliey shall wish, or any one of them,
to return to their own homes, thej shau forthwith be
able, at their good pleasure, to return freelj and securely,
•without any hmdrance, obstacle, or delay, without injury
. done to their property, or to the honour also and persons of
their attendants respectively, with the knowledge, however,
and information of those who shall be deputed [hereimto]
by the said synod,^ that so, without guile or fraud, proper
care may be taken for their safety. The holy synod also
and wills that all clauses soever, which may be necessary
convenient for a full, effectual, and sufficient securitjr in
coming, sojourning, and returning, be included and contamed,
and be accounted as contained, in this public flEiith and safe-
conduct. It also expressly declaring, — ^with a view to their
' mter security, and the blessing of peace and reconciliation,
uat if, which far be it ! any one, or certain of theiii, should,
either on the journey when coming to Trent, or whilst
sojourning at, or returning from that same place, perpetrate
or commit any heinous deed, whereby the benefit of this
public faith and assurance might be annulled and quashed,
wills and grants, that the persons detected in any such
crime shall be forthwith punished by their own countrymen,
and not by others, with a proportionate chastisement and a
sufficient amends, which, on the part of the sjmod may
justly be approved and commended, the form, conditions,
and terms of the safe-conduct remaining wholly uninfringed.
It also reciprocally wills, that if, which fer be it! any one,
or certain of this synod, should, either on the journey, or
whilst sojourning at, or returning therefrom, perpetrate or
commit any heinous act, whereby the benefit of this public
fidth and assurance may be violated, or in any way set aside,
the persons detected in such crime shall be forthwith pun-
ished by the synod itself only, and not by others, with a
proportionate chastisement and a sufficient amends, to be
justly approved and commended on the part of the Germans
of the Confession of Augsburg, who may be present here at
the time, the present torm, conditions, ana terms of the
safe-conduct remaining wholly uninfringed. The said synod
also wills, that it be lawful for all and each of the ambas-

. 1 De Bcientia tamen ab eadem flynodo deputandorunt.

WMfifon to go out of tiie citj of Trent to take Hm ah; m
often JM iliiB be comrenient or wifJiMij; and to ratnni
thither; aa alao firedj to aend or dpwpatfh tiieir
or mfatcngeia to any plaee> aoerer, aceogdingaa the _

ment of weir aiEun maj require, and to reoeiTe tiie and
meaeengera or meHenger, despatdiea or dfaqiatrh^ aa oAm
aaahall aeem fit to them; ao aa however one or more be
aaiociated theiewith bj ihoae deputed by' the oooncO, in
order to provide for their aafet j. And thu aafip-conduct and
aecuritj aball atand good and endure, both finom the time,
and during the time that ihej ahall hi^pen to haTo been
received under the care of the said synod, and the protectian
of its agents ; and further, after thej have had a auffioent
audience, and twenty days having expired since they have
themselves asked, or since the council^ upon that audience
had, shall have given them notice, to retuni, it will, all guile
and fraud being entirely excluded, restore them, with God'a
favour, from IVent, to that place of safety which each may
select for himself. All which things it promiaesy and in
good faith pledges itself^ shall be inviolably observed towarda
all and each of the £Eiithfiil of Christ, towarda all eccle-
siastical and secular princes, and towards all other ecdesiaa*
tical and secular persons, of whatsoever state and condition
they be, or by whatsoever name designated. Yet further^
it promises in true and good Mth, all guile and deceit being
excluded, that the said synod will neither openly nor covertly
seek for any opportunity ; nor make use of, nor suffer any
one to uuiko use of, any authority, power, right, or statute,
privilege of laws or canons, or of any councils soever,
especially those of Constance and Sienna, under what form
soever of words expressed ; to the prejudice in any way of
this public faith, and most full security, and of the public
and free hearing, granted by this said synod to the above-
named ; and it derogates from the aforesaid in this instance,
and for this occasion. And if the holy synod, or any mem-
ber thereof, or of their followers, of what condition, state,
or pre-eminence soever, shall, which may the Almighiy deign
to avert, violate the form and terms of the security and
safe-conduct as above^ set down, in any point or clause so-

' Compare the similar precept on the preceding page.

STJSFEKSIOir 09 9HX COVKOIL. 117

ever, and a sufficient amends shall not have forthwith
followed, and one that may with reason he approved of and
praised hy the parties themselves ; they may and shall hold
the said synod to have incurred all those penalties which,
hy law divme and human, or hy custom, the violators of such
safe-conducts can possibly incur, without any excuse or
contiudiction in this^respect. ^

SESSION THE SIXTEENTH,

Being the nxth and Uut v/nder ike Sovei^eign Pontiff JvUut III,, ceUhraJUd

on the twenty-eighth day of April, 1552.

DIOBEB FOR THB SUSPENSION OF THS COUNCIL.

"* The sacred and holv, oecumenical and general Synod of
Trent, lawfully assembled in the Holy Ghost, — ^the most
reverend lords Sebastian, Archbishop of Siponto, and Aloy-
sius, Bishop of Verona, apostolic nuncios, presiding therein,
as well in their own proper names as in that of the most
reverend and illustrious lord, the legate Marcellus Cres-
cenzio, Cardinal of the holy Eoman Church, of the title of
Saint Marcellus, is absent by reason of a most grievous
illnesSj'—doubts not that it is well known to all Christians,
that this oecumenical Council of Trent was first convoked
and assembled by Paul, of happy memory, and was after-
wards, at the request of the most august Emperor Charles
v., restored by our most holy lord Julius III., for this
cause especially, that it might bring back to its pristine
state, relision, which was miserably divided into diverse
opinions in many parts of the world, and especially in.
Germany ; and might amend the abuses and the most
corrupt manners of Christians ; and whereas very many
Fathers, paying no regard to their labours and dangers,
had for this end cheerfully flocked together from different
countries, and the business was bemg proceeded with
earnestly and happily, in a great concourse of the faithful,
and there was no sbght hope that those Germans who had
stirred up these novelties would come to the council, so
disposed, as to acquiesce unanimously in the truthful rea-
sons of the Church \ when, in fine, a kind of light seemed

118 SESaiOK XYI.

to have dawned upon things ; and the Christian common-
wealth, before so beaten down and afflicted, began to lift
lip its head ; of a sudden such tumults, such wars blazed
forth through the craft of the enemy of mankind, that the
council was most inconveniently compelled as it were to
pause, and to interrupt its course, and all hope of further
progress was taken away at that time ; and sp £ar was the
noly synod from finding a remedy for the evils and troubles
of the Christian world, that, contrary to its own intention,
it irritated rather than appeased the minds of many. Where-
as, therefore, the. said holy synod perceived that all places,
and especially Germany, were blazing with arms and dis-
cords; that almost all the German bishops, and especially ~
the electoral princes, had withdrawn from the council, in
order to provide for their own churches ; it resolved not to
struggle against so great a necessity, but to be silent until
better times ; that so the fathers, who could not now act,
might return to their own churches to take care of their
own sheep, and no longer wear away their time in idleness,
useless in both respects. And so, seeing that the state of
the times has so required, it decrees that the progress of this
<BCumenical Synod of Trent shall be suspended during two
years, as it doth by this present decree suspend it ; imder
this condition, however, that if things be sooner set at peace,
and the former tranquillity return, which it hopes will before
long happen, through the blessing of God the best and

freatest, the progress of the council shall be considered to
ave its full force, power, and authority. But if, which may
God avert, the lawful impediments aforesaid shall not have
been removed at the expiration of the two years, the said
suspension shall, as soon as they shall have ceased, be there-
upon understood to be removed, and the council shall be,
and shall be understood to be, restored to its own force and
vigour, mthout another fresh convocation thereof, the con-
sent and authority of his Holiness, and of the holy Apostolic
See, having been given to this decree.

Meanwfile, however, this holy synod exhorts aU Christian
princes, and all prelates, that tney observe, and respectively
cause to be observed, as far as concerns them, in their own
kingdoms, dominions, and churches, all and each of the

THB OOUKOIL TniTDBB PITTS IT. 119;

thingB which have been hitherto ordained and decreed by
this Bacred (Bcumenical council. ,

BULL 70B THE CELEBRATION OF THE COUNCIL OF TBENT, UNDXB THE

SOVEREION PONTIFF PIUS IV,

Paul, bishop, servant of the servants of Gtoi, unto the*
perpetual memory hereof.

On being called, by the condescension alone of Q<)d, to
the government of the Church, although unequal to so great a
burthen, forthwith casting the eyes of our mind around, ^
over every part of the Christian commonwealth, and behold-
ing, not without great horror, how far and wide the pesti-
l|3nce of heresies and schism had penetrated, and how much
correction the morals of the Christian people lacked, — we
began, iEUJCordiog to the dulr of our office received, to apply
our care and thoughts to the means of extirpating the said
heresies, and of domg away with so great and so pernicious a
achism, and of amending morals so much corrupted and
depraved. But whereas we understood that, for the healing
of these evils, that remedy was the most suitable which this
Holy See had been accustomed to apply, we formed the
resoliition of convoking, and, with God^s help, celebrating,,
an oecumenical and general council. That council had in-,
deed been already indicted by our predecessors, Paul III.,
of happy memory, and by Julius, his successor ; but, having-
been often hindered and interrupted from various causes^ it!
could not be brought to a conclusion. Por Paul indeed,
after having indicted it first for the city of Mantua, then for
Vicenza, he, for reasons expressed in his letters, first of aU sus-
ponded, and afterwards transferred it to Trent. Then, after
the time of its celebration had been, for certain reasons,-
then also postponed, at length, the suspension having been
removed, it was begun in the said city of Trent. But, after
a few sessions had been held, and certain decrees made, the;
said council afterwards, for certain reasons, the Apostolic,
See also consenting, transferred itself to Bologna. But-.
Julius, who succeeaed him, recalled it to the same city of
Trent, at which time certain other decrees were made. But
whereas fresh tumults were raised in the neighbouring parts
of Germany, and a most fierce war was kindled up in Italy and

France, the council was again suspended and postponed ; the
enemy of mankind, to wit, striving, and throwing difficulties
upon difficulties and hindrances in the way, to retord, at least
as long as possible, although unable utterly to prevent, a thing
BO advantageous to the Church. But how greatlv, meanwhile^
the heresies were increased and multiplied, and propagated,
how widely schism spread, we can neither think of, nor tell,
without the greatest sorrow of mind. But at length the
Lord, kind and merciful, who is never so angry that he re-
member not mercy f vouchsafed to bestow peace and unani*
mity upon Christian kings and princes. Which opportunity
being offered, we, relying on His mercy, have come to the
8tron&;est hope that, by the said means of a council, an end
may be put to these so great evils of the Church. We
therefore have Judged that the celebration thereof is no
longer to be deferred ; to the end that schism and heresies
may be taken away ; that morals may be corrected and re*
formed; that peace may be preserved amongst Christian
princes. Wherefore, mature deUberation havuig been had
with our venerable brethren the cardinals of the noly Boman
Church, and havinc^ also acquainted with this our purpose
our most dearly beloved sons in Christ, Ferdinand, emperor
elect of the Bomans, and other kings and princes, whom,
-even as we had promised ourselves from their great piety
and wisdom, we found most ready to aid in the celebration
of the said council : We, to the praise, honour, and glory of
Almighty God, and for the advantage of the imiversal
Church, with the advice and assent of our said venerable
brethren, and reljrinff and resting on the authority of God
Himself, and of the blessed apostles Peter and Paul, which
we also exercise on earth ; indict a sacred, oecumenical, and
general council in the city of Trent for the next ensuing
most holy day of the Lord's resurrection ; and we ordain
and decree, that, all suspension soever removed, it be there
celebrated. Wherefore, we do earnestly in the Lord exhort
and admonish, and we do also by strictly charging, com-
mand, by \drtue of holy obedience, and by the obligation of
tlie oath which they have taken, and under the penalties
which they know to be appointed by the sacred canons

* See Habak. iii. 2.

THS OOtTKOIL XnnOEB l^ItTS IT* 121

against those who neglect to assemble at general councils ;
our venerable brethren from all nations, patriarchs, arch*
bishops, bishops, and our beloved sons the aobots, and others
who, W common law, or by privilege, or by ancient custom,
are permitted to sit, and give their opinion in a general
council, that they meet, bv the aforesaid day, there to cele«
brate a council; unless they happen to be hindered by a
lawful impediment, which impediment nevertheless they
shiill be bound to prove to the synod by lawful proctors*
We furthermore admonish all and each, whom it aoth and
may concern, that they fail not to be present at the council.
And we exhort and entreat our most dearly beloved sons in
Christ, the emperor elect of the Bomans, and the other
kings and princes, who it were earnestly to be wished could
be present at the council, that, if they should not be able
to Be themselves present thereat, they would at least send
prudent, srave, and pious men as their representatives,^ to be
present thereat in their name ; and that they take diligent
care, befitting their piety, that the prelates of their kmg*
doms and dominions perform, without refusal or delay, their
duty to Gl-od and the Chiu*ch at this so urgent a season :
doubting not they will also take care that through their
kingdoms and dominions a safe and free passage be kept for
the prelates and their domestics, attendants, and all others
who are proceeding to or returning from the council, and
that they be received and treated m all places kindly and
courteously; as we also, as far as we are concerned, will
similarly provide, who have determined not to omit anything
that can by us, who have been placed in this position, be
done towards completing so pious and salutary a work ;
seeking, as God knows, nothmg else, proposing nothing
else, in celebrating this council, but the honour of God
himself, the recovery and salvation of the scattered sheep,
and the perpetual tranquillity and quiet of the Christian
commonweal. But, to the end that these our letter, and
the contents thereof, may come to the knowledge of all
whom it behoveth, and that none may plead as an excufie
that he knew not thereof, especially as there may not, per-
haps, be safe access open to all who ought to be made ac-

* Oratores.

12% . . BDSSIOK XYU.

qiiainted with these our letters: We will and ordaiu that,;
ill the Vatican Basilica of the prince of the apostles, and in
the Lateran Church, at the time when the people is wont to
1)0 assembled there, in order to he present at the solemnities
of the maas, they be read publicly in a clear voice by ushers™;
of our court, or by certam public notaries ; and that they
be, after being read, affixed to the doors of the said churches,
also to the gates of the apostolic Chancery, and to the usual
place in the Campo di Eiore, and that they shall there be
left for some time to be read by and made known to all.
But when they shall be moyed thence, copies thereof shall
remain affixed in those same places. !For we will that, by
such reading, publishing, and affixing after an interval of
two months froia the day of being piiblished and affixed, all
and each of those whom they include, even as if these letters
had been communicated and read to them in person, shall
be. bound and obliged by them. And we ordain and decree,
that, without any doubt, £aith be given to copies thereof,
which have been written or subscribed by the hand of a
pubUc notary, and guaranteed by the seal of some person
QOnstituted in ecclesiastical dignity. Wherefore, let no one
of men infringe this our letter of indiction, statute, decree,
precept, admonition, and exhortation, or with rash daring go
contrary thereunto. But if any one shall presume to at-
tempt this, let him know that he will incur the indignation
of Almighty Ood, and of His blessed apostles Peter and
Paul. Given at Eome, at Saint Peter's, m the year mdlx
of the Lord's incarnation, on the third of the calends of
December,^ in the first year of our pontificate.

Antonius Plobibellus Lavellinus.

BAEENaUS.

SESSION THE SEVENTEENTH

<y Ute Holy, (Ecumenical, and General Council of Trent, being the first
wider ike Sovereign Pontiff Pius IV., celebrated on tlie eighte^L day of
January, 1562.

DECBEE rOB CELEBBATINa THE COUNCIL.

, ,Doth it please you, unto the praise and glory of the Holy
and imdivided Trinity, Pather, and Son, and Holy Ghost,

• Cursoribus. • ^ November 29th,

ON THE OHOICB OF BOOKS, ETC. 128.

unto the increase and exaltation of the faith, and of the
Christian religion, that the sacred, oecumenical, and general
Council of Trent, lawfully assembled in the Holy Ghost, be,
all manner of suspension removed, celebrated from this day,'
which is the eighteenth of the month of January, in the
year hdlxii from our Lord's nativity, consecrated to the'
chair of the blessed Peter, according to the form and tenor
of the letter of our most holy lord, the Sovereign Pontiff:
Pins IV.; and that, due order being observed, those things
be treated of therein, which, the legates and presidents!
proposing, shall appear to the said holy synod fitting and
proper for alleviating the calamities of these times, ap-
peasing controversies concerning religion, restraming de-
ceitful tongues, correcting the abuses of depraved manners,
and procuring for the Church a true and Christian peace ?
. They answered : It pleaseth.

INDICTION OF THE NEXT SESSION,

Doth it please you that the next ensuing session be held
and celebrated on the Thiu^day after the second Sunday of
Lent, which will be on the twenty-sixth day of the month .
of Pebruary?
. They answered : It pleaseth.

SESSION THE EIGHTEENTH,

jSeififf tJie tecoTfd under the Sovereign Pontiff Pius IV., celebrated on ihe

twenly-nxth day of February, 1562.

DECREE TOUCmNa THE CHOICE OF BOOKS ; AND FOB INVITINQ ALL MEN ON**

THE PUBLIC FAITH TO THE COUNCIL.

The sacred and holy, oecumenical and general Synod of '
Trent, lawfully assembled in the Holy Ghost, — ^the same
legates of the Apostolic See presiding therein,— not indeed
confiding in human strength, but relying on the aid and'
assistance of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has promised that
he would ffive to His Church a mouth and imsdom,"^ doth
ponder especially how it may at length restore to its native
purity and splendour, the doctrine of the Catholic faith, which

^ Luke 3cri. 15.

124' 8E8SIOK XYin.

is in many places defiled and obscured by the opinions of
many who cdffer one among another ; to bring back, to a
better system of life, manners, which have turned aside
£rom ancient usage ; and to turn the heart of the fathers
unto the children,^ and the heart of the children unto the
fathers. Whereas, therefore, first of all, it hath perceived
that the number of suspected and pernicious books, wherein
an impure doctrine is contained, and is spread far and wide,
has at this season increased to excess, which indeed has
been the cause that many censures have been, out of a godly
zeal, published in divers provinces, and especially in the
mighty city of Bome, and yet that no salutary remedy has
av^ed against this so great and pernicious a disorder; it
hath [therefore] thought fit, that fathers specially chosen
for this inquiry, should carefully consider what ought of
necessity to be done in the matter of censures and of books,
and also in due season make a report to this holy synod, to
the end that it may itself more easily separate the various
and strange doctrines, as tares from the wheats of Christian
truth, and may, in regard thereof, more conveniently deli-^
berate and determine what shall seem best suited to remove
scruples from the minds of very many, and to remove various
causes of complaint. And [the synod] wishes all these mat*
ters to come to the cognizance of all persons soever, as by
this present decree it doth make them cognizant; to the
end tnat, if any person shall think it in any way concemeth
himself, either in this matter of books and censures, or in
the other matters which it has before declared are to be
treated of in this general council, he may not doubt but
that he will be kindly hearkened to by the holy synod.

And inasmuch as this said holy synod heartily desires,
and earnestly beseeches God for the things that are for the
peace^ of the Church, that we all, acknowledging our com-
mon mother upon earth, who cannot forget the sons of her
womhy^ with one mind, tuith one mouth, glorify Qod, and the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ;^ it mvites and exhorts,
by the bowels of the mercy of the same our God and Lord,
all who hold not communion with us, unto concord and
reconciliation, and that they come unto this holy synod, and

» Luke i. 17. ' Matt. xiii. 30. » Pa. cxxi. 6 (cxxii. 6).

• Is. xlix. 15. ^ Kom, xv. 6.

SAFE-COlTDtTCrr OBAITTBI) TO THB GEBHAK8. 125

embrace chanty ^ which t> the bond of petfectnessy and to
sbow forth the peace of Christ rejoicing in their hearts^ to
the which they are called in one hody,^ Wherefore, in hear-
ing this voicCf not of man, but of the Holy Qhost, let them
not harden their hearts,^ hut, walking not after their own
sense,^ nor pleasing themselves,^ let them be excited and
turned unto this so charitable and salutaiy an admonition
of their own mother. For, as the holy synod invites, so
will it embrace them with all offices of love.

Yet further, this same holy synod has decreed, that the
public faith may be granted in a general congregation, and
that it shall have the same force, and shall be of the same
strength and weight, as if it had been given and decreed in a
public session.

IRDICnON OF TWK NEXT SESSIOK.

The same sacred and holy Synod of Trent, lawfully as*
sembled in the Holy Qhost, — ^the same legates of the Apo-
stolic See presiding therein, — ordains and decrees, that the
next ensuing session be held and celebrated on the Thursday
after the most sacred festival of the Ascension of oiur Lora,
which will be on the fourteenth day of the month of
May.

SAFE-CONDUCT GRANTED TO THE OEBHAK NATION,

In a General Congregation, on the fourth day of March, 1562.

The sacred and holy, oecumenical and general Synod of
Trent, lawfully assembled in the Holy Ghost, — ^the same
legates of the Apostolic See presiding therein, — ^pledges faith
to all men, that, by the tenor of these presents, it grants and
wholly concedes the public faith, and the fullest and most
true security, which they call a safe-conduct, to all and each,
the priests, electors, princes, dukes, marquises, counts,
barons, nobles, soldiers, common people, and to all other men
soever, of what state, condition, or quality soever they be, of
the province and nation of Germany, and to the cities and
other places thereof, and to all other ecclesiastical and secular
persons, especially those of the Confession of Augsburg, who
shall come, or shall be sent with them to this General

* G0I088. ill. 14, 15. * Pa. xciv. 8 (xcv. 8).

" Ephes. iv. 17 : "in the vanity of their own mind."
' Bom. XY. 8.

«126 8ESSI0K ZYin.

Council of Trent, ^nd to those that shall set out, or ha^
■ alreadj come hither, by what name soever they are entitled,
• or may be designated, to come fireely to this city of Trent,
and there to remain, tarry, Bojoum, propose, speA, treat o^
examme, and discuss any matters whatsoever together with
the said synod, and freely to present and set forth all things
whatsoever may seem fit to them, and any articles whateveir,
. either in writing or by word of mouth, aild to expkin, coni
firm, and jjrove them by the holy Scriptures, and by the
words, opinions, and reasons of the blessed fathers, and, if it
be needful, even to answer the objections of the general
council ; and to dispute, or to confer in charity, without any
hindrance, with those who may have been chosen by the
council, all opprobrium, railing, and contumely being utterly
discarded; and, in particular, that the controverted matters
, shall be treated of in the aforesaid Council of Trent, accord-
ing to sacred Scripture, and the traditions of the apostles,
approved councils, and the consent of the Catholic Church,
and the authorities of the holy fathers ; this fturther being
added, that they shall not be punished under pretence of
religion, or of offences already committed, or that may be
committed, in regard thereof; as also, that there shall be no
interruption to the divine offices on account of their presence,
either upon the jovumey, or in any place during their progress,
stay, or return, or in the city of Trent itself; and that, these
matters being concluded or not concluded, whensoever such
is their pleasure, or the command and leave of their superiors,
if they shall wish, or any of them shall wish, to return to their
own homes, they shall forthwith be able, at their good pleasure,
to return freely and securely, without any hindrance, ob-
. stacle, or delay, without injury done to their property, or to the
. honour also and persons of their attendants respectively ; with
the knowledge, however, of those who shall be deputed [here-
unto] by the said synod; that so, without guile or fraud, proper
care may be taken for their safety. The holy synod also
wiUs, that all clauses soever, which may be necessary and
convenient for a ftdl, effectual, and sufficient security in
coming, sojourning, and returning, be included and contained,
and be accounted as contained, in this public faith and safe-
conduct; it also expressly declaring, with a view to their
greater security, and the tlessing of peace and reconciliation.

SAEE-OOKDUOT GBAITTEB HO THE QEBMAirS. '127

tliat if, T^hicli fiir be it ! any one, or certain of them, shonld,
either on the journey when coming to Trent, or whilst
Bojouming at, or returning from that same place, p^etrate
or commit any heinous aeed, whereby the benefit of this
public faith and assurance might be annulled and quashed,
wills and grants, that the persons detected in such crime
shall be forthwith punished by their own countrymen, and
not by others, with a proportionate chastisement and a suffi-
cient amends, which on the part of the synod may justly be
approved and commended, the form, conditions, and terms
of the safe-conduct remaining wholly uninfringed. It also
reciprocally wills, that if, which far be it ! any one, or certain
of this synod, should, either on the journey, or whilst
sojourning at, or returning therejfrom,' perpetrate or commit
any heinous act, whereby the benefit of this public faith and
assurance may be violated, or in any way set aside, the
persons detected in such crime shall be forthwith punished
.by the synod itself only, and not by others, with a proper^
•tionate chastisement and a sufficient amends, to be justly
approved and commended, on the part of the Q^rmans of the
Confession of Augsburg, who may be present here at the
time, the present form, conditions, and terms of the safe-
conduct remaining wholly uninfringed. The said synod also
wills, that it be lawful for all and each of the ambassadors to
go out of the city of Trent to take the air, as often as shall be
convenient or necessary, and to return thither ; as also freely
. to send or despatch their messenger or messengers to any
' places soever, according as the arrangement of their afiairs
may require, and to receive the said messengers or messenger,
despatches or despatch, as often as shall seem fit to them ; so
as, however, one or more be associated therewith by^ those
deputed by the council, in order to provide for their safety.
And this safe-conduct and these securities shiill stand good
and endure, both from the time, and during the time th^t
they shall happen to have been received under the care of
the said synod, and the protection of its agents ; and fror-
ther, after they have had a sufficient audience, and twenfy
. days having expired since they have themselves asked, or
' since the council, upon that audience had, shall have given
them notice, to return, it will, all guile and fraud being en-
tirely excluded, restore them, with God's favour, from

128 0SSSIOK XYm.

Trent to that place of safety which each maj select for
himself. All which things it promises, and in good fiuth
pledges itself, shall he inviolably observed towards all and
each of the futhful of Christ, towards all ecclesiastical and
secular princes, and towards all other ecclesiastical and
secular persons, of whatsoever state and condition thej be,
or by whatsoever name designated. Yet further, it pro-
mises in true and good faith, all guile and deceit being
excluded, that the said synod wm neither openly nor
covertly seek for any opportunity, nor make use o^ nor
suffer any one to make use of, any authority, power, right,
or statute, privilege of laws or canons, or of any councils
soever, especially those of Constance and Sienna, under
what form soever of words expressed; to the prejudice
in any way of this public faith, and most full security, and
of the public and free hearing, granted by this said synod
to the above-named ; as it derogates from the aforesaid in
this instance and for this occasion. And if the holy synod,
or any member thereof, or of their followers, of what con-
dition, state, or pre-eminence soever, shall, which may the
Almifi;hty deign to avert, violato the form and terms of the
security and safe-conduct as above set down, in any point
or clause soever, and a sufficient amends shall not have
forthwith followed, and one that may with reason be ap-
proved of and praised by the parties themselves ; they may
and shall hold the said synod to have incurred all those
penalties, which, by law divine and human, or by custom,
the violators of such safe-conducts con possibly incur ; with-
out any excuse or contradiction in this respect,

EXTENSION [or THE BAFE-CONDUCT] TO OTHER NATIONS.

The same sacred and holy synod, lawfully assembled in
the Holy Ghost, — ^the same legates a latere of the Apostolic
See presiding therein, — grants the public faith, or a safe-
conduct, imder the same form, and in the same terms,
wherein it is granted to the Germans, to all and each of
those others, wno hold not communion with us in the mat-
ters of faith, of whatsoever kingdoms, nations, provinces,
cities, and places [they may be], wherein the contrary to
that which the holy Boman Church doth entertain, is pub-
licly and with impunity preached, taught, or believed. ^

FBOBOOATtOK OV VHS SESSION. 129

SESSION THE NINETEENTH,

. Beinff the iJUrd under the Sovereign Pontiff Pitu IV,, cdebraJted on ike

fourteenth day of May, 1562.

DECREE FOR THE PROROGATION OF THE SESSION.

The sacred and holy, cBCumenical and general Synod of
Trent, lawfully assemoled in the Holy Ghost, — ^the same
legates of the Apostolic See presiding therein, — ^has, for
certain just and fitting reasons, thought fit to prorogue, and
doth [hereby] prorogue, until the Thursday after the ap-
proaching solemnity of Corpus Christi, which will be tne
day before tlie nones of June,B those decrees which were to
have been this day ordained and sanctioned in the present
session ; and it indicts to all men, that, on the said day, a
session will be held and celebrated. Meanwhile, God, the
Pather of our Lord Jesus Christ, the author of peace, is to
be implored, that He would sanctify the hearts of all ;
that, by His help, the holy synod may be enabled, both
now and ever, to meditate and perform those things which
shall be unto His praise and glory.

SESSION THE TWENTIETH,

Being the fourth tmder tlie Sovereign Pontiff Piu» IV., celebrated on tlie

fourth day of June, 1562.

BECREE FOR THE PROROGATION OF THE SESSION.

The sacred and holy, oecumenical and general Synod of
Trent, lawfully assembled in the Holy Ghost, — the same
legates of the Apostolic See presiding therein, — on account
of various difficulties arising from divers causes, and also to
the end that aU things may proceed in a more befitting
manner, and with greater deliberation ; to wit, that dogmas
may be treated of and sanctioned conjointly with the things
relating to E«formation ; has decreed that what matters
soever it shall seem fit to ordain, as well touching Eeforma-
tion, as touching dogmas, shall be defined in the next ses-
sion, which it indicts to all men for the sixteenth day of the
month of July next ; adding, however, that the same holy

» June 4th.
K

130 ssasioif XXI.

synod freely may and can, at its will and pleasure, as it
shall deem to be expedient for the business of the coiuicil,
shorten or lengthen the said term, even in a general con-
gregation.

SESSION THE TWENTY-FIRST,

Being tlie fifth wider the Sovereign Pontiff Pius IV., cdebrated on the
sixteenth day of the month of July, 1562.

The sacred and holy, (ecumenical and general Synod of
Trent, lawfully assembled in the Holy Ghost, — the same
legates of the Apostolic See presiding therein, — ^whereas,
touching the tremendous and most holy sacrament of the
Eucharist, in divers places, by the artifices of the most
wicked devil, certain monstrous errors are spread abroad, on
account of which, in some provinces, many seem to have de-
parted from the faith and obedience of the Catholic Church,
it has thought fit, that those things which relate to com-
munion under both species, and [the communion] of infants,
be in this place set forth. Wherefore it forbids all the
faithful of Christ henceforth to presume to believe, or teach,
or preach otherwise on these matters, than is in these de-
crees explained and defined.

CHAPTER 1.

T7iat Laymen, and Clei'Tcs wJien not consecrating, are not hound, of Divine
Right, unto Communion imder loth Species.

"Wherefore, this holy synod, instructed by the Holy Spiriiy
who is the spirit of wisdom and of understanding, the spirit
of counsel and of godliness}^ and following the judgment and
usage of the Church itself,* declares and teaches, that lay-
men, and clerks when not consecrating, are not obliged, Dy
any divine precept, to receive the sacrament of the Eucha-
rist under Doth species ; and that neither can it by any
means be doubted, without injury to faith, that communioi^
under either species is sufficient for them unto salvation.
Eor, although Christ the Lord, ia the last supper, iustituted
and delivered to the apostles, this venerable sacrament in

^ [b. xi. 2. . * See Ooncil. Oonstantiens. sess. xiii.

OK COHMUKION IK ONE KIND. 131

the species of bread and wine ; that institution and deUvery
do not therefore tend thereunto, that all the faithful of the
Church be bound, by the institution of the Lord, to receive
both species. But neither is it rightly inferred, jfrom that
discourse which is in the sixth of John,^ however according
to the various interpretations of holy fathers and doctors
it be understood, that the communion of both species was
enjoined bv the Lord : for He who said. Except ye shall eat
the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, ye shall have
no life in you, also said, He that eateth this bread shall live
for ever; and He who said, He that eateth my flesh and
drinketh my blood hath eternal life, also said. The bread that
I will give is my flesh for the life of the world; and, in fine.
He who said, He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood,
abideth in me and I in him, said, nevertheless, Me that
eateth this bread shall live for ever,

CHAPTER II.

T?ie Power of Hu Church toudiing the Dispensaiion of the Sacrameni of

the Eucharist,

It furthermore declares, that this power has ever been in
the Church, that, in the dispensation of the sacraments,
their substance remaining untouched, it might ordain, or
change, what things soever it might judge most expedient
for the profit of those who receive, or for the veneration of
the said sacraments, according to the variety of circum-
stances, times, and places. And this the apostle seems to
have intimated not obscurely, when he says. Let a man so
account of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and stewards of
the mysteries of God^ And indeed it is sufficiently certain
that he himself exercised this power, as in many other
things, so also in regard of this very sacrament ; when, afler
having ordained certain things touching the use thereof, he
says, The rest will I set in order when I come} "Wherefore,
Holy Mother Church, knowing this her authority in the
adnunistration of the sacraments, although the use of both
species has, from the beginning of the Christian religion,
not been unfrequent, yet, in progress of time, that custom
having already been very widely changed, she, induced by

J John vi. 63, sqq. ^ 1 Cor. iv. 1. » 1 Cor. xi. 34.

k2

weighty and just reasons, has approved of this custom of
communicating under one species, and decreed that it was
to be held as a law ; which it is not lawful to reprobate, or
to change at pleasure, without the authority of the Church
itself.

CHAPTER III.

That Christ, whole and entire, and a tnie Sacrament, are received under

eitlier Species.

It furthermore declares, that although, as hath been be-
fore said, our Eedeemer, in that last supper, instituted, and
delivered to the apostles, this sacrament in two species, yet
it is to be confessed, that Christ whole and entire, and a true
sacrament, are received under either species alone ; and that
therefore, as appertaincth unto the fruit thereof, they, who
receive one species alone, are not defimuded of any grace
necessary to salvation.

CHAPTER IV.

Thai Utile Childitn are not lound unto Saci^amental Communion.

Einally, this same holy synod teaches, that little children,
who lack the use of reason, are not by any necessity obliged
to the sacramental communion of the Eucharist : forasmuch
as, having been regenerated by the laver of baptism, and
being incoq^orated with Christ, they cannot, at that age,
lose the grace already acquired, of [being] the sons of God.
Not therefore, however, is antiquity to be condemned, if, in
some places, it, at one time, observed that custom. For, as
those most holy fathers had a probable cause for their con-
duct in respect of their times, so, assuredly, is it to be
believed without controversy, that they did this without any
necessity unto salvation.

ON COMMUNION UNDER BOTH SPECIES, AND ON THE COMMUNION OF

INFANTS.

Canon I. If any one shall say, that, by the precept of
G-od, or, by necessity of salvation, aU and each of the faith-
ful of Christ ought to receive both species of the most holy
sacrament of the Eucharist ; let him bo anathema.

Canon ii. If any one shall say, that the holy Catholic
Church was not induced by just causes and reasons to com-

OK BEFOBliATIOK. 133

municate, under the species of bread only, laymen, and also
clerks when not consecrating ; let him be anathema.

Canon hi. If any one shall deny, that Christ whole and
entire, the fountain and author of all graces, is received
under the one species of bread; because that, as some falsely
assert, he is not received, according to the institution of
Christ himself, under both species ; let him be anathema.

Canok IV. If any one shall say, that the communion of
the Eucharist is necessary for Httle children, before they
have arrived at years of discretion ; let him be anathema.

As regards, however, those two articles," proposed else-
where, but not as yet discussed ; to wit, whether the reasons
by which the holy Catholic Church was led to communicate,
under the one species of bread only, laymen, and also priests
when not celebrating, are in such wise to be adhered to, as
that on no account is the use of the chalice to be allowed to
any one soever ; and whether, in case that, for reasons be-
seeming and consonant to Christian charity, it appears that
the use of the chalice is to be granted to any nation or king-
dom, it is to be conceded under certain conditions ; and
what are those [conditions] ; this same holy synod reserves
them to another time, for the earliest opportunity that shall
present itself, to be examined and de£baed.

DECREE CONCERNING REFORMATION.

The same sacred and holy, oecumenical and general Synod
of Trent, lawfully assembled in the Holy Ghost, — ^the samft
legates of the Apostolic See presiding therein, — ^has thought
fit that, unto the praise of Almighiy God, and the adorn-
ment of holy Church, those things which follow be ordained
at present, touching the business of Beformation. .

CHAPTEE I.

JBiskops ihall both confer orders and give Letters Dimtssoi'y and Testimo^
nicds graiuitously, for which tlieir Servants shaU receive nothing, biU tlie
Notaries that which is defined in this Decree,

Inasmuch as every suspicion of covetousness ought to bo
absent in the ecclesiastical order, neither bishops, nor others,

" See Sess. xiii. and xxii*

134 8SSSI0K XXI.

who confer orders, nor their ministers, shall, under any pre-
text, receive anything for the conferring of any manner of
orders, not even for the clerical tonsure, nor for letters
dimissory, or testimonials, nor for the seal, nor for any other
cause soever, not even should it be voluntarily offered. And
notaries, in those places only where the laumible custom of
not receiving anything does not prevail, shall only be able
to receive the tenth part of a golden crown" for each letter
dimissory, or testimonial ; provided that there be no salary
assigned them for the discharge of this office. Nor shall any
emolument out of the fees of the notary accrue, either directly
or indirectly, to the bishop from the conferring of the said
orders. For in this case the synod ordains that they are
bound to give their labour altogether gratuitously ; utterly
quashing and prohibiting all taxes to the contrarv, and all
statutes, and customs, even though immemorial, oi all places
soever, which may rather be called abuses and corruptions
tending to simoniacal pravity; and they who shall act other-
wise shall, as well the givers as the receivers, incur, by the very
fact, besides the divine vengeance, the penalties inflicted bylaw.

CHAPTER II.

Those who have not wherewith to live are excluded from Holy Orders,

Whereas it becometh not those who are enrolled in the
divine ministry, to beg, or to exercise any sordid occupation,
to the disgrace of their order ; and whereas it is well known
that very many, in very many places, are admitted to sacred
orders almost without any discrimination of choice whatever ;
who, by various artifices and deceits, pretend to have an
ecclesiastical benefice, or even means sufficient; the holy
synod ordains, that henceforth no secular clerk, though lie
be otherwise fit in morals, knowledge, and age, shall be pro-
moted to holy orders, unless it be first lawfully certain, that
he is in the peaceful possession of an ecclesiastical benefice
adequate to his honest livelihood. And he shall not be able
to resign that benefice, without mentioning that he was pro-
moted unto the title thereof; nor shall that resignation be
admitted, imless it be certain that he can live conveniently

" Aureus.

OK BEFOBKATION. l85

from other sources ; and any resignation made otherwise
shall be null. But those who have a patrimony, or a pen-
sion, shall not hereafter be ordained, except such as the
bishop shall judge fit to be received, in consideration of the
necessity or the convenience of his churches ; after having
also first carefully looked to this, that they really possess
that patrimony, or pension, and that they are such as to
suj£ce them for sustenance. And they may not in any case
be alienated, extinguished, or remitted, without the permis-
sion of the bishop, imtil they shall have obtained a sufficient
ecclesiastical benefice, or they shall have from some other
source whence they may live : renewing hereupon the penal-
ties of the ancient canons.

CXHAPTER in.

A Method of mcrecumg the Dcaly Distributiofu is prescribed; the Persons
to whom tliey shall be due : the Contumacy of tJiose who do not serve is
jpunished.

Whereas benefices were established in order to the per-
formance of divine worship, and the offices of the Church ;
lest the divine worship may in any respect be diminished,
and that due attention may De paid thereunto in all things ;
the holy synod ordains, that in churches, as well cathedral as
coUegiate, in which there are no daUv distributions, or so
slight, that they are probably disregarded, a third part of
the fruits and 6f all proceeds soever, and comings in, as well
of dignities, as of canonries, personates, portions, and offices,
shall be set apart and converted to the purpose of daily dis-
tributions, in order to be divided amongst those who possess
dignities and the others who are present at divine service,
according to a proportiomate division to be settled by the
bishop, even as the delegate of the Apostolic See, at the time
6f the very first deduction made from the fruits ; saving,
however, the customs of those churches wherein those who
do not reside, or who do not serve, receive nothing, or less
than a third part : all exemptions, and any other customs,
even though immemorial, and all appeals soever notwith-
standing. And if the contumacy of those who do not
serve increase, they may lawfully be proceeded against accord-
ing to the provision of the law, and of the sacred canons.

186 . BES8I0K ZXI.

CHAPTER IV.

Jn what Cases Coadjutoi*8 are to he employed for the cure of souls. The
Meiltod of erecting new Parishes is setfo^tfi.

Bishops, even as delegates of the Apostolic See, shall,
in all parish churches, or those wherein baptism is adminis-
tered, in which the people is so numerous, that one rector is
not sufficient for the administration of the sacraments of the
Church, and for the performance of divine worship, compel
the rectors, or others to whom it may appertain, to associate
with themselves unto this office, as many priests as shall
suffice to administer the sacraments, and to celebrate the
divine worship. But in respect to those [churches] to
which, on account of the distance, or the difficulties of the
localities, [the people] camiot, without great inconvenience,
repair to receive the sacraments, and to hear the divine
ofKces ; they may, even against the will of the rectors, con-
stitute new parishes, according to the form of constitution
of Alexander III., which begms. Ad audientiam. And to
those priests who shall have to be appointed anew over the
churches newly erected, a competent portion, according to
the bishop's judgment, shall be assigned out of the fruits in
any wise belonging to the mother church : and if it be
necessary, he may compel the people to contribute those
things which may suffice for the sustaining the life of the
said priests ; every general or special reservation, or assign-
ment, that may lie upon the said churches, notwithstanding.
Neither shall such ordinances and erections be prevented or
hindered by means of any provisions, or even by force of
any resignation, or by any other derogations, or suspensions
soever.

CHAPTER V.

JBishops are alle to form Unions in perpetuity in Cases permitted by Zaw»

In order, also, that the state of those churches, wherein
the sacred offices are administered unto God, may be main-
tained according to their dignity, the bishops, even as the
delegates of the Apostolic See, may, according to form
of law, make unions in perpetuity, without prejudice, how-
ever, to the incumbents of any parochial churches soever,
and of those wherein baptism is administered, and of

OK. BEFOBMATIOK. 137

other benefices with or without cure, with [other] cures, on
account of the poverty of those [churches], and in the other
cases permitted by law ; even though the said churches, or
benefices, be generallv or specially reserved, or in what way
soever applied. "Which unions shall not be able to be re-
voked or infringed, by force of any provision soever, not
even on account of any resignation, or derogation, or sus-
pension.

CHAPTER VI.

To unskilful Jlccton Vicars shall he deputed with a Portion of the Fruits;
those persevering in the Scandal may he deprived of their Benefices,

Inasmuch as illiterate and unskilful rectors of parish
churches are but little fit for the sacred offices ; and others,
by reason of the baseness of their lives, rather destroy than
eaify; the bishops, even as the delegates of the Apos-
tolic See, may depute to the said illiterate and unskiliul
rectors, if thev be otherwise of a beseeming life, coadjutors^
or vicars for the time being, and assign to the same part of
the finiits for their sufficient maintenance, or provide for
them in some other manner, setting aside any appeal or ex-
emption whatsoever. But those who live basely and scan-
dalously, they shall, after they have first been admonished,
restrain and punish ; and if they shall still continue incor-
rigible in their wickedness, they shall have power to deprive
them of their benefices, according to the constitutions of
the sacred canons, setting aside every exemption or appeal
soever.

CHAPTER VII.

Bishops shall transfer Benefices from Churches which cannot he restored/
btU tJiey shall cause otiiers to he repaired. What must he ohserved in this
respect.

Whereas very great care ought also to be taken, lest those
things which have been dedicated to sacred services, may,
through the injury of time, grow obsolete, and pass from tne
memory of men ; the bishops, even as the delegates of the
Apostolic See, may transfer simple benefices, even those
under a right of patronage, from churches, which by age, or
otherwise, have fsdlen into ruin, and which cannot, on account
of their poverty, be restored to the mother churches, or

188 • 8SSSI0K XXI.

others of the same or neighbouring places, according to their
own judgment, having summoned those interested therein ;
and they shall raise in the same churches, altars or chapels,
under the same invocations ; or transfer them, with all their
emoluments and with all the obligations that were imposed
on the former churches, to altars or chapels already erected.
But, as regards parish churches which have thus faUen into
decay, they shall, even though they be under a right of
patronage, take care that they be repaired and restored, out
of any miits and proceeds soever in any way appertaining
to the said churches. And if [these resources] should be
insufficient, they shall compel, by all suitable means, the
patrons and otU who reUve'anv fruits resulting 'from
those churches, or, in their default, the parishioners to
[provide for] the aforesaid [repairs] ; every appeal, exemp*
tion, or reservation soever being set aside. But if they
shoiild all labour under too great poverty, they shall be
transferred to the mother churches, or to those in the
neighbourhood, with power to convert both the said parish
churches and others that are in ruins, to pro&ne, though not
to sordid uses ; a cross, however, being erected there.

CHAPTEB VIII.

Monasteries in commendam, in which Regular Observance is not in vigottr,
and all Benefices soever, shall he annually visited by Hie Bishops,

It is right that what things soever in a diocese regard the
worship of God, be diligently cared for by the ordinary,
and, where it behoveth, be by him provided. Wherefore,
monasteries held in commendam, even abbeys, priories, and
those called provostries, in which regular observance is not
in vigour, as also benefices, with or without the cure of
souls, as well regular as seciilar, in whatever manner held in
commendam^ even though exempt, shall every year be visited
by the bishops, even as the delegates of the Apostolic See ;
and the said bishops shall take care, by suitable measures,
even by the sequestration of the fruits, that what things
require renewing or restoring, be repaired; and that the
cure of souls, if it be charged upon those places, or those
annexed to them, as also that other required duties be
rightly exercised ; any appeals soever, privileges, or customs,

OK BEFOBHATIOK. l^d

eren prescribed from time immemorial, letters conservatory^
deputations of judges, and their inliibitions to the contraiy,
notwithstanding. And, if regular observance be therein in
vigour, the bishops shall take care, by fatherly admonitions,
that the superiors of the said regulars observe, and cause to
be observed, the manner of life due according to the insti-
tutes of their order, and that they keep, and govern those
subject to them, in their duty. And if, after having been
admonished, they shall not, within six months, have visited
or corrected them, then may the said bishops, even as dele-
gates of the Apostolic See, visit and correct them in the
same way as the superiors themselves might do, according
to their institutes ; all appeals, privileges, and exemptions
soever being set aside, and notwithstancQng.

CHAPTER IX.

The Name and Use of Q;iU8t<yr$ of A Ims i» aholUked. The Ordinaries shall
publish Indulgences and Spiritual Graces, Two of the Chapter shaU,
gratuitously, receive the Alms,

Whereas many remedies, applied heretofore by divers
councils; as well oy that of Lateran,® and of Lyons, as by that
of yienne,P against the wicked abuses of questors of alms,
have in later times become useless ; yea, rather the depravity
of such is, to the great scandal and complaint of all the
faithful, found daily so much the more to increase, as that
there seems no longer to be any hope left of their amend-
ment; [the synod] ordains that, in all places where the
Christian religion prevails, their name and use be henceforth
utterly abolished ; nor shall they in any wise be admitted to
exercise any such office ; any privileges granted to any
churches, monasteries, hospitals, pious places, or to any
persons of whatsoever degree, estate, and dignity, or any
customs, even though immemorial, notwithstanding. But
as regards the indulgences, or other spiritual graces, of
which the faithful of Christ ought not on this account to
be deprived, it decrees, that they are henceforth, at the due
times, to be published to the people by the ordinaries of the
places, aided by two members of the chapter. To whom

® See c. 62, x. de poenit. v. 38. p Clem. 2, h. t., v. 9.

140 . SESSION XXII.

also power is given to gather faithfully the alms, and the
succours of charity offered, without their receiving any
remuneration soever ; that so at length all men may truly
miderstand, that these heavenly treasures of the Church are
administered, not unto gain, but unto godliness.

INDIcnON OF THE NEXT SESSION.

The sacred and holy, (ecumenical and general Synod of
Trent, lawfully assembled in the Holy Ghost, — ^the same
legates of the Apostolic See presiding therein, hath ordain-
ed and decreed, that the next ensuing session be held and
celebrated on the Thursday after the octave of the feast of
the Nativity of the blessed Virgin Mary, which will be on
the seventeenth of the month of the next ensuing September;
with the addition, however, that the said holy synod freely
may and can, according to its will and pleasure, as it shall
judge expedient for the affairs of the council, limit or
extend, even in a general congregation, the said term, as
also that which may hereafter be assigned for each session.

SESSION THE TWENTY-SECOND,

Being the sixth tmder the Sovereign Pontiff Pirn IV., celebrated on the

seventeentJi, day of September, 1562.

DOOTBINE TOUCHINa THE SACRIFICE OF THE MASS.

The sacred and holy, oecumenical and general Synod of
Trent, lawrfully assembled in the Holy Ghost, — ^tfie same
legates of the Apostolic See presiding therein, — to the end
that the ancient, complete, and in every part perfect faith
and doctrine touching the great mystery of the Eucharist
may be retained in the holy Catholic Church ; and may, all
errors and heresies being repelled, be preserved in its own
purity ; [the synod], instructed by the illumination of the
Holy Ghost, teaches, /declares, and decrees what follows, to
be preached to the faithful, touching the Eucharist, in as far
as it is a true and singular sacrifice.

OK THE SACBIFICE OF THE MASS. 141

CHAPTER I.

On the Ifutitutum of the most holy Sacrifice of tlie Mau,

Inasmuch as, under the former Testament, according to
the testimony of the apostle Paul, there was no perfection,
because of the weakness of the Levitical priesthood ;^ it he'
hoved God, the Father of mercies, so ordaining, that
another priest should rise, after the order of Melchisedech,^
our Lord Jesus Christ, who might perfect, and lead unto
what is perfect, as many as were to he sanctified. He,
therefore, our God and Lord, although He was about to offer
Himself once on the altar of the cross unto God the Father,
by means of His death, there to operate an eternal re-
demption;^ nevertheless, because that His priesthood was
not to be extinguished by His death, in the last supper, on
the night in which He was betrayed, to the end that He
might leave to His own beloved spouse the Church, a visible
sacrifice, such as the nature of men requires, whereby that
bloody [sacrifice], once to be accomplished on the cross,
might be represented, and the memory thereof remain even
unto the end of the world, and its salutaiy virtue be applied
unto the remission of those sms which we daily commit,
declaring Himself constituted a priest for ever, after the
<n*der of Melchisedech,^ He offered up to God the Father
His own body and blood under the species of bread and
wine ; and, under the symbols of those same things. He
delivered [them] to be received by His apostles, whom He
then constituted priests of the New Testament; and by
those words. This do in remembrance ofme,^ He commanded
both them and their successors in the priesthood, to offer
[them], as the Catholic Church has always understood and
taught. For, having celebrated the ancient passover, which
the multitude of the children of Israel immolated in memory
of their departure out of Egypt, He instituted the new
passover, to wit, namely, that Himself should be immolated,
under visible signs, by the Church through the priests, in
memory of His own passage from this world unto the
Father, when by the effusion of His own blood He redeemed

9 Heb. vii. 11, 18. ' Ibid. vs. 11. • Heb. ix. 12.

* Ps. cix. 4 (ex. 4). • ■ Luke xxii. 19.

142 BESSIOK

US, and delivered us from the power of darkness, and translated
us into his kingdom.'' And this indeed is that pure oblation^
which cannot be defiled by any unworthiness, or malice of
those that offer it ; which the Lord foretold by Malachi was
to be offered in every place, pure unto his name, which was to
le great amongst the Oentiles ;^ and which the apostle Paul,
writing to the Corinthians, has not obscurely intimated,
when he says, that they who are defiled by the participation
of the table ^devils, cannot he partakers of the table of the
jLord;^ by the table, meaninc; in both places the altar. This,
in fine, is that [oblation] which was prefigured by various
types of sacrifices, during the period of nature, and of the
law ; inasmuch as it comprises all the good things signified
by those [sacrifices], as being the consummation and per-
fection of them all.

CHAPTER II.

S%at the Sacrifice of the Mass is propitiatory as weUfor ike Living as the

Dead,

And inasmuch as, in this divine sacrifice which is per-
formed in the mass, that same Christ is contained and
immolated in a bloodless manner, who once offered Himself
in a bloody manner on the altar of the cross ; the holy synod
teaches, that this sacrifice is truly propitiatorv, and that by
means thereof this is effected, that we obtain mercy, and
find grace in convenient aid, if we draw nigh unto God,
contrite and penitent, with a true heart and upright faith,
with fear and reverence. For the Lord, appeased by the
oblation thereof, and granting the grace and girb of penitence,
forgives even heinous crimes and sins. Por the victim is
one and the same, the same now offering by the ministry of
priests, who then offered Himself on the cross, the manner
alone of offering being different. The fruits indeed of which
oblation, of that bloody one, to wit, are most plentifully
received through this oloodless one ; so far is this latter
from derogating in any way from that former [oblation].
Wherefore, not only for the sins, punishments, satisfactions,
and other necessities of the faitliml who are alive, but also
for those who are departed in Christ, and who are not as yet

▼ ColoBS. i. 13. ^ Malach. i. 11. « 1 Cor. x. 21.

OK THE BACBIFIOE OF THE liASS. 148

fully purified,y is it rightly offered, agreeably to a tradition
of the apostles.

CHAPTER in.

On the Mass in Ifowmr of the Saints,

And although the Church hath been accustomed at times
to celebrate certain masses in honour and memory of the
saints; she does not, therefore, however, teach that sacrifice
is offered imto them, but unto Gk)d alone, who hath crowned
them ; whence neither is the priest wont to say, " I offer
sacrifice unto thee, Peter, or Paul;" but, retummg thanks
to God for their victories, he implores their patronage, that
they may vouchsafe to intercede for us in heaven, whose
memory we celebrate upon earth.

CHAPTER IV.

On ike Canon of the Mass.

And whereas it is beseeming that holy things be admi^
nistered in a holy manner, and whereas this sacrifice is the
most holy of all holy things ; to the end that it might be
worthily and reverently offered and received, the Catholic
Church instituted, many ages since, the sacred canon, so
pure from every error, that nothing is therein contained
which does not in the highest degree savour of a certain
holiness and piety, and raise up the minds of those that
offer imto God. For it is composed both out of the very
words of the Lord, and the traditions of the apostles, and
the pious institutions also of holy pontiffs.

CHAPTER V.

On the Ceremonies and Jtites of the Mass,

And whereas such is the nature of man, that, without
external helps, he cannot be easily upraised to the medita-
tion of divme things ; on this account has holy Mother
Church instituted certain rites, to wit that certain things
be pronounced in the mass in a softened, and others in a
raised tone. She has likewise made use of ceremonies, such

y Literally, "purged,*'

144! BESSioK xxn.

as mystic benedictions, lights, Aimigations of incense,' vest-
ments, and many other things of this kind, derived from an
apostolical discipline and tradition, whereby both the majesty
of so great a sacrifice might be recommended, and the minds
of the faithful be excited, bv these visible signs of religion
and piety, to the contemplation of those most sublime thmgs
which lie hidden in this sacrifice.

CHAPTER VI.

On ike Mom wherein tite Finest alone communicates.

The sacred and holy synod would wish indeed that, at
each mass, the faithful who are present should communicate,
not only in spiritual desire, but also by the sacramental
participation of the Eucharist, tliat thereby a more abundant
fruit of this most holy sacrifice might be derived unto them:
but nevertheless, if this be not always done, it doth not
therefore condemn, as private and unlawful, but approves of,
and therefore commends, those masses in which the priest
alone communicates sacramentally; since those masses ought
also to be considered as truly common; partly because in
them the people communicate spiritually; partly also be-
cause they are celebrated by a public minister of the Church,

, not for himself only, but for all the faithful, who appertain

\ to the body of Christ.

CHAPTER VII.
On the WaXer to he mixed with the Wine to he offei'ed in the Chalice,

The holy synod in the next place observes, that it hath
been enjoined by the Church on priests, to mix water with
the wine that is to be oifered in the chalice ; as well because
it is believed that Chinst our Lord did so, as also because
from His side there came out hlood and water ;^ which sacra-
mental mystery^ is renewed by this mixture ; and, whereas
in the lievelation of the blessed John, the peoples are called
waters,^ the union of that faithful people with Christ their
head is hereby represented.

' Thymiamata. * John xix. 34.

** Sacrumentuin. « Rev, xvii. 15.

OK THE SACBHTICE OF THE MASS. 145

CHAPTER Vm.

7^u Mass tHiall not he cdehrated everywhere in the Vulgar Tongue, Its
Mysteries shall be explained to the People,

Although the mass contains great instruction for„the
faithful people, nevertheless, it has not seemed expedient to
the fathers, that it should be celebrated everywhere in the
vulgar tongue. Wherefore, the ancient rite of each church,
and [the rite] approved by the holy Eoman Church, the
mother and mistress of all churches, being in every place
retained ; and, that the sheep of Christ may not suffer hun-
ger, nor the young children ask bread, and there he none who
shall break it unto them,^ the holy synod charges pastors,
and all those who have the cure of souls, that they fre-
quently, during the celebration of mass, expound, either by
themselves or others, some portion of those things which '
are read at the mass, and that, amongst the rest, they ex-
plain some mystery of this most holy sacrifice, especially on
the Lord's days and festivals. /

CHAPTER IX.

PreHmincay Jlemarh on the following Canons.

But because that many errors are at this time spread
abroad, and many things taught and maintained by many
persons, in contradiction to this ancient faith, based upon
the sacred Gospel, the traditions of the apostles, and the
doctrine of the holy fathers ; the holy synod, after many
and grave deliberations maturely held touching these mat-
ters, has resolved, with the unanimous consent of all, to
condemn, and to eliminate from the Holy Church, what-
soever is opposed to this most pure faith and sacred doc-
trine, by means of the canons subjoined.

TOUCHIKa THE SACRIFICE OF THE MASS.

Canon i. If any one shall say, that in the mass a true
and proper sacrifice is not ofiered to God ; or, that to be
ofiered is nothing else but that Christ is given unto us to
eat ; let him be anathema.

* Lam. iv. 4.

Canon ii. If any one shall say, that by those words, Do
this in remembrance of me,^ Christ did not institute the
apostles priests ; or, did not ordain that they, and other
priests, snould offer His own body and blood; let him be
anathema.
^^ Canon m. If any one shall say, that the sacriiice of the
mass is only a sacrifice of praise and of thanksgiving ; or,
that it is a bare commemoration of the sacrifice offered on
the cross, but not a propitiatory sacrifice ;^ or, that it avails
him only who receiveth ; and that it ought not to be offered
for the living and the dead for sins, punishments, satisfac-
tions, and other necessities ; let him be anathema.

Canon it. If any one shall say, that, by the sacrifice of
the mass, a blasphemy is thrown upon the most holy sacri-
fice of Christ offered on the cross ; or, that it is thereby
derogated from ; let him be anathema.

Canon v. If any one shall say, that it is an imposture
to celebrate masses in honour of the saints, and for obtain-
ing their intercession with God, as the Church intends ; let
him be anathema.

Canon vi. If any one shall say, that the canon of the
mass contains eiTors, and is therefore to be abrogated ; let
him be anathema.

Canon vii. If any one shall say, that the ceremonies,
vestments, and outward signs, of which the Catholic Church
makes use in the celebration of masses, are incentives to
impiety, rather than offices of piety ; let him be anathema.

Canon viii. If any one shall say, -that masses, in which
the priest alone communicates sacramentally, are unlawful,
and therefore to be abrogated ; let him be anathema.

Canon ix. If any one shall say, that the rite of the
Soman Church, whereby a part of the canon and the words
of consecration are pronounced in a softened tone, is to
be condemned; or, that the mass ought only to be cele-
brated in the vulgar tongue ; or, that water is not to be
mixed with the wine to be offered in the chalice, in that it
is contrary to the institution of Christ; let him be ana-
thema.

• 1 Cor. xi. 25. ' Propitiatorium.

OK THE SACBIFICB OF THE MASS. 147

DECREE TOUCHING THE THINGS TO BE OBSERVED AND TO BE AVOIDED IN

THE CELEBRATION OF THE XASS.

How great care is to be taken, that the sacred and holy
sacrifice of the mass be celebrated with all religious service
and veneration, each one may easily make an estimate, who
considers, that, in holy writ, he is called accursed, who doth
the work of God negligently. f^ And if we must needs con-
fess, that no other work can be performed by the faithful so
holy and divine as this tremendous mystery itself, wherein
that life-giving victim, by which we were reconciled unto
God the Father, is daily immolated on the altar by the
priests ; it is also sufficiently clear, that all industry and
diligence is to be applied to this end, that it be performed |
with the greatest possible inward cleanness and purity of \
heart, and outward show of devotion and piety. "Whereas, #
therefore, either through the wickedness of the times, or
through the carelessness and unworthiness of men, many
things already seem to have crejpt in, which are alien from
the dignity of so great a sacrifice; to the end that the
honour and worship due thereunto may be restored, unto the
glory of God and the edification of the faithful people ; the
holy synod decrees, that the ordinary bishops of places shall
diligently take care, and be bound to prohibit and abolish
all those things which either covetousness, which is a serving
ofidols,^ or irreverence, which can scarceljr be separated
from impiety ; or superstition, the false imitatress of true
piety, have mtroduced.

And that many things may be comprised in few words :
first, as relates to covetousness, they shall utterly prohibit I
all manner of conditions and bargains for recompenses, and '(
whatsoever is given for the celebration of new masses ; also \
the importunate and illiberal exactions, rather than requests^ \
for alms, and other things of the like sort, which are but
little removed from simoniacal taint, or at all events, from i
filthy lucre}

[Furthermore, that irreverence may be avoided, let each,
in his own diocese, forbid that any wandering or unknown
priest be permitted to celebrate mass. Ajid, moreover,

i Jer. xlviii. 10, marginal reading. ^ Ephes. v. 5.

* 1 Tim. iii. 3.

148 SESsiosr XXII.

1 they shall not allow any one who is publicly and notoriously
I a criminal, either to minister at the holy altar, or to assist
. at the sacred services ; nor shall they suffer this holy sacri-
fice to be celebrated, either by any secidars or regulars
whatsoever, in private houses, or anywhere, out of the church,
and those oratories dedicated solely unto divine worship,
and which are to be designated and visited by the said
ordinaries; and not then, unless those who are present
shaU have first declared, by their decently composed external
appearance, that they are not present there in body only, but
also in mind and devout affection of heart. They shall also
keep from the churches all those kinds of music, in which,
whether bv the organ, or in the singing, there is mixed up
anything lascivious or impure ; as also all secular actions ;
vain and therefore profane conversations, aU walking about,
noise, and clamour; that so the house of God may truly
seem to be, and may be called, a home qfpra^erJ

Lastly, that no place may be given to superstition ; they
shall by edict, and under penalties laid do^Mi, that priests
take care not to celebrate at other than due hours, nor
make use of other rites, or other ceremonies and prayers,
in the celebration of masses, besides those which have been
approved by the Church, and have been received by a fre-
quent and laudable usage. They shall wholly remove from
the Church the observance of a fixed number of certain
masses, and of candles, as being invented rather by super-
stitioiis worship, than by true religion ; and they shall
instruct the people, what is, and from whom especially is
derived, the fruit so precious and heavenly of this most holy
sacrifice. They shall also admonish the same people, to
repair frequently to their own parish churches, at least on
the Lord's days and the greater festivals. All these things,
therefore, that have been summarily enumerated, are in such
wise propounded unto all ordinaries of places, as that accord-
ing to the power given them by this sacred and holy synod,
and even delegates of the Apostolic See, they may prohibit,
command, reform, and ordain, not only those very things
aforesaid, but also whatsoever else shall seem to them to
appertain hereunto ; and may compel the faithful people in-

i Matt. xxi. 13.

OK BEFOBMATIOK. 149

violabl^ to observe them, by ecclesiastical censures and other
penalties, which may be appointed at their pleasure ; any
privileges, exemptions, appeals, and customs whatsoever, to
the contrary notwithstanduig.

DECREE CONCERNING REFORMATION.

The same sacred and holy, oecumenical and general Synod
of Trent, lawftdly assembled in the Holy Ghost, — the same
legates of the Apostolic See presiding therein, — to the end
that the business of Reformation may be pursued, has
thought fit that the following things be ordained in the
present session.

CHAPTER I.

T7ie Decrees touching the Life and Propriety of Conduct of Clerh are

renewed.

There is nothing that continually instructs others unto
piety, and the worship of God, more than the life and ex-
ample of those who have dedicated themselves to the divine
ministry. Por whereas they are seen to be raised from above
the things of this world to a higher position, others cast
their eyes upon them as upon a mirror, and derive from
them what they should imitate. AVherefore it by all means
becometh clerks called to have the Lord for their portion, so
to regulate their life and manners, as that in tneir dress,
gesture, gait, discourse, and all things else, they, bear
nothing about them but what is grave, moderate, and replete
with religiousness; that they avoid even slight faults, which in
them woidd be most grievous; that so their actions may
impress all with veneration. Whereas, therefore, the more
usefid and decorous these things are in the Church of Qt)d,
so much the more carefully also are they to be observed ;
the holy synod ordains, that those things which have been
elsewhere copiously and wholesomely enacted by the so-
vereign pontiffs and sacred councils, touching the life,
propriety, dress, and learning of clerks, and also touching
luxury, feastings, dances, gambling, sports, and all sorts of
crimes whatever, as also the secular employments to be [by
them] avoided, the same shall hereafter be observed, under
the same penalties, or greater, to be imposed at the discre-
tion of the ordinary ; nor shall any appeal suspend the

150 BESSIOK XXII.

execution hereof, as pertains to the correction of manners.
But if they shall find anything of the above fallen into
desuetude, they shall take care that it be again brought
into use as soon as possible, and be accurately observed by
all'; any customs soever notwithstanding ; lest they them-
selves, God being the avenger, may pay the penalty deserved
by their neglect of the correction of those subject [to them].

CHAPTER II.

Who are to heproitwted to Cathedral Churches,

"Whosoever is, hereafter, to be promoted to cathedral
churches, shall not only be fully qualified by birth, age,
morals, and life, and, in other matters which are required by
the sacred canons, but shall also have been previously con-
stituted in holy orders, for the space of at least six months.
And information on these points, if there be only recent
knowledge, or none at all of the party at the court [of Eome],
shall be derived from the legates of the Apostolic See, or
from the nuncios of the provinces, or from his ordinary,
and in his default, from the nearest ordinaries. And besides
these things, he shall abound in such learning as to be able
to satisfy the obligations of the office about to be conferred
upon him. And for this reason, he shall have been previously
promoted by merit, in some university for studies, to be a
master, or doctor, or licentiate, in sacred theology, or in canon
law ; or shall be declared, by the public testimony of some
academy, competent to teach others. And, if he be a regular,
he shall have a similar testimonial^ from the superiors of his
own religion. And all the above-named persons, from whom
the information, or testimony, is to be derived, shall be bound
to report on these matters faithfully and gratuitously; other-
wise let them know, that their consciences will be grievously
burthened, and that they will have God, and their own supe-
riors, as avengers [upon them].

^ Fidem.

OK BBFOBICATIOK. 151

CHAPTER in.

DcMy JDutribwtions, out of the Third Part of all Fruits ioever, are to he
ordained : on whom the Portion of Absentees shall devolve ; eertain Cases
excepted.

Bishops, even as the delegates of the Apostolic See, shall
be able to divide the third part of any maimer of finiits and
revenues of all dignities, personates, and offices existing in
cathedral or collegiate churches, into distributions, to be
assigned according to their discretion ; in such wise, to wit,
that, if those who have the right to receive them^ should
fail, on any appointed day, personally to discharge the duty
devolving upon them, accordmg to the form to be prescribed
by the said oishops, they shall forfeit that day's distribution,
and shall acquire no manner of property therein, but it shall
be applied to the fabric of the church, in as far as it may
need, or to some other pious place, at the discretion of the
ordinary. But if their contumacy increase, they shall pro-
ceed against them according to the constitutions of the sacred
canons. But if upon any of the aforesaid dignitaries any
jurisdiction, administration, or office in the cathedral or col-
legiate churches, devolves neither by right nor custom;
but, out of the city, in the [same] diocese, there is a cure
of souls to be attended to [by him], which he, who holds
that dignity, is willing to take upon himself ; in this case,
during the time that he shall reside and minister in the
church with that cure, he shall be considered as though he
were present and assisted at the divine offices in those cathe-
dral or collegiate churches. These things are to be under-
stood as appointed for those churches only, in which there is
no custom, or statute, whereby the said dignitaries, who do
not serve, lose something, which amounts to the third part
of the said fruits and proceeds : any customs, even though
immemorial, exemptions, and constitutions, even though con-
firmed by oath or by any authority soever, to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Qui eas obtinent.

152 . BXSSiOK XXII.

• •chapter IV,

Thoae not inUiated into Holy Orders tkaU not have a voice in ilte Chapter
of any Cathedral or Collegiate Church, The Qualifications and Dutiei
of those who hold Benefices therein.

Whosoever being employed in divine offices in a cathe-
dral, or collegiate, secular or regular church, is not consti-
tuted in the order of subdeaconship at least, shall not have
a voice in the chapter of such churches, even though this may
have been freely conceded to him by the others. But those
who possess, or shall hereafter possess, in the said churches,
any dignities, personates, offices, prebends, portions, and any
other manner of benefices whatever, to which various obh-
gations are annexed ; such as, that some shall say, or sing,
mass, others the Gospel, others the Epistle, they shall be
bound, just impediment being wanting, to receive the re-
quisite orders within a year, whatsoever may be their privi-
lege, exemption, prerogative, or nobility of birth ; otherwise
they shall incur the penalties according to the constitution
of the Council of Vienne, which begins. Jit ii qui, which
[the sjmod] by this present decree renews. And the bishops
shall compel them to exercise the aforesaid orders in person
on the appointed days, and to discharge all the other duties
which belong to them in the divine service, under the same
penalties, and others even more grievous, to be imposed at
their discretion. Nor, for the future, shall any such office
be assigned to any others but those who shall be well known
fully to have alreadv the age and the other qualifications ;
otherwise such provision sliall be void.

CHAPTER V.

Dispensations out of the Court shall he committed to the Bishop, and he

examined hy him.

Dispensations, by what authority soever they are to be
granted, if they are to be consigned out of the Koman
court, shall be consigned to the ordinaries of those who
shall have obtained them. And those dispensations which
shall be granted as graces, shall not possess their effect,
until the said ordinaries, as apostolic delegates, shall have
first ascertained summarily only, and extra-judicially, that
the terms of the petition do not labour under the vice of
surreption or obreption.

OK BBFOBMATIOir. 153

CHAPTER VI.
Laxi Intentions to be altered vnih catUion,

In alterations of last wills, "wliich [alterations] ought not
to be made except for a just and necessary cause, the
bishops, as delegates of the Apostolic See, shall, before the
aforesaid alterations are carried into execution, summarily
and extra-judicially ascertain, that nothing has been stated,
in the petition, which suppresses what is true, or suggests
what is false.

CHAPTER VII.
I%e Chapter "Jlomana,** in the sixth [of the Decretals], is renewed,

'' Apostolic legates and nuncios, patriarchs, and primates
and metropolitans, in appeals interposed before them, shall,
in all causes soever, as well in admitting appeals, as in
granting inhibitions after an appeal, be bound to observe the
form and tenor of the sacred constitutions, and especially of
[the constitution of] Innocent IV., beginning Montana ; any
custom, even though immemorial, or manner, or privilege to
the contrarv, notwithstanding. Otherwise the inhibitions
and proceecungs, and all the consequences thereof, shall by
the very fact be null.

CHAPTER Vni.

Bishops shall execute (he piom Dispositions of all Persons ; shall visit all
. marniicr of pious Places, provided they be not under the immediate proteC'
tion of Kings.

The bishops, even as the delegates of the Apostolic See,
shall, in the cases allowed by law, be the executors of all

Eious dispositions, whether made by last will, or among the
ving : they shall have the right of visiting all manner of
hospitals, colleges, and confraternities of laymen, even those
which they call schools, or by any other name (not, how»
ever, those places which are under the immediate protection
of kings, except with their permission) ; also the eleemosy-
nary institutions, called monts-de-pietCy or of charity, and all
pious places by what name soever designated, even though
the care of the aforesaid institutions appertain to laymen,
and though the same pious places be protected by a privilege
of exemption ; and, by virtue of their office, they shall take

as mystic benedictions, lights, fumigations of incense,' vest-
ments, and many other thmgs of this kind, derived from an
apostolical discipline and tradition, whereby both the majesty
01 so great a sacrifice might be recommended, and the minds
of the faithful bo excited, by these visible signs of religion
and piety, to the contemplation of those most sublime tlimgs
which lie hidden in this sacrifice.

CHAPTER VI.
On the Mass wherein tJie Ptneat (done communicatea.

The sacred and holy synod would wish indeed that, at
each mass, the faithful who are present should communicate,
not only in spiritual desire, but also by the sacramental
participation of the Eucharist, that thereby a more abundant
fruit of this most holy sacrifice might be derived unto them:
but nevertheless, if this be not always done, it doth not
therefore condemn, as private and unlawful, but approves of,
and therefore commends, those masses in which the priest
alone communicates sacramentally; since those masses ought
also to be considered as truly common; partly because in
them the people communicate spiritually; partly also be-
cause they are celebrated by a public minister of the Church,
not for himself only, but for aU the faitliful, who appertain
to the body of Christ.

CHAPTER VII.

On tlie Water to he mixed with the Wine to he qffiu'ed in the Chalice,

The holy synod in the next place observes, that it hath
been enjoined by the Church on priests, to mix water with
the wine that is to be ofiered in the chalice ; as well because
it is believed that Christ our Lord did so, as also because
from His side there came out hlood and water ;^ which sacra-
mental mystery^ is renewed by this mixture ; and, whereas
in the lievelation of the blessed John, the peoples are called
waters,^ the union of that faithful people with Christ their
head is hereby represented.

» Thymiamata. ■ John xix. 34.

•* Sacrumentuin. c Rev. xvii. 15.

OK BBFOBHATIOir.

CHAPTEBXI.
Uiurpen of the Property of any Church or pioui Place toever are punWted,

If any clerk, or layman, by what dignity soever, even that
of emperor or king, pre-eminent, should be so greatly
possessed by covetousness, the root of all evils, as to pre-
sume to convert unto his own use, and to usurp, by himself
or by others, by force, or fear excited, or even by means of
any supposititious persons, whether lay or clerical, or by any
arnfice, or under any sought-for colourable pretext soever,
the jurisdictions, goods, incomes, and rights, even those held
in fee or under lease, the fruits, emoluments, or any revenues
soever, belonging to any chiu'ch, or to any benefice, whether
secular or regular, manU-de-piete, or to any other pious
places, which ought to be employed for the necessities of \
the ministers and the poor; or [shall presiune] to* hinder \
them from being received bv those unto whom they by right
belong ; he sh^ so long be under an anathema, until he
shall have entirely restored to the Church, and to the
administrator or beneficiary thereof, the jurisdictions, goods,
effects, rights, fruits, and revenues which he has seized
upon, or in what manner soever they have come to him,
even by way of gift from a supposititious person ; and,
until he shall, furthennore, have obtained absolution fipom
the Roman Pontiff. But if he be the patron of the said
church, he shall, besides the aforesaid penalties, be by the
very act deprived of the right of patronage. And the clerk,
who shall bo the author of, or shall consent to, any wicked
fraud and usurpation of this kind, shall be subjected to the
same penalties ; as also he shall be deprived of all benefices
soever, and be rendered incapable of any others soever ; and
even after entire satisfaction and absolution, he shall be
suspended from the exercise of his orders, at the discretion
of his ordinary.

DECREE TOUCHING THE PETITION FOR THE CONCESSION OP THE CHALICE.

Yet, further, whereas the same sacred and holy synod, in
the preceding session, reserved until another time, for an
opportunity that might occur, two articles to be examined
and defined, which had been proposed on another occasion, ^
but had not then as yet been discussed, to wit, whether the

148 ssssioir xxn.

CAMomu. Vanjoneshansaj, tiiitbr those words, A^
im rewtemhrmnee qf mef Chnst did risk insdtate the
aposdes meats; or, did not (ndaiii that thejr, and other
prieaUy should offisr His own body and blood ; let him be

Cajtos^ m. If ^uij one shall si^, that the sacrifice of tlie
mass is onl j a sacrifice of praise and of thanksginng ; or,
that it is a bare commemoration of the sacrifice offered on
the croaiy but not a propitiatory sacrifice ;^ or, that it a?aOs
him only who reoeircih ; and that it ought not to be offered
for the liYing and the dead for sins, punishments, satisiao-
tions, and other necessities ; let him be anathema*

Cajtoit it. If any one shall say, that, by the sacrifice of
the mass, a blasphemy is thrown upon the most holy sacri-
fice of Christ offered on the cross ; or, that it is thereby
derogated from ; let him be anathema.

Casou t. If any one shall say, that it is an imposture
to celebrate masses in honour of the saints, and for obtain-
ing their intercession with Grod, as the Church intends ; let
him be anathema.

Cakok yi. If any one shall say, that the canon of the
mass contains errors, and is therefore to be abrogated ; let
him be anathema.

Cakow VII. If any one shall say, that the ceremonies,
vestments, and outward signs, of which the Catholic Church
makes use in the celebration of masses, are incentives to
impiety, rather than offices of piety ; let him be anathema.

Cakon VIII. If any one shall say, -that masses, in which
the priest alone communicates sacramentally, are unlawful,
and therefore to be abrogated ; let liim be anathema.

Cakow IX. If any one shall say, that the rite of the
Soman Church, whereby a part of the canon and the words
of consecration are pronounced in a softened tone, is to
be condemned; or, tnat the mass ought only to be cele-
brated in the vulgar tongue ; or, that water is not to be
mixed with the wine to be offered in the chalice, in that it
is contrary to the institution of Christ; let him be ana-
thema.

• 1 Cor. xi. 25. ' Propitiatorium.

THB 8ACBAHE5T OF OBDEBS. 167

Whereas, therefore, in the New Testament, the Catholic
Church has received, from the institution of our Lord, the
holy visible sacrifice of the Eucharist ; it must of necessity
also be confessed, that there is, in that [Chiu*ch], a new,
visible, and external priesthood, into which the old nas been
translated.™ And the sacred Scriptures show, and the
tradition of the Catholic Church has always taught, that
this was instituted by the same Lord our Saviour, and that
to the apostles, and to their successors in the priesthood, the
power was delivered of consecrating, offering, and admi-
nistering His Body and Blood, as also of remitting and of
retaining sins.

CHAPTER II.

TouchiTig the Seven Orders,

But whereas the ministir of so holy a priesthood is a
divine thing ; to the end that it might be exercised more
worthily, and with greater veneration, it was meet that, in
the most well-ordered arrangement of the church, there
should be several and diverse orders of ministers," to
minister unto the priesthood, by virtue of their oflBce,
[orders] so distributed as that those who were already
marked with the clerical tonsure should ascend through the
lesser to the greater orders. For the sacred Scriptures
make open mention not only of priests, but also of deacons;**
and teach, in the most weighty terms, what things are espe-
cially to be attended to m the ordination thereof; and,
from the very beginning of the Church, the names of the
following orders, and the proper ministrations of each one
of them, to wit, those of subdeacon, acolyth, exorcist, reader,
and door-keeper, are known to have been in use ; though
not of equal rank : for the subdeaconship is classed amongst
the greater orders by the fathers and sacred councils,
wherein also we very often read of the other inferior orders.

*■ Heb. vii. 12, sqq.

" See Llatt. xvi. 19 ; Mark xiv. 22-24 ; Luke xxii. 19 ; John xx. 22,
with Hooker, E. P. v. 78.
" See Acts vi. 5, xxi. 8 ; 1 Tim. iii. 8, sqq.

58 BESSIOK

CHAPTER ni.
That Or den is tndy and properly a Sacrament.

Whereas, by the testimony of Scripture, by apostolic
tradition, and the unanimous consent of the fathers, it is
clear that grace is conferred by sacred ordination, which is
performed by words and outward signs, no one ought to
doubt that Orders is truly and properly one of the seven
sacraments of the holy Church. Por the apostle says, I
put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the grace of God,
which is in thee hy the putting on of my hands. For God
hath not given us the spirit of fear ; hut of power, and of
love, and of sobriety,^

CHAPTER rv.

T<mching Ecdesiaatical Hierarchy a/nd (h'dvnation.

But, inasmuch as in the sacrament of Orders, as also in
Baptism and Confirmation, a character is imprinted, which
can neither be effaced nor taken away ; the holy synod with
reason condemns the opinion of those, who assert that the
priests of the New Testament have only a temporary power ;
and that those who have once been rightly ordained, can
again become laymen, if they do not exercise the ministry
01 the word of God. But if any one afiSrm that aU
Christians indiscriminately are priests of the New Testa-
ment, or that they are all mutually endowed with an equal
spiritual power, he seems to do nothing but confound the
ecclesiastical hierarchy, which is as an army set in array ;9
as if, contrary to the doctrine of the blessed Paul, all were
apostles, all prophets, all evangelists, all pastors, all doctors,^
Wherefore, the sacred and holy synod declares that, besides
the other ecclesiastical degrees, bishops, who have succeeded
imto the place of the apostles, principally belong to this
hierarchical order ; that they are placed, as the same apostle
says, by the Holy Ghost, to rule the Church of God;* that
they are superior to priests ; confer the sacrament of Con-

P 2 Tim. i. 6, 7.

•i Cant. vi. 3 (4 : " terrible as an army with banners ").

' Ephes. iv. 11.

■ Acts XX. 28 : "to feed the church of God."

TnE SACBAlfSlTT OE 0SDEB8. 169

firmation ; ordain the mmifltera of the Church ; and that
they are able themselves to perform Yery many other things ;
orer which functions the rest of an inferior order have no
power. The sacred and holy synod further teaches, that,
m the ordination of bishops, priests, and of the other orders,
neither the consent, nor vocation, nor authority, whether of
the people, .or of any secular power or magistrate soever, is
requu*ed in such wise as that, without this, the ordination is
invalid : yea rather it doth decree, that aU those who, being
only called and instituted by the people, or by the secular
power and magistrate, ascend to the exercise of these mini-
straiions, and those who of their own rashness assume them
to themselves, are not ministers of the Church, but are to be
accounted as thieves and robbers , who have not entered by the
door} These are the things which it hath seemed good to
the sacred S3mod to teach the faithful of Christ, in fi;eneral
terms, touching the sacrament of Orders. But it hath
resolved to condemn things contrary thereimto, in express
and specific canons, in the manner which follows ; to the
end that all men, with the assistance of Christ, using the
rule of faith, may, amidst the darkness of so many errors,
more easily be able to recognize and to hold Cathouc truth.

ON THE SACBAMENT OF OBDEBS.

Cawok I. If any one shall say, that there is not in the
New Testament a visible and external priesthood : or that
there is not any power of consecrating and offering the true
body and blood of the Lord, and of remitting and retaining
sins ; but only an office and bare ministry of preaching the
Gt)spel ; or that those who do not preach are not priests at
all ; let him be anathema.

Canon ii. If any one shall say, that, besides the priest-
hood, there are not m the Catholic Church other orders, both
greater and lesser, by which, as by certain steps, advance is
made unto the priesthood ; let him be anathema.

Canon hi. If any one shall say, that orders, or sacred
ordination, is not truly and properly a sacrament instituted
by Christ the Lord ; or, that it is a certain human figment
devised by men unskilled in ecclesiastical matters ; or, that

* John X. 1.

it is only a certain kind for choosing ministers of the word
of G od and of the sacraments ; let him be anathema.

Canon it. If anj one shall say, that, by sacred ordina-
tion the Holy Ghost is not given ; and that .the bishops do
therefore vainly say, Receive ye the Holy Ghost ; or, tnat a
character is not thereby imprinted; or, that he who has
once been a priest, can again become a layman ; let him be
anathema.

Canon v. K any one shall say, that the sacred unction
which the Church makes use of in holy ordination, is not
only not required, but is to be despised and is pernicious,
as likemse the other ceremonies of Order; let him be ana*
thema.

Canon ti. If any one shall say, that, in the Catholic
Church there is not a hierarchy instituted hj divine ordina-*
tion, consisting of bishops, pnests, and ministers ; let him
be anathema.

Canon vii. If any one shall say, that bishops are not
superior to priests; or, that they have not the power of
confirming and ordaining ; or, that that power which they
possess is common to them with the priests ; or, that orders,
conferred by them, without the consent or vocation of the
people, or of the secular power, are invalid ; or, that those
who have neither been rightly ordained, nor sent, by eccle-
siastical and canonical power, but come from elsewhere, are
lawftd ministers of the word and of the sacraments ; let him
be anathema.

Canon viii. If any one shall say, that the bishops, who
are assumed by authority of the lioman Pontift', are not
legitimate and true bishops, but a human figment ; let him
be anathema.

DECREE CONCERNING REFORMATION.

The same sacred and holy Synod of Trent, pursuing the
matter of Eeformation, ordains and decrees that the tilings
foUowLng be at present decreed,

CHAPTER I.

The Negligence of Pastors of Churches in residitig is vanously pwnislied :

Provision is made for the ewe of souls,

AVhereas it is by divine precept enjoined on aU, to
whom the cure of souls is committed, to know their own

ON BSFOBICATIOK. 161

sheep ;^ to offer sacrifice for them ; and, by the preaching of
the divine word, hj the administration of the sacraments, and
by the example of all good works, to feed them ; to have a
fatherly care for the poor and for other distressed [>ersons,
and to apply themselves to all other pastoral duties; all
which [oinces] cannot be rendered and fulfilled by those
who neither watch over nor stand by their own flock, but,
after the manner of hirelings, abandon it ; the sacred and
holy synod admonishes and exhorts, that, mindful of the
divme precepts, and nuide ensamples to tlieflock^ they feed
and rule in judgment and in truth. And lest those things
which have been already elsewhere holily and usefully sanc-
tioned, concerning residence, imder Paul III., of happy
memory, may be wrested to meanings alien from the mind
of the sacred and holy synod, as if by force of that decree
it were lawful to be absent during five continuous months ;
the sacred and holy synod, adhering to those [decrees], de-
clares, that all persons who are, under what name and title
soever, even though they be cardinals of the holy Eoman
Church, set over any patriarchal, primatial, metropolitan,
and cathedral chiu*ches whatsoever, are obliged to personal
residence in their own chiu'ch, or diocese, where they shall
be bound to discharge the office enjoined them ; and may
not absent themselves save for the causes and in the manner
below stated. For whereas Christian charity, urgent neces-
sity, due obedience, and the evident utility of the Church,
or of the commonwealth, require and demand that some at
certain times be absent, this same sacred and holy synod
ordains, that these causes of lawful absence are to be ap-
proved of in writing by the most blessed Eoman Pontifi*, or
by the metropolitan, or, in his absence, by the oldest resi-
dent suffragan bishop, who shall also be bound to approve of
the absence of the metropolitan ; except when such absence
happens on account of some employment and office in the
state attached to the bishoprics ; the causes of which absence
being notorious, and sometimes sudden, it will not be neces-
sary even that these be notified to the metropolitan. To
the same, however, it shall belong, conjointly with the pro-
vincial council, to judge of the permissions granted by him-

* See John x. 14, xxi. 15, sqq. ^ 1 Peter v. 3.

162 SBSSIOK XXIU.

self, or by liis suffiragan, and to see that no one abuse that
right, and that transgressors are punished with the canonical
penalties. Meanwhile let those about to depart remember
to make such provision for their sheep, as that, as &r as is
possible, they may sustain no injury through their absence.
jBut, inasmuch as those who are only absent for a short
period, are, according to the expression of the ancient
canons, not considered to be absent, in that they are about
to return immediately; the sacred and holy synod wills,
that that term of absence, whether continuous or interrupted^
ought by no means to exceed two, or at most three, months ;
except for the above-mentioned causes ; and that regard be
had that it be done from a just cause, and without any detri-
ment to the flock : which, whether it be so, the synod leaves
to the conscience of those who withdraw themselves, which
it hopes will be religious and timorous ; seeing that their
hearts are open before God, whose wwh they are bound, at
their peril, not to do deceitfully ^ In the mean time it ad-
monishes and exhorts the same in the Lord, that, unless
their episcopal duties call them to some other part of their
own diocese, they on no account be absent from their own
cathedral church during the period of the Advent of the
Lord, of Lent, the Nativity, of the Lord's Resiurection, of
Pentecost, and of Corpus tJhristi, on which days especially
the sheep ought to be refreshed, and to rejoice in the Lord
at the presence of the shepherd.

But if any one, which it is to be hoped will never happen,
shall be absent, contrary to the regulation of this decree, the
sacred and holy synod ordains, that, in addition to the other
penalties imposed upon and renewed against non-residents,
under Paul III., and the guilt of deadly sin which [such
offender] incurs, he acquires no fruits, in proportion to the
time of his absence, and that he cannot, even though no
other declaration follow, retain them as his with a safe con-
science ; but that he is bound, or, in his default, his ecclesi-
astical superior for him, to apply them unto the fabric of the
churches, or to the poor of the place ; every kind of agree-
ment, or composition as it is called, in regard of ill-gotten
fruits, being prohibited, whereby the aforesaid fruits even

* Jer, xlviii. 10. See Sess. xxii. ch. ix. after the decrees.

ON BBFOBHATIOir. 163

might be wholly, or in part, restored to him ; any pri-
vileges soever, granted to any college or £&bric, notwith-
standing.

The same also, both as regards the guilt, the loss of fruits,
and the penalties, the sacred and holy synod wholly declares
and decrees, in regard to inferior curates, and all others so^
ever who hold any ecclesiastical benefice having cure of souls ;
in such wise however, as that, whensoever it shall happen
that they are absent for a cause that has been first made
known to, and approved by, the bishop, they shall leave,
with a due assignment of stipend, a suitable vicar, to be ap-
proved of by the said ordinary. And they shall not obtain
permission to be absent, which is to be granted in writing^
. and gratuitously, beyond a period of two months,* except
for some weighty cause. And if, after having been cited,
even though not personally, by an edict, they shall be con-
tumacious, [the synod] wills, that the oroinaries be at
liberty to constrain them by ecclesiastical censures, and by
the sequestration and ) subtraction of fruits, and by other
legal remedies, even as far as deprivation; and that the
execution hereof shall not be able to be suspended by any
privilege soever, Ucense, claim as a domestic, exemption,
though even upon the ground of any maimer of benefice, by
any compact, or statute, even though confirmed by oath or
by what authority soever, by any custom, even though im-
memorial (which IS to be looked upon rather as a corruption),
or bv any appeal, or inhibition, even in the Eoman Court,
or by* virtue of the constitution of Eugenius. Einally,
the holy synod commands, that both that decree under
Paul III., and this present, shall be published in the pro-
vincial and episcopal councils ; for it desires that thmgs
which so nearly concern the office of pastors, and the salva-
tion of souls, be frequently impressed upon the ears and
minds of all men ; that so, with God's hel^, they may never
hereafter be abolished through the injury of time, the for-
getfulness of men, or by desuetude.

h2

164i SESSIOK XXIII.

CHAPTER II.

7%08e set over ChwcJie» akall receive the Rite of Conseci'cUi&n within Three
Months; in whcU Place the Consecration is to be performed.

Those who, under what name or title soever, even though
they be cardinals of the holy Eoman Church, have been set
over cathedral, or superior churches, if they shall not have
received the rite of consecration within three months, shall
be bound to the restoration of the fruits received ; if they
shall have neglected to do this vdthin three other months
afterwards, they shall be by the very fact deprived of their
churches. And their consecration, if performed out of the
Court of Rome, shall be celebrated in the church to which
they have been promoted, or in the province, if it can con-
veniently bo done.

CHAPTER III.

Bishops, except vn Cases of Illness, shall confer Orders in pet^son.

Bishops shall confer orders in person ; but, should they
be hindered by illness, they shall not send their subjects to
another bishop for ordination, unless they have been already
approved and examined.

CHAPTER IV.

Who are to he initiated hy the first Tonsure,

None shall be initiated by the first tonsure, who have not
received the sacrament of Confirmation, and who have not
been taught the rudiments of the faith ; and who do not
know how to read and write ; and concerning whom there
is not a probable conjecture, that they have chosen this
manner ot life, not that they may fraudulently withdraw
themselves from secular jurisdiction, but that they may
render unto God a faithful service.

CHAPTER V.

Touching tJie Matters Vfith which those who are to he ordained ought to he

fuimished.

Those who are to be promoted to minor orders shall have
a good testimonial from tlieu* parish priest, and from the

OV BEFOBMATIOir. 165

master of the scliool in whicli thej are educated. But those
who are to be raised to anj one of the greater orders, sliall,
a month before ordination, repair to the bishop, who shall
commission the parish priest, or such other person as maj
seem to be more expedient, haying stated publicly in the
church the names and the desire of those who wish to be
promoted, diligently to inform himself, from persons worthy
of credit, touching the birth, age, morals, and life of those
to be ordained, and to transmit to the bishop himself, as
soon as possible, letters testimonial, containing the actual
inquiry that has been made.

CHAPTER VL

The Age qf Fourteen Tears is required for on Ecdetiaaiiccil Ben/^fice ; toho

ii to enjoy the Privilege of the Court,*

"No one, after being initiated by the first tonsure, or even
after being constituted in minor orders, shall be able to hold
a benefice before his fourteenth year. Furthermore, he shall
not enjoy the privilege of the court, imless he have an eccle-
siastical benence; or, wearing the ecclesiastical dress and
tonsure, he serves in some church by the bishop's command,
or lives with the bishop's permission in an ecclesiastical
seminary, or in some school, or university, on the way as it
were to receive the greater orders. But as regards married
clerks, the constitution of Boniface YIII., which begins,
Clerici qui cum tmicis, shall be observed; provided these
clerks, beiug deputed by the bishop to the service or minis-
try of some church, serve and minister therein, and make
use of the clerical dress and tonsure : no privilege, or cus-
tom, even immemorial, herein availing any one.

CHAPTER VII.

Thoee to he ordained are to he examined hy Persons skilled in Divine and

Human Law,

The holy synod, adhering to the footsteps of the ancient
canons, decrees, that when a bishop has arranged to hold an
ordination, all who may wish to be received into the sacred
ministry shall be summoned to the city, on the Thursday

* /• e. the eccleaastical courU

166 . SESSION XXIII.

before the said ordination, or when the bishop shall think
fit. And the bishop, taking to his aid priests and other
prudent persons, skilled in the divine law, and practised in
the sanctions of the Church, shall diligently investigate and
examine the parentage, person, age, education, morals, doc-
trine, and faith of those to be ordained.

CHAPTER VIII.

Hew, cmd by whom, eacJi ougtU to he ordomtd.

Ordinations of sacred orders shall be celebrated publicly,
at the times ordained by law, and in the cathedral church,
the canons of that church being invited and present for that
purpose; but, if they are celebrated in some other place of
the diocese, the clergy of the place are to be present ; and
the leading church shall always, as far as is possible, be
made use of. But each one shall be ordained by his own
bishop. And if any one seek to be promoted by another
[bishop], this shall by no means be allowed him, even under
the pretext of any general or special rescript or privilege
soever, even at the appointed times ; unless his probity and
morals be recommended by the testimony of his own ordi-
nary. If it be otherwise, he who ordains him shall be sus-
pended from the conferring of orders during a year, and
ne who has been ordained from exercising the orders re-
ceived, for as long a period as shall seem expedient to his
ordinary.

CHAPTER IX.

• A BUhop ordaining one of his ovm Hov^ehold shall forthtoith aaid reaUy

conf&r v/pon him, a Benefice,

A bishop may not ordain one of his own household, who
is not his subject, unless he has lived with him for the space
of three years ; and he shall really, and without fraud of any
kind, straightway confer on him a benefice; any custom,
even though immemorial, to the contrary notwithstanding.

OK BSFOBMATIOK. 167

CHAFFER X.

Prdates Urferior to BiikoptMU not eomftr the Tomure, or Minor Orden,
$aive upon Beguksn their won Sufffeete; neither thaU they, nor any
Chegpien 9oever, gnxni LeUert Dimiteory: a more grievom Penalty Ix^
enaOed against thoee who offend againet this Decree.

It sliall not hereafter be lawful for abbots, or for any
otber persons soever, howsoever exempted, being within the
limits of any diocese, even though thej be said to be of no
diocese, or to be exempted, to confer the tonsure, or minor
orders, upon anj one who is not a regular subject to them ;
nor shall the said abbots, and other exempted persons, or
any colleges, or chapters soever, even those of cathedral
churches, grant letters dimissory to any secular clerks, that
they may be ordained by others. But the ordination of all
these persons shall appertain to the bishops within the
limits of whose diocese they are, all things which are con-
tained in the decrees of this holy synod being observed ;
any privileges, prescriptions, or customs, even though imme- .
monal, notwithstanding. And # [the synod] ordains, that
the penalty imposed on those, who, contrary to the decree
of this holy synod under Paul III., obtain, during the
vacancy of the episcopal see, letters dimissory from the
chapter, be also extended to those who shall obtain the said
letters, not from the chapter, but from any other persons
soever, who, during the vacancy of the see, succeed to the
jurisdiction of the bishop, in place of the chapter. And
they who grant letters dimissory contrary to the form of
this decree, shall be by the very fact suspended from their
office and benefice during a year.

CHAPTER XI.

The Interstices, and certain other Precepts to he observed in the receiving of

Minor Orders,

The minor orders shall be given to such as at least under-
stand the Latin language, but with the appointed interstices
of time, imless the bishop shall think it more expedient
otherwise ; that so they may be taught the more accurately
how great is the responsibility of this their state of life ;
and may exercise themselves in each office, according to the
appointment of the bishop ; and this in that church to

which they shall be assigned, unless they chance to be
absent on account of their studies ; and may thus ascend
from step to step : that so with their age their worthiness of
life and greater learning may increase; of which they will give
proof both by the example of their good conduct, by their
assiduous ministry in the church, and their greater reverence
towards priests and the superior orders, as well as by a
more frequent communion than heretofore of the Body of
Christ. And whereas from hence is the entrance unto
higher grades and to the most sacred mysteries, no one
shall be initiated therein, whom the promise of knowledge
does not show to be worthy of the greater orders. And
such shall not be promoted to sacred orders till a year afber
the reception of the last degree of minor orders; unless
necessity, or the advantage of the Church, according to the
bishop's judgment, shall require otherwise.

CHAPTER XII.

Age required for ike ChreoiUT Orders ; the Wwihy only to he admitted,

No one shall for the future be promoted to the order of
subdeaconship before his twenty-second year; to that of
deaconship before his twenty-third; to that of priesthood
before his twenty-fifth. Nevertheless, bishops are to know,
that not all who have attained to that age must needs be
admitted to these orders, but those only who are worthy,
and whose approved life is an old age. Eegulars likewise
shall not be ordained under the above age, nor without a
diligent examination by the bishop ; all privileges soever in
this regard being entirely set aside.

CHAPTER XIII.

On tlie Manner of Ordination of a Suhdeacon and Deacon : onno one
shall two Sacred Orders he ccmf erred on tlie same day.

Such as possess a good testimonial,y and have been already
approved in minor orders, and are instructed in letters, and
in those things which pertain to the exercise of their orders,
shall be ordained subdeacons and deacons. They shall have

y Cf. 1 Tim. ill. 7.

Oir BEFOBHATIOir. 169

a hope, with God's help, to be able to live continently ; they
shall serve in the churches to which they may be assigned;
and are to know that it is most highly becoming that, after
having ministered at the altar, they should receive the
sacred communion, at least on the Lord's days and solem-
nities. Those who have been promoted to the sacred order
of the subdeaconship shall not, until they have been em-
ployed therein during at least a year, be permitted to ascend
to a higher grade, unless it shall seem otherwise to the
bishop. Two sacred orders shall not be conferred on the
same day, even upon regulars ; any privileges and indults
soever, to whomsoever granted, notwithstanding.

CHAPTER XIV.

Who are to he admitted to the Priesthood : the Office of thoee to headmitted.

Those who have piously and faithfully conducted them-
selves in their precedmg mnctions, and are admitted to the
order of priestnood, shall have a good testimonial, and be
such persons as have not only served in their office of deacon
during at least an entire year, unless for the utility and the
necessity of the Church, it should seem otherwise to thc^
bishop, but who, by a careful previous examination, have
also been approved to be competent to teach the people
those things which it is necessary for all to know unto sal-
vation, as also [fit] to administer the sacraments; and so
conspicuous for piety and chasteness of morals, as that a
glorious example of good works and a lesson of life may be
expected from them. The bishop shall take care that they
celebrate mass at least on the Lord's days, and on solemn
festivals ; but, if they have the cure of souls, so ofben as to
satisfy their bounden duty. The bishop may, for a lawful
cause, grant a dispensation to those who have been pro-
moted per saltumj^ provided they have not exercised the
ministry [of that order],

* Literally, "at a leap/' i, e. omitting some inferior gradation of
orders.

170 aEssioK xxin«

CHAPTER XV.
No one ihaU hear Co^fetrione wnUet approved by the Ordinary,

Althougli priests in their ordination receive the power of
absolving from sins; nevertheless, the holy S3mod decrees,
that no one, even a regular, is able to hear the confessions
of seculars, not even of priests, and that he is not to be
reputed £t thereunto, unless he either holds a parochial
benefice, or is, by the bishops, through an examination, if
they shall think it necessary, or in some other manner,
judged competent ; and has obtained their approval, which
shall be granted gratuitously; any privileges, and custom
soever, though immemorial, notwithstanding.

CHAPTER XVI.
The Uadese and the Vagrant are hindered from the Orders of the Church,

Whereas no one ought to be ordained, who, in'Jthe judg-
ment of his own bishop, is not usefril or necessary for his
churches, the holy sjmod, adhering to the footsteps of the
sixth canon of the Council of Clialcedon, ordains, that no
one shall hereafter be ordained, unless he be attached to that
church, or pious place, for the need, or utility whereof he is
promoted; there to discharge his duties, and not wander
about without any certain abode. And if he shall quit that
place without consulting the bishop, he shall be interdicted
the exercise of sacred [orders]. Furthermore, no clerk,
who is a stranger, shall, without letters commendatory from
his own ordinary, be admitted by any bishop to celebrate
divine service, and to administer the sacraments.

CHAPTER XVII.
In what Manner the Exercise of the Minor Orders is to be restored.

That the functions of holy orders, from the deacon to
the door-keeper, which have been laudably received in the
Church from the times of the apostles, and which have been
for some time interrupted in many places, may again be
brought into use according to the sacred canons ; and that
they may not be traduced by heretics as idle; the holy

OK SBrOBHATIOir. 171

synod, burning witH the desire of restorinff tliat pristine
usage, decrees that, for the future, such ministries shall not
be exercised but bj those who are constituted in the said
orders ; and it exhorts in the Lord all and each of the pre-
lates of the churches, and enjoins them, that they take care
to restore such functions, as far as can conveniently be
done, in the cathedral, collegiate, and parochial churches of
their dioceses, where the number of the people and the
revenues of the church shall be able to support it ; and, to
those who exercise those functions, they snail assign sti-

Eends out of some part of the revenues of any simple bene-
ces, or those of the fabric of the church, if the revenues
allow of it, or out of the revenues of both together, of which
[stipends] they may, if they be negligent, be mulcted in a
part, or be wholly deprived thereof, according to the judg-
ment of the Ordinary. And if there should not be immar-
ried clerks at hand to exercise the functions of the four
minor orders, their place may be supplied by married clerks
of approved life ; provided they have not been twice married,
be competent to discharge those duties, and wear the ton-
sure and the clerical dress in church.

CHAPTER XVIII.

Method of erecting a Seminary for Clerks, especially of the Poorer Classes;
in the said Erection many things to he observed ; touching the Education
of those to be promoted to Cathedral and [other] greater Churches,

Whereas the age of youth, unless it be rightly trained, is

Erone to pursue the pleasures of the world; and unless it
e formed, from its tender years, unto piety and religion,
before habits of vice have wholly taken possession of men,
it never will perfectly, and without the greatest, and almost
singular, help of Almighty God, persevere in ecclesiastical
discipline ; the holy synod ordains, that all cathedral, metro-

Eolitan, and other chiu-ches greater than these, shall be
ound, each according to the measure of its means and the
extent of the diocese, to maintain, to educate religiously,
and to instruct in ecclesiastical discipline, a certain number
of youths of their city and diocese, or, if [^that nmnber] can-
not there be found, of that province, in a college to be
chosen by the bishop for this purpose near the said churches.

1712 BESSIOK xxin.

or in some other convenient place. And into this college
shall be received such as are at least twelve years old, bom
in lawful wedlock, and who know how to read and write
competently, and whose disposition and inclination afford a
hope that they will always serve in the ecclesiastical minis-
tries. And it wishes that the children of the poor be prin-
cipally selected ; though it does not however exclude those
of the more wealthy, provided they be maintained at their
own expense, and carry before them a desire of serving God
and the Church. The bishop, having divided these youths
into as many classes as shall seem fit to him, according to
their number, age, and progress in ecclesiastical discipline^
shall, when it seems convenient to him, assign some of them
to the ministry of the churches, [and] keep the others in
the college to be instructed ; and shall supply the place of
those who have been withdrawn, by others ; that so this
college may be a perpetual seminary of ministers of Ood.
And to the end that the youths may be the more conve-
niently trained in the aforesaid ecclesiastical discipline, they
shall alwavs at once wear the tonsure and the clerical dress ;
they shall learn grammar, singing, ecclesiastical computa-
tion, and the other liberal arts ; they shall be instructed in
sacred Scripture ; ecclesiastical books ; the homilies of the
saints ; the manner of administering the sacraments, espe-
ciallv those things which shall seem suited unto heanng
confessions; and the forms of the rites and ceremonies.
The bishop shall take care that they be every day present
at the sacrifice of the mass, and that they confess their sins
at least once a month ; and receive the body of our Lord
Jesus Christ, according to the judgment of their confessor;
and on festivals serve in the cathedral and other churches
of the place. All which, and other things advantageous and
needful imto this object, all bishops shall ordain, wdth the
advice of two of the senior and most discreet canons whom
themselves have chosen, as the Holy Spirit shall have
suggested ; and shall make it their care, by frequent visi-
tation, that the same be always observed. The froward,*
and incorrigible, and the disseminators of evil morals, they
shall punish sharply, even, if necessary by expulsion ; ana,

■ Dyscolos.

OK BBFOBMATIOir. 173

removing all hindrancesy they shall carefiillj attend to what-
soever things appear to tend to preserve and advance so
pious and holy an mstitution. And inasmuch as some certain
revenues will be necessary, for raising the fabric of the col-
lege, and for paying their salaries to the teachers and ser-
vants, and for mamtaining the youths, and for other ex-
penses ; besides those [funds] which are, in some churches
and places, set apart for instructing; or maintaining youths,
and which are to be hereby looked upon as applied to this
seminary under the said charge of the bishop ; the same
bishops, with the advice of two of the chapter, of whom
one snail be chosen by the bishop, and the other by the
chapter itself, and also of two of the clergy of the city,
the election of one of whom shall in like manner appertain
to the bishop, and of the other to the clergy, shall take
away a certain part or portion, out of the entire fruits of the
episcopal income, and of the chapter, and of all dignities
soever, personates, offices, prebends, portions, abbeys, and
priories, of what order soever, even though regular, or of
what quality or condition soever they may be, and of hos-
pitals which are conferred under title or administration^
according to the constitution of the Council of Yienne,
which begins Quia contingit ; and of all benefices soever,
even those belonging to regulars, even if they be under
any right of patronage, even if they be exempted, even if
they be of no diocese, or are annexed to other churches,
monasteries, hospitals, or to any other pious places, even
such as are exempted ; as also of [the revenues devoted to]
the fabrics of churches, and of other places, and likewise of
all other ecclesiastical revenues or proceeds soever, even
those of other colleges; in which, however, there are not
actually seminaries of scholars, or of teachers, for promoting
the common good of the church ; (for [the synod] wills that
such places be exempted,) except in regard of such revenues
as may remain superfluous over and above the fitting sup-
port of the said seminaries ; or of bodies, or confraternities,
which in some places are called schools, and of all monas-
teries, with the exception of the mendicants ; also of the
tithes in any way appertaining to laymen, out of which
ecclesiastical subsidies are wont to be paid, and to the sol-
diers of any military' body, or order, the brethren of Saint

Jolin of Jerusalem alone excepted ; and they shall apply to,
and incorporate with, the said college that portion so de-
ducted, as also certain simple benefices, of what quality and
digni^ soever they may be, or even pr^stimonieB, or presti.
monial portions, as they are called, even before they fall
vacant, without prejudice to the divine service, or to those
who hold them. And this shall have effect, even if the
benefices be reserved or appropriated; nor shall these
imions and applications of the said benefices be suspended,
or in any way hindered, by the resignation thereof, but
shall still in any case have effect, any way in which they
may be vacated, even be it in the [Eoman] court, and any
constitution whatsoever notwithstanding.

And they shall be compelled by the bishop of the place,
by ecclesiastical censures, and otner legal remedies, even by
calling in for this purpose, if it shall seem fit, the help of
the secular arm, to pay this portion of benefices, dignities,
personates, and of all and each the above-named [revenues],
not merely on their own account, but also on account of
what pensions soever they may chance to have to pay to
others, out of the said revenues or firuits, keeping back, how-
ever, a sum equivalent to what they have to pay on account
of those said pensions : any privileges, as regards all and
singular the above-mentioned premises, exemptions, even
such as might require a special derogation, any custom, even
immemorial, or any appeal and allegation, which might
hinder the execution hereof, notwithstanding. But in case
it should happen that, by means of the said imions obtaining
their effect, or from some other cause, the said seminary
should be found to be wholly or in part endowed, then shall
the portion, deducted as above from all benefices, and incor-
porated by the bishop, be remitted, either wholly or in part,
as the actual circumstances shall require. But if the pre-
lates of cathedral and other greater churches should be negli-
gent in erecting the said seminary, and in preserving the
same, and should refuse to pay their share ; it will be the
duty of the archbishop sharply to rebuke the bishop, and to
compel him to comply with all the matters aforesaid, and of
the provincial synod [to rebuke and compel in like manner]
the archbishop, and earnestly to take care that this holy and
pious work be, wherever it is possible, as soon as possible

OK BSFOBMATIOK. 175

proceeded witb. But the bishop shall annually leceiTe the
accounts of the revenues of the said seminaiy, two deputies
from the chapter, and the same number deputed from the
dergjr of the city, being present.

Furthermore, in order that provision may be made for tiie
teaching in schools of this nature at less expense, the
liolj synod ordains, that bishops, archbishops, primates, and
other ordinaries of places, shall constrain and compel, even
by the subtraction of their fruits, those vrho possess any
professorships of theology,^ and others to whom is attached
the office or lecturing or teaching, to teach those vrho are to
be educated in the said schools, personally, if they be com-
petent, otherwise by competent substitutes to be chosen by
the same professors, and to be approved of by the ordinary.
And if, in the judgment of the bishop, they be not fit, they
shall nominate another who is fit, all power of appeal being
set aside. But should they neglect tnis, the bishop himaftfr
shall depute one. And the aioresaid [masters] shall teadb.
those thmgs which shall seem expedient to the Ushop. And,
henceforth, those offices, or di^iities, which are called pro-^
fessorships of theology, shall not be conferred on any hot
doctors, or masters, or licentiates in sacred letters or canon
law, or on other competent persons, and such as can perso*
nally discharge that office ; and any provision made otherwise
shall be null and void; all privu^es and customs soever,
even though immemorial, notwithstanding.

But if the churches in any province laTOur undnr so great
poverty, that, in some of them, a college cannot be eredted ;
the provincial svnod, or the metropolitan, with the two ddesfe
suffisgsms, shall take care to erect one or more colleges, as
shall be judged convenient, in the meiaropolitan churai, or
in some other more convenient church of the province, out
of the revenues of two or more churches, in wnich sing^ a
college csmnot conveniently be established, where theyorais
of tiSwe churches shall be educated.

But in churdies which possess unple dioceses, the hisbop
may have one or more senunaries in the diocese, wb shau
seem expedient to him ; which shall however be entirdy de-

^ 8dioIacteria«. See ihe %\fnAgtA edHion of Dn Gauge, roL tL
p. 117, ed. Haleof.

pendent in all tilings on the one erected and established in
the [episcopall city.

Lastly, if, either upon occasion of the said unions, or the
taxation, or assignment, and incorporation of the said

Eortions, or from some other cause, any difficulty should
appen to arise bv reason of which the institution, or main-
tenance of the said seminary may be hindered or disturbed,
the bishop, with the deputies as above, or the provincial synod,
according to the custom of the country, shall have power,
according to the character of the churches and benefices, to
regulate and order all and each the matters which shall seem
necessary and expedient for the advancement of the said
seminary, even so as to modify or enlarge them, if need be.

nn)IOTION OF THE NEXT SESSION.

Tet further, the same sacred and holy Synod of Trent
indicts the next ensuing session for the sixteenth day of the
month of September ; in which it will treat of the sacrament
of Matrimony, and of such other matters, if there be any,
relative to the doctrine of faith, as can be expedited, as also
touching provisions for bishoprics, dignities, and other eccle-
siastical benefices, and divers articles of Reformation.

The session was 'prorogued until the eleventh day of November^

MDLXIII.

SESSION THE TWENTY-FOURTH,

Bdng the eighth vndei' tlie Sovereign Pontiff Plus IV., cdehrated on Hie
eleventh day of the month of November, 1563.

DOCTBINK TOUOHINa THE SACRAMENT OP MATRIMONY.

The first parent of the human race, under the instinct of
the divine Spirit, pronounced the bond of matrimony per-
petual and indissoluble, when he said ; This is noia bone of
my hones, a/nd flesh of my flesh. Wherefore shall a man leave
his father and mother, and shall cleave unto his toife, and
they shall be two in oneflesh.^

But, that by this bond two only are coupled and joined

e Gen. ii. 23, 24.

THE 8A0BAMBKT 07 MATAIMOKT. 177

together, Christ our Lord taught more openly, when repeat-
in^ those last words as havuig been uttered bj God, He
said, therefore they are no more twain, hut one flesh ^ and
straightway confinned the firmness of that tie, proclaimed
so long before by Adam, in these words ; What therefore
CM hath joined together, let no man put asunder,^

But, the grace which might perfect that natural love, and
confirm that indissoluble union, and sanctifv- the wedded,
Christ Himself^ the institutor and perfecter of the venerable
sacraments, merited for us by His passion ; which Paul the
Apostle intimates, saying : Husbands, love your wives, even
as Christ also loved the Church, and delivered up himself for
it;^ adding shortly after, This is a great sacrament, but I
speak in Christ and in the Church,^

Whereas therefore matrimony, in the evangelical law,
excek the ancient marriages in ^e, through CW ; with
reason have our holy Eathers, the Councils, and the tradi-
tion of the universal Church, always taught, that it is to be
numbered amongst the sacraments of the new law ; against
wliich impious men of this age raving, have not only enter-
tained false opinions touching this venerable sacrament, but,
introducing according to their wont, under the pretext of
the Gk)8pel, a liberty of the flesh, they have by writing and
word asserted, not without great injury to tne faithiul of
Christ, many things alien from the sentiment of the Catholic
Church, ana from the usage approved of since the times of
the apostles ; whose rashness the holy and universal S3mod
wishing to meet, has thought proper, lest their pernicious
contagion should draw more afber it, that the more conspi-
cuous heresies and errors of the schismatics aforesaid oe
oicterminated, decreeing against the said heretics and their
errors the following anathemas.

TOUCmNG THB SACRAMENT OF MAfBDfOirr.

Canon i. If any one shall say, that matrimony is not
truly and properly one of the seven sacraments of the evan-
gelic law, instituted by Christ the Lord ; but that it has
been inveilted by men in the Church, and that it does not
confer grace ; let him be anathema.

«» Matt. xix. 6. « Ibid.

' Eplies. V. 25. » Ibid. 82.

N

178 8E8SIOK XXIY.

Canok II. If any one shall say, that it is lawM fop
Christians to have several wives at the same time, and that
this is not prohibited by any divine law ; let him be ana-
thema.

Canoit in. K any one shall say, that those degrees only
of consanguinity and affinity, which are set down in Levi-
ticus,^ can hinder matrimony from being contracted, and
dissolve it when contracted; and that the Church cannot
dispense in some of those degrees, or ordain that others
may hinder and dissolve it ; let him be anathema.

Canon iv. If any one shall say, that the Church could
not constitute impediments dissolving marriage;^ or that
she has erred in constituting them ; let him be anathema.

Canon v. If any one shall say, that on account of heresy,
or irksome cohabitation, or the mtentional absence of one of
the parties, the bond of matrimony maybe dissolved; let him
be anathema.

Canon vi. If any one shall say, that matrimony con-
tracted, but not consummated, is not dissolved by the
solemn profession of religion by one of the parties married ;
let him be anathema.

Canon vii. If any one shall say, that the Church doth
err in that she hath taught, and doth teach, according to the
evangelical and apostolic doctrine, that the bond of matri-
mony cannot be dissolved on account of the adultery of one
of the married parties ; and that both, or even the innocent
party, who gave not occasion to the adultery, cannot contract
another marriage during the lifetime of the other married
person ; and, that he is guilty of adultery, who, having put
away the adulteress, shall marry another wife, as also she,
who, having put away the adulterer, shall wed another
husband ; let him be anathema.

Canon viii. If any one shall say, that the Church errs,
in that she decrees that, for many causes, a separation may
take place between husband and wife, in regard of bed or
cohabitation, for a determinate or for an indeterminate
period ; let him be anathema.

Canon ix. If any one shall say, that clerks constituted in

^ Levit. xviii. 6, sqq.

^ See Matt. xvi. 19 ; a text used on all occasions by the Homanists
to prove anything.

OK BEFOBMATIOK. 179

sacred orders, or regulars, whd have solemnly professed
chastity, are able to contract marriage, and that being con-
tracted, it is valid, the ecclesiastical law, or vow, notwith-
standing; and that the contrary is nothing else than to
condemn marriage ; and, that aU who do not feel that they
have the gift of chastity, even though they have made- a
vow thereof, may contract marriage ; let him be anathema ;
seeing that God denieth not that gift to them that ask it
rightly, neither does He suffer us to he tempted above that we
a/re able)

Canon x. If any one shall say, that the marria&;e state is
to bo preferred before a state of virginity, or of celibacy,
and that it is not better and more blessed to remain m
virginity, or in celibacy, than to be joined in matrimony ; let
him be anathema.

Canon xi. If any one shall say, that the prohibition of
the solemnization of marriages at certain times of the year,
is a tyrannical superstition, proceeding from the superstition
of the heathen ; or shall condemn the benedictions and other
ceremonies of which the Church makes use therein ; let him
be anathema.

Canon xii. If any one shall say, that matrimonial causes
do not concern ecclesiastical judges ; let him be anathema.

DEGREE TOUOmKa THE BEFOBMATION OF MABRIAGE.

CHAPTER I.

Tht Foi'^n prcsci'ibed in the Council of LcUeran for solemnly contracting
Man'iage is renewed. Bishops may dispense vfith (he Banns. Jf any one
contracts Marriage otherwise tJtan in the presence of the Parish Priest
and of Two (W* ThreeWitnesses, it comes to nothing.

Although it is not to be doubted, that clandestine mar-
riages, made with the free consent of the parties contracting,
are valid and true marriages, so long as the Church has not
rendered them invalid ; and consequently, that those persons
are justly to be condemned, as the holy synod doth condemn
them with anathema, who deny that such marriages are true
and valid ; as also those who falsely affirm that marriages
contracted by the children of a family, without the consent

1 1 Cor. X. 13.

n2

180 8SSSI0K TUT.

of their parents, are invalid, and that parents can maike such
marriages either valid or invalid; nevertheLess, the holy
Church of God has, for most just reasons, at all times
detested and prohibited them. But, whereas the holy synod
perceives that those prohibitions, by reason] of men's dis-
obedience, no longer avail; and whereas it takes into account
the grievous sins which arise from the said clandestine
marrwges, and especially the sins of those parties who con-
tinue in a state of damnation, when, having left their former
wife, with whom they had privily contracted marriage, they
publicly marry another, and live with her in perpetual
adultery; an evil which the Church, which judges not of
things hidden, cannot rectify, unless some more efficacious
remedy be applied ; therefore, treading in the footste ps o f
the sacred Council of Lateran, celebrated under Innocent JH.,
it ordains that, for the future, before a marriage is con-
tracted, it shall three times be announced pubhcly in the
church, by the proper parish priest of the contracting par-
ties, during the solemnization of mass, on three contmuoua
festival days, between whom marriage is to be celebrated ;
after which banns being published, if there be no lawful
impediment opposed, the marriage shall be proceeded with
in the face or the church ; where the parish priest, after
having questioned the man and the woman, and having learnt
their mutual consent, shall either say, " I join you together
in matrimony, in the name of the Eather, and of the Son,
and of the itoly Ghost ;" or shall use other words, accord-
ing to the received rite of each province. But if there
should at any time be a probable suspicion that the marriage
may be maliciously hindered, if so many publications of
banns have preceded it ; in this case either one publication
only shall be made ; or at least the marriage shall be cele-
brated in the presence of the parish priest, and of two or
three witnesses. Then, before the consummation thereof,
the banns shall be published in the churcli ; that so, if there
be privily any impediments, they may the more easily be
discovered : imless the ordinary shall himself judge it to be
expedient, that the publications aforesaid be dispensed with,
which the holy synod leaves to his prudence and judgment.
Those who shall attempt to contract marriage otherwise than
in the presence of the parish priest, or of some other priest

ON BEFOBMATIOK. 181

1)y permission of the said parisb priest, or of the ordinary,
and in the presence of two or three witnesses ; them doth
the holy synod render utterly incapable of thus contracting^
and declares such contracts void and null, as by the present
decree it declares them void and annuls them. Yet further, it
enjoins that the parish priest, or any other priest, who shall
have been present at any such contract with a less number of
witnesses [than aforesaid]; as also the witnesses who have
been present thereat without the parish priest, or some other
priest ; and, also, the contracting parties themselves ; shall be
severely punished, at the discretion of the ordinary. Fur-
thermore, the same holy synod exhorts that the married
couple do not live together in the same house imtil they
have received the sacerdotal benediction, which is to be
received in the church ; and it ordains that the benediction
shall be given by their own parish priest, and that permission
to bestow the aforesaid benediction cannot be granted by
any other than the parish priest himself, or the ordinary ;
any custom, even though immemorial, which is rather to oe
called a corruption, or any privilege, notwithstanding. And
if any parish priest, or any other priest, whether he be
regular or secular, shall dare to unite in marriage the
betrothed of another parish, or to bless them [when mar-
ried], without the permission of their parish priest, he
shall, even though he may contend that he is allowed to do
this by a privilege, or an immemorial custom, remain by the
very act suspended, imtil he be absolved by the ordinary of
that parish priest who ought to have been present at the
marriage, or from whom the benediction ought to have been
received. The parish priest shall have a book, which he
shall keep carefully by nim, in the which he shall register
the names of the parties married, and of the witnesses, and
the time and place of the marriage being contracted. Finally,
the holy synod exhorts those who marry, that, before they
contract, or, at all events, three days before the consumma-
tion of marriage, they carefully confess their sins, and
approach piously to the most holy sacrament of the
Eucharist. If any provinces have herein in use any praise-
worthy customs ana ceremonies, besides the aforesaid, the
holy synod earnestly desires that they by all means be re-
tained. And lest these so wholesome injunctions be unlmo^ii

tW7 ihi^ jw'nr irn hr rr[ii[ilMBi Ii

'dflt tktt deem dnH beem 10 ~ '

at tiie cxpbaoaa of ikntT dsriL 10 le iciAjaiwd fixan
the dsr of its first paUatiun tiibI "in the

CHAPTER n.

Ejmrienee teacher that, br reason of die mnhitiide of
prohibhionB, marriagea are ofkentiiiieB imvittinghr contracted
in prohibited casea^ in whidi [^marriagea] either ftiie parties]
continue, not nitboot great an, or ther are dmalred, not
without great ncanHa] The holr arno^ th er e for e, widiing
to proTi& against this inoonYenienoe, and beginning with
the impediment arisng from spiritual rehtioiiahip, ordains,
that, according to the institutions of the sacred canons^ one
person only, whether male or female, or at most one male
and one female, shall receive in baptism the person baptized;
between whom and the baptized, and the father and mother
thereof; as also between toe person baptizing and the bap-
tized, and the father and mother of the b&ptized, [and these]
only, shall a spiritual relationship he contracted. The parish
priest, before that he proceeds to confer baptism, shall care-
mQy inquire of those whom it may regard, what person or
persons they have chosen to receive firom the sacred font the
person baptized, and he shall allow him or them only to
receive him, and shall register their names in the book, and
teach them what relationship they have contracted, lest they
have any excuse on the plea of ignorance. And if any
others, besides those designated, should touch the bantized,
they shall not in any respect contract a spiritual relation-
ship ; constitutions that tend to the contrary notwith-
standing. If, through the fault or negligence of the parish
priest, anything be done contrary hereto, he shall be
punished at the discretion of the ordinaij. That relation-
ship, likewise, which is contracted by confirmation, shall not

Oir BEFOSMATIOK. 183

pass beyond him who confirms, and the person confirmed,
and his father and mother, and him who holdeth him ; all
impediments resulting from this kind of spiritual relation*
ship between other persons being utterly set aside.

CHAPTER III.
The Impediment cf PMic Htmegty is cof^ned within certain Limits.

The holy synod entirely removes the impediment of justice
restdting from public honesty, whensoeyer espousals shall
be, for what cause soever, not valid. But, wnen they are
valid, they^ shall not extend beyond the first degree ; inso-
much as any such prohibition can no longer be observed,
without injury, in more remote degrees.

CHAPTER IV.
Affinity arising from Fomicaiion is restricted to the Second Degree,

Moreover, the holy synod, moved by the same and other
most weightv reasons, restricts, to those only who are con-
nected in the first and second degree, the impediment,
which is contracted by affinity resultii^ from fornication, and
which dissolves the marriage that may afterwards have been
made. But, as regards more remote degrees, it ordains that
tliis kind of affinity do not dissolve the marriage that may
have been afterwards contracted.

CHAPTER V.

No one is to contract [Marriage] within the Prohibited Degrees : in what
Manner Dispensation is to he granted therein.

If any one shall presume knowingly to contract marria£;e
within the prohibited degrees, he shaU be separated, and be
deprived of^hope of obtaining a dispensation ; and this shall
much the rather have effect in regard of him who shall have
dared not only to contract, but also to consummate, such a
marriage. But if he have done this unwittingly, but has yet
neglected the solemnities required in contracting matrimony,
he shall be subjected to the same penalties ; for he who has

^ I, e, the impediments.

rasUjr despised tbe wbolesome precepts of the Church, is
not worthy to experience her boon^ with ease. But i^
having observed the solemnities^ some impediment be after-
wards discorered to exist secrethr, of which he might pro-
bably^ be ignorant, he maj then obtain a dispensation more
easifyy and gratuitously. As regards marriages to be con-
tracted, either no dispoisation at all shall be granted, or but
seldom, and then for a cause, and gratuitouuy. A dispen-
sation shall never be granted in the second d^;ree, except
between great princes, and for a public cause.

CHAPTER VL
Hvm RaiciAen art to lepuniskitL

The holy synod ordains, that no marriage can subsist be-
tween the ravisher and her who is ravished, so long as she
shall remain in the power of the ravisher. But if she that
has been ravished, being separated from her ravisher, and
being in a safe and free place, shall consent to have him for
her husband, the ravisher may have her for his wife ; never-
theless, the abducer himself and all who afforded him advice,
aid, and countenance, shall be by the very act excommuni-
cated, and for ever infamous, ana incapable of all dignities ;
and if they be clerks, they shall forfeit their rank. The ra-
visher shall fiirthermore be bound, whether he marry or do
not marry the woman ravished, to settle on her a suitable
dowry at the discretion of the judge.

CHAPTER VII.

Vagrants are to be manned with caution.

There are many persona who are vagrants, and have no
settled homes ; and, being of a dissolute disposition, they,
after deserting their first >vife, marry another, and very often
several in different places, during her lifetime. The holy
synod, being desirous to meet this disorder, gives this fa-
therly admonition to all whom it concerns, not easily to
admit this class of vagrant persons to marriage ; and it also
exhorts the civil magistrates to pimish them severely. But
it commands parisli priests that they do not be present at
the marringes of such persons, imless they liiive liirft made

OK BEFOSMATIOK. 185

a diligent inquiry, and, having; reported the matter 'to
the ordinary, shall [have obtamed permisBion fix)m him
so to do.

CHAPTER Vm.

(kfncvtbvMigt Upuni^d with the most Cfriewnu Penalties,

It is a grievoiis sin for unmarried men to have concu-
bines ; but it is a most grievous sin, and one committed in
special contempt of this great sacrament, for married men
also to Hve in this state of damnation, and to have the auda-
city sometimes to maintain and keep them at home even
with their own wives. Wherefore, the holy synod, that it
may by opportune remedies provide against this so great an
evil, ordams that these concubinaries, whether unmarried or
married, of what state, dignity, and condition soever they
ma^ be, if, after they have been thrice admonished on this
subject by the ordinary, even accordins; to the duties of his
office,^ they shall not have put away their concubines, and
have separated themselves from connection with them, they
shall be smitten with excommunication; from which they
shall not be absolved until they have really obeyed the ad-
monition given. But if, neglectful of these censiu^s, they
shall contmue in concubinage during a year, they shall be
proceeded against with severity by the ordinary, according
to the character of the crime. Women, whether married or
single, who live publicly with adulterers or with concubi-
naries, if, after having been thrice admonished, they shall
not obey, shall be rigorously punished, according to the
measure of their guilt, bv the ordinaries of the places, ac-
cording to the duties of their office, even though no one
should call upon them [to do so] ; and they shall be cast
out from the city or diocese, if it shall seem fit to the ordi-
naries, the aid of the secular arm being called in, if need be;
the other penalties inflicted on adulterers and concubinaries
remaining in their proper force.

1 Ex officio.

186 SESBIOK ZXIY.

CHAPTER IX.

That Temporal Lords, or Magistrates, shaU not attempt anything contrary

to the Liberty of Marriage.

Earthly affections and lusts do for the most part so blind
the eyes of the mind of temporal lords and magistrates, as
that, by threats and pains, they compel both men and
women, living under their jurisdiction, especially such as are
rich, or have expectations of a great inheritance, imwillingly
to contract marriage with those whom the said lords or
magistrates may prescribe unto them. Wherefore, see-
ing it is a thing especially wicked to violate the liberty of
matrimony, and that wrongs proceed fi*om those fi*om whom
right is expected, the holy synod enjoins on all, of what
degree, dignity, and condition soever they may be, under pain
of anathema to be incurred by the very act, that they do not
in any way constrain, directly or indirectly, those subject to
them, or any others soever, so as to hinder them from freely
contracting marriage.

CHAPTER X.

The Solemnities of Marriage are prohibited at certain times.

The holy synod commands, that the ancient prohibitions
of solemn nuptials, from the Advent of our Lord Jesus
Christ until the day of the Epiphany, and from Ash- Wed-
nesday untn the octave of Easter inclusively, be carefully
observed by all ; but at other times it allows marriages to
be solemnly celebrated ; concerning which the bishops shall
take care, that they be conducted with becoming modesty
and propriety. Eor marriage is a holy thing, and is to be
treated in a holy manner.

DECBEE CONCERNiya BEFORMATION.

The sacred and holy synod, pursuing the subject of Ee-
fonnation, decrees that the things foUowiug bo ordained in
the present session.

OV SXFOBXAXIOF. 187

GHAPTEB I.
The Rule for the Proeeedm^ io the Oreatiom ffBiAcpi m^ OmrdmA,

If, as regards all maimer of degrees soerer in the Church,
provident and judicious care is to oe taken, that in the house
of the Lord there be nothing disorderly, nothing preposte-
rous ; much more earnestly ought we to stnTe that no error
be committed in the election of him, who is constituted
aboTe all those degrees. For the state and order of the
whole household of the Lord will totter, if what is required
in the body be not found in the head. Hence, although the
holy synod has elsewhere usefully ordained certain things
touching those to be promoted to cathedral and superior
churches, yet doth it account this office to be of such a
nature, as that were men to ponder upon it in proportion
to its fi^reatness, there would never seem to have been caution
enough taken. Wherefore it ordains, that, as soon as a
church shall become vacant, supplications and prayers shall
be made in public and private ; and such shall be enjoined,
by the chapter, throughout the cily and diocese ; that
thereby both clergy and people may oe able to obtain from
Gk)d a good pastor. Ana as regards all and each of those
who have, in any way, any right from the Apostolic See, or
who otherwise have their part in the promotion of those to
be set over [churches] ; the holy erood, without making
any change herein, fipom a consideration of present circum-
stances, exhorts and admonishes them, that they above all
things be mindful that they cannot do anything more ad-
vantageous to the glory of God, and the salvation of the
people, than if they study to promote good pastors, and
such as are competent to govern a churdi ; and that they
commit a deadly sin, becoming partakers in other men's
sins, unless they take diligent care that those be set over
[the churches], whom they themselves judge most worthy
and most useful to the church, not being guided by en-
treaties, or human affection, or the solicitations of canvas-
sers, but by what the merits of the persons themselves
demand at their hands; and that they be persons whom
they know to have been bom in lawful wedlock, and who,
by their life, age, learning, and all other oualifications, are
such as are required according to the sacred canons, and the

decrees of tliis S3niod of Trent. And insomuch as, by reason
of the diversity of nations, people, and manners, a uniform,
system cannot be adopted everywhere, in receiving the grave
and competent testimony of good and learned men touching
the aforesaid qualifications, the holy synod commands, that,
in a provincial synod, to bo held by the metropolitan, there
shall be prescribed for each place and province a proper
form of examination, scrutiny, or information, such as shall
seem to be most useful and convenient for the said places^
to be approved by the discretion of the most holy Boman
Pontiff; yet so, however, that, after that this examination
or scrutiny, as concerns the person to be promoted, shall
have been completed, it shall, after having been reduced into
the form of a public document, be by all means transmitted,
as soon as possible, with the whole attestation and profes-
sion of faith made by him,"* to the most holy Eoman rontiff,
to the end that the said Sovereign Pontiff, having a full
knowledge of the whole matter and of the persons, may, to
the advantage of the Lord's flock, in a more useful manner
provide for the churches out of their number,** if, by exami-
nation or scrutiny, they shall have been found competent
persons. And all the scrutinies, informations, attestations,
and proofs, of what kind soever, and by whomsoever made,
even though in the Boman court, touching the qualifications
of the person to be promoted, shall be diligently examined
by a cardinal, who shall be bound to report® thereon to the
consistory, and by three other cardinals ; and the said report
shall be confirmed by the signature of the cardinal who gave
the report, and of the three other cardinals ; in the which
the four cardinals shall each make affirmation that, after
bestowing diligent attention thereon, he has found the per-
sons to be promoted, endowed with the qualifications re-
quired by law, and by this holy synod, and that, at the peril
of his eternal salvation, he doth certainly consider them
competent to be placed over the churches ; in such wise
that, after the report has been made in one consistory, to
the end that the said inquiry may be more maturely consi-
dered in tlie mean time, the sentence shall be deferred imtil

'" /. c. the person to lie promoted.

" " De illis," unless "illis" refers to '* eccledii.^."

*» flelationem facturus erit.

OK SETOBHATIOir. 189

another consistory, unless it shall seem expedient to the
most blessed Pontiff to act otherwise. And [the synod]
decrees, that all and each of the particulars which have been
elsewhere ordained, in the same synod, touching the life,
age, learning, and other qualifications of those who are to be
promoted to be bishops, the same are also to be required in
the creation of cardinals of the holy Eoman Church, even
though they be deacons ; whom the most holy Eoman Pon-
tiff shall, as far as can conyeniently be done, choose out of
all the nations of Christendom, as he shall find persons com-
petent. Finally, the same holy synod, moved by the so
many most grievous difficulties of the Church, cannot avoid
calling to mind, that nothing is more necessary for the
Church of God than that the most blessed Eoman Pontiff
appl^ esnecially here to that solicitude, which, by the duty
01 nis ofiice, he owes to the Universal Church ; that he take
unto himself, to wit as cardinals, men the most select only,
and that he set over each church, above all things, good and
competent pastors ; and this the more, for that our Lord
Jesus Christ will require at his hands the blood ^ of those
sheep of Christ which shall perish through the evil govern-
ment of pastors who are negligent, and forgetful of their
office.

CHAPTEB II.

Provinctal Synod$ shall he celebrated evert; Third Tear ; Diocesan Synods
every Year : who are to convoke, and who to be present at them.

Provincial councils, wheresoever they have been omitted,
shall be renewed, for the regulating of morals, the correcting
of excesses, the' settling of controversies, and for the other
matters allowed by the sacred canons. AVherefore, the
metropolitans in person, or if they be lawfully hindered, the
oldest suffragan bishop, shall not omit to assemble a synod,
each in his own provmce, within a year at latest from the
termination of the present council, and thenceforth, at least
every third year, either after the octave of the Eesurrection
of our Lord Jesus Christ, or at some other more convenient
time, according to the custom of the province ; at which
[council] all the bishops and others, who, by right or custom,

P Ezek. iii. 18.

190 SESBIOK XXXV.

ought to be present thereat, shall be by all means bound to
assemble, those excepted who would have to cross the sea
at their imminent peril. Nor shall the bishops of the pro-
vince for the future be compelled, under the pretext of any-
custom soever, to repair to the metropolitan church against
their will. Those bishops, likewise, who are not subject to
any archbishop, shall once for all choose some neighbouring
metropolitan, at whose provincial synod they shall be bound
to be present with the other [bishops], and shall observe,
and cause to be observed, whatsoever shall be ordained
therein. In all other matters, their exemption and privi-
leges shall remain whole and entire.

Diocesan synods also shall be celebrated every year; to
which all, even those who are exempted, but who otherwise,
that exemption ceasing, ought to attend, and who are not
subject to general chapters, shall be bound to come; it
being understood however that, in the case of parochial, or
other secular churches, even though annexed, those who
have charge thereof, whosoever they may be, must needs be
present at the said synod. But if any, whether metropo-
litans or bishops, or the others above mentioned, shall be
negligent in these matters, they shall incur the penalties
ratified by the sacred canons.

CHAPTER IIT.
In what Maimer Visitation is to be made by Prelates.

Patriarchs, primates, metropolitans, and bishops shall not
omit to visit their own respective dioceses, either personally,
or, if they be lawfully hindered, by their vicar-general, or visi-
tor ; if they shall not be able to visit the whole annually, on
account of its extent, they shall visit at least the greater part
thereof, so that the whole shall be completed in two years,
either by themselves, or by their visitors. Metropolitans,
however, eVen after having completely visited their own
proper diocese, shall not visit the cathedral churches, or the
dioceses of the bishops of their province, except for a cause
known and approved of in the provincial council. But
archdeacons, deans, and other inferiors, shall henceforth visit
those churches, in which they have been hitherto accustomed
lawfully to exercise visitations; but by them'selves only,
with the consent of the bishop, and assisted by a notary.

OK BETOSMATIOK. 191

The Tisitors also who may be deputed by a chapter, where
the chapter has the right of yisitation, shall &Bt be ap-
proyed by the bishop ; but the bishop, or, if he be hindered^
his yisitor, shall not thereby be preyented from yisiting
those same churchesa part from them ; and the said arch-
deacons, and other inferiors, shall be bound to giye [the
bishop] an account, within a month, of the yisitation that has
been made, and to show him the depositions of witnesses,
and the entire proceedings ; any custom, eyen though im-
memorial, and any exemptions and priyileses soeyer, not-
withstanding. But the principal object ox all these yisi-
tations must be to introduce sound and orthodox doctrine,
by banishing heresies ; to maintain ^ood morals, and to cor-
rect eyil ones ; to incite the people, by exhortations and
admonitions, unto religion, peace, and innocence; and to
establish such other thmgs as, according to the prudence of
the yisitors, shall seem for the profit of the faithiiil, as time,
place, and opportunity shall allow. And to the end that all
these matters may have a more easy and prosperous issue,
all and each of the aforesaid, whom the right of yisitation
concerns, are admonished that they treat all persons with
fatherly tenderness and Christian zeal ; and therefore being
content with a modest train of horses and servants, they shaU
strive to complete the said yisitation as speedily as possible,
yet with due diligence. And they shall meanwhile be careful
not to be grievous or burthensome to any one by any useless
expenses ; and neither they, nor any of theirs, shall, by way
of agency feei for the yisitation, or, on account of wills made
for pious uses, except that which is due to them of right out
of pious bequests, or under any other name soever, receive
anything, either money, or present, of what kind soever, or
in what way soever offered ; any custom, even though imme-
morial, notwithstanding; with the exception, however, of
food, which shall be furnished frugally and in moderation to
them and theirs, only during the necessary period, and no
longer. It shall, however, be at the option of those who are
visited, to pay, if they prefer it, in a fixed assessment of
money,' what they have been heretofore accustomed to pay,
or to furnish the food aforesaid; saving also the right of

9 Procurationis causa. ' Certa pecunia taxata.

192 8ES8IOK ZXIY.

ancient conventions entered into with monasteries, or other
pious places, or churches not parochial, which shall remain
inviolate. But, in those places or provinces, where it is the
custom that neither food, nor monev, nor anything else be
received by the visitors, but that all be done gratuitously,
the same shall there be retained. But if any one, which far
be it, shall presume to receive anything more than is pre*
scribed in any of the cases above mentioned ; 'besides the
restitution oi double the amount, to be made within a
month, he shall also be mulcted, without any hope of par-
don, in the other penalties contained in the constitution of
the general Council of Lyons, which begins, JExigit; as also
in the other penalties [enacted] in the provincial synod,
at the discretion of that synod. But patrons shall not pre-
sume in any way to interiere in those things which regard
the administration of the sacraments ; nor shall they mix
themselves up«with the visitation of the ornaments of the
church, or its revenues arising from landed property, or
from the rental of buildings,^ excepting so far as they are
competent to do this by the institution, or foundation;
but the bishops shall themselves attend to these tilings, and
shall take care that the revenues of those buildings be ex-
pended upon purposes necessary and useful for the church,
as shall to them seem most expedient.

CHAPTEB IV.

By whom, and when, the Office of PreacJting is to he discharged. The
Parish Church to be frequented in Oi'der to hear tJie Woi'd of Qod. No
one sliall Preach in opposition to the WiU of the Bishop.

The holy synod desirous that the office of preaching,
which peculiarly appertains to bishops, may more frequently
be exercised for the welfare of the faithful, in accommo-
dating more aptly to the use of the present times the canons
elsewhere set forth on this subject, under Paul III., of
happy memory, ordains, that the bishops shall themselves in
person, each m his own church, announce the sacred Scrip-
tures and the divine law, or, if they shall be lawfully hin-
dered, by those whom they shall appoint to the office of
preaching ; and in the other churches by the parish priests,

* Fabricarum proventibus.

ON BETOSMATIOK. 193

OP, they being hindered, by others to be deputed by the
bishop, whether in the city, or in any other port soever of
the diocese wherein they shall judge it to De expedient^
at the charge of those who are bound, or who ore accus-
tomed to defray it, and this at least on all Lord's days and
solemn festivals; but, during the season of the flEists, of Lent
and of the Advent of our Lord, daily, or at least on three
days in the week, if [the said bishops] shall deem it to be
needful ; and, at other times, as often as they shall judge
that it can opportunely be done. And the bishop shsJl
diligently admonish the j^ple, that each one is bound to
be present at his own pansh church, where that can be con-
veniently done, to hew* the word of God. But no one,
whether secular or regular^ shall presume to preach, even
in churches of his own order, in opposition to the will of the
bishop. The said [bishops] shall also take care, that, at
least on the Lord's days and other festivals, the children in
every parish be diligently taught the rudiments of the faith^
and obedience towards God and their parents, by those
whom it concerns, and, if need be, they shall constram them
even by ecclesiastical censiures ; any privileges and customs
notwithstanding. In other respects, those things which
were decreed under the said Paul III., concerning the office
of preaching, shall have their proper force.

CHAPTER V.

Of CHminal Catises agamst BuihopSf the Ch'ecUer Oms akaU he taken cog*
nizance of by the Sovereign PofUiff only, the Lesser by the Provincial
Council.

•

The more grave criminal causes against bishops, even of
heresy, which far be it ! which are deserving of deposition
or deprivation, shall be taken cognizance of and decided by
the Sovereign Koman Pontiff himself only. But if the
cause shall be of such a nature that it must necessarily be
committed out of the Eoman Coiui;, it shall not be com-
mitted to any others soever, but to metropolitans, or
bishojjs, to bo chosen by the most blessed Pope. And this
commission must both be special, and signed by the most
holy Pontiff's own hand ; nor shall he ever grant more to
them than this ; that they take information only of the fact,

194 SESSIOir XXIY.

and draw np the process, which they shall straightway
transmit to the Eoman Pontiff; the definitive sentence
being reserved to the said most holy [Pontiff].

The other things elsewhere decreed hereupon, under
Julius III., of happy memory, as also the constitution.

6 published] in a genem council under Innocent III., which:
egins, Qualiter et quando, which the holy synod renews in
this present decree, shall be observed by all.

But the lesser criminal causes of bishops shall be taken
cognizance of and decided in the provincial council only,
or by persons to be deputed thereunto by the provincial
council

CHAPTER VI.

Power 18 given to the Bieliops touching Dispensations in Ccaes of IrregU'
larity and Stispension, and Absolution from Crimes.

It shall be lawful for the bishop to dispense in all manner
of irregularities and suspensions, arising n*om a secret crime,
except that which arises from wilful homicide, and those
crimes which have already been carried before a judicial^
tribunal ; and [it shaU be lawful for them], in their own
diocese, either of themselves, or by a vicar to be deputed
especially for that purpose, to absolve gratuitously, as far as
the court of conscience is concerned,^ having imposed a
salutary penance, all delinquents soever their subjects,
in all secret cases soever, even though reserved for the
Apostolic See. The same also, as regards the crime of
heresy, shall be permitted in the said court of conscience,
but to them only, and not to their vicars.

CHAPTER VII.

The Virtue of the Sacraments sItaU, before it be admvnistet'ed to tJte People,
be explained by Bishops and Parish Priests. During the Solemnization
of Mass, the S(wred Pages sJiall be explained.

. To the end that the faithful people may approach to the
receiving of the sacraments with greater reverence and
devotion of mind, the holy synod enjoins on all bishops,
that, not only when they shall themselves be about to ad-
minister them to the people, they shall first explain, in a

t Conteotiosum. ** In foro conscientiae.

OK BSFOBKATIOir. 195

manner suited to the capacity of the recipients, the effect
and use of those [sacraments], but shall endeayour that the
same conduct be observed piously and prudently bjr every
parish priest ; and this even in the vulgar tongue, if need
be, and it can conveniently be done, according to the form
to be prescribed for each of the sacraments, by the holy
synod, m a catechism which the bishops shall take care to
have faithfully translated into the vulgar tongue, and to
have expounded to the people by all parish priests ; as also
that, during the solemnization of mass, or the celebration of
the divine offices, they explain, in the said vulgar tongue, on
all festivals, or solemnities, the sacred oracles, and the
maxims of salvation ; and that, setting aside oil unprofitable
questions, they endeavour to insinuate them into the hearts
of all, and to mstruct them in the law of the Lord.

CHAPTER VIII.

PMic Sinners sliall do Penance puUidy, ivnless the Bishop shaU determine
otherwise. A Penitentiary to be vnstituted in Cathedral Churdi£8,

The apostle admonishes that those who sin publicly are to
be rebuked openly.^ When therefore any one has committed
a crime, publicly and in the sight of many, whereby there ia
no doubt that others have been offended and disturbed by a
scandal; upon him there must needs be publicly imposed
a penance fitting the measure of his guilt ; that so those
whom, by his example, he has allured to evil manners, he
may bring back to an upright life by the testimony of his
amendment. The bishop, however, may, when he shall
judge it to be more expedient, commute this kind of public
penance into one that is secret. Likewise, in all cathedral
churches, where it can conveniently be done, a penitentiary
shall be appointed by the bishop, with the prebend that
shall next become vacant annexed, which penitentiary shall
be a master, or doctor, or licentiate in theology, or in canon
law, and forty years of age, or another who shall be found
more suitable considering the character of the place ; who,
whilst hearing confessions in the church, shall meanwhile be
reputed as present in choir.

^ 1 Tim. V. 20.

o2

CHAPTER IX.
By whom Secular CJiwdiea, not hdonging to any IHocese, ought to he visited.

Those things which have elsewhere been ordained by this
same council, under Paul III., of happy memory, and lately
under our most blessed lord Pius IV., touchmg the dih-
gence to be employed by the ordinaries in the visiting of
benefices, even though exempted, the same shall also be
observed in regard to those secidar churches which are said
to be in no one's diocese ; that they shall be visited by the
bishop, as the delegate of the Apostolic See, whose cathedral
church is the nearest, if it be possible ; otherwise, by him
who has been once for all selected by the prelate of the said
place in the provincial council ; any privileges and customs
soever, even though immemorial, notwithstanding.

CHAPTER X.

The Performcmce of Visitation it not to he suspended hy those suHtject,

Bishops, to the end that they may be the better able to
keep the people whom they rule in duty and obedience,
shall, in all those things which concern visitation and cor-
rection of manners, have the right and power, even as
delegates of the Apostolic See, of ordainmg, regulating,
punishing, and executmg, in accordance with the enactments
of the canons, in those matters which, in their prudence,
shall seem to them necessary for the amendment of their
subjects, and for the advantage of their respective dioceses.
Nor herein, when visitation, or correction of manners is
concerned, shall exemption, or any inhibition, appeal, or
complaint, even though interposed unto the Apostolic See,
in any way hinder, or suspend the execution of those things
which shall have been by them commanded, decreed, or
adjudged.

CHAPTER XI.

Honorary Titles, or Particular Pinvileges, shall not detract in any way from
the Right of Bisluyps. The chapter, Quum capella, concerning Privileges,
is renewed.

Insomuch as the privileges and exemptions which, under
various titles, are granted to very many persons, are clearly

ON BEFOBMATIOK. 197

found to raise, in thcso days, disturbance in the jurisdiction
of bishops, and to give to those exempted occasion for a
more relaxed life; the holy synod decrees, that, if at any time
it shaU seem fit, for just, weighty, and well nigh necessary
causes, that certain persons be distinguished by the honorary
titles of Protonotary, Acolyte, Count Pabtine, Eoyal Chap-
lain, or other such titles of distinction, whether in the
Boman Court or elsewhere ; as also that others be admitted
into monasteries as Oblates, or as thereunto attached in
some other way, or under the name of servants to military
orders, monasteries, hospitals, colleges, or under any other
title soever ; nothing is to be understood as being, by these
privileges, taken away from the ordinaries, so as to prevent
those persons, to whom those things have already been
grantea, or to whom they may be hereafter happen to be
conceded, from being fully subject in all things to the said
ordinaries, as delegates of the Apostolic See, and this as
regards Boyal Chaplains, according to the constitution of
Innocent III., which begins Quum capella : those persons,
however, being excepted, who in the aforesaid places are
engaged in actual service, or in military orders, and who
reside within their enclosures and houses, and live under
obedience to them ; as also those who have made their pro-
fession lawfully and according to the rules of the said mili-
tary orders, touching which the ordinary must be certified :
any privileges whatsoever, even those of the order of Saint
John of Jerusalem, and of other military orders notwith-
standing. But, as regards those privileges which, by force
of the constitution of Eugenius, are wont to belong to those
who reside in the Eoman Court, or who belong to tne house-
hold of cardinals, such [privileges] shall in no wise be
understood to apply to those who possess ecclesiastical
benefices, in so far as concerns those benefices ; but [such
persons] shall continue subject to the jurisdiction of the
ordinary ; any inhibitions to the contrary notwithstanding.

CHAPTER XII.

WhcU Maimer of Peraom those ov^ht to he who are to he promoted to the
Dignitiea and Canonriea of Cathedral Churches : and loha/t those pro-
moted are hownd to perform,

"Whereas dignities in churches, especially in cathedral
ones, were estaolished to preserve and increase ecclesiastical
discipline, to the end that those who should obtain them,
might be pre-eminent in piety, and be an example to others,
and aid the bishop by their exertions and services ; it is but
reasonable, that those who are called unto those dignities,
shoidd be such as to be able to answer the purposes of their
office. No one, therefore, shall henceforth be promoted to
any dignities soever, to which the cure of souls is attached,
unless he have attained at least to the twenty-fifth year of
his age, and, having been practised for some time in the
clerical order, is recommended by the learning necessary for
the discharge of his office, and by integrity of morals, ac-
cording to the constitution of Alexander III., promulgated
in the Coimcil of Lateran, which begins, QuiMn in cunctis.

Archdeacons also, who are called the eyes of the bishop,
shall, in all churches, where it ia possible, be masters in
theology, or doctors or licentiates m canon law. But, to
the other dignities or personates, to which no cure of souls
is attached, clerks shall be taken in, who are in other respects
competent, and who are not less than twenty-two years of
age. Those also who are promoted to any benefices what-
soever having cure of souls, shall, withm two mouths at
latest from the day of obtaining possession, be bound to
make public profession of their orthodox faith in the pre-
sence ^ of the bishop himself, or, if he be hindered, before
his vicar-general, or official ; and shall promise and swear
that they will continue in obedience to the Eoman Church.
But those who are promoted to canonries and dignities in
cathedral churches, shall be bound to do the same not only
before the bishop, or his official, but also in the chapter ;
otherwise all those promoted as aforesaid shall not render
the fruits their own ; nor shall possession avail them. Nor
shall they henceforth receive any one to a dignity, canonry,

* Lit. "in the hands."

OK BEJOBMATIOK. 199

or portion, but him who has either ahready been initiated
into the sacred order which that dignity, preoend, or portion
requires, or is of such an age as to be capable of being ini-
tiated into that order, Trfthin the time ordained by law and
by this holy synod. But as regards all cathedral churches,
aU canonries and portions shaU be attached to the order
of the priesthood, deaconship, or subdeaconship ; and the
bishop, with the advice of the chapter, shall designate and
distribute, as it shall seem to be expedient, to which [there-
fore] each of those respective holy orders is for the future to
be annexed ; in such wise, however, that one-half at least
shall be priests, but the rest deacons, or subdeacons. But
where the more praiseworthy custom requires, that the
greater part, or all, be priests, it shall by all means be ob-
served. Moreover, the holy synod exhorts that, in provinces
where it can conveniently be done,. all the dignities, and at
least one-half of the canonries, in cathedral and eminent
collegiate churches, be conferred only on masters, or doctors,
or even on licentiates in theology, or canon law. Pxurther-
more, it shall not be lawful, oy force of any manner of
statute or custom soever, for those who possess, in the said
cathedral or collegiate churches, any dignities, canonries,
prebends, or portions, to be absent from those said churches,
above three months in each year ; saving, however, the con-
stitutions of those churches which require a longer term of
service. Otherwise every one shall, for the first year, be
deprived of one half of the fruits which he has made his own
by reason even of his prebend and residence. But, if he
^ain display the same negligence, he shall be deprived of
aU the fruits which he may have gained during that same
rear ; and, the contumacy increasing, such [offenders] shall
De proceeded against according to the constitutions of the
sacred canons. As regards the distributions, however ; those
who have been present at the stated hours shall receive
them ; the rest shall, all collusion and remission soever being
set aside, forfeit them, according to the decree of Boniface
VIII., which begins, Consuetudinem, which the holy synod
again calls into use ; any statutes or customs soever to the
contrary notwithstanding. And all shall be compelled to per-
form the divine oiOSces in person, and not by substitutes ; as
also to attend on and serve the bishop whencelebrating [mass].

^00 SESSION XXIY,

or performing any other pontifical functions ; and reverently,
distinctly, and devoutly to praise the name of God, in hymns
and canticles, in the choir mstituted for psalmody.

They shall, furthermore, at all times make use of a be*
coming dress, both in and out of church ; shall abstain from
unlawful hunting, hawking, dancing, taverns, and games;
and abound in such integrity of manners, as that they may
with justice be called the senate of the Church. As to the
other matters, which regard the fitting manner of conduct-
ing the divine offices, and the proper way of singing or
chanting therein, the fixed regulations for assembhng and
remaining in choir, as also such things as may be necessary
in regard of all the ministers of the church, and any other
matters of the like kind ; the provincial s3mod shall prescribe
a fixed form on each su^ect, considering the utility and
habits of each province. But, in the meantime, the bishop,
— ^with not less than two canons, one of whom shall be chosen
by the bishop, the other by the chapter, — shall be able to
provide herein as may seem to be expedient.

CHAPTER XIII.

In what manner Care must he taken fcyr the Power Catliedral and Parish
Churches, Parishes to be distinguished by certain Boundaries,

Insomuch as very many cathedral churches have so slight
a revenue, and are so small, that they by no means answer
to the episcopal dignity, nor suffice for the necessities of the
churches; the provincial council, having summoned those
whose interests are concerned, shall examine and diligently
weigh, what churches it may be expedient, on account of
their narrow extent and their poverty, to unite to others in
the neighbourhood, or to augment with fresh revenues ; and
shall send the documents prepared touching the aforesaid to
the Sovereign Eoman Pontiff; and the Sovereign Pontiff,
being thereby informed, shall, of his own prudence, as he
may judge to be expedient, either unite together the poor
churches, or improve them by some addition derived from
the fruits. But in the meantime, until the aforesaid things
are carried into effect, provision shall be made by the Sove-
reign Pontiff for those bishops who, on account of the
poverty of their dioceses, need the aid of fruits, out of cer*

OK BSFOBMATIOK. 201

tain benefices, provided, howerer, thej be not cures, nor
dignities, cononries, prebends,, nor monasteries in which
regular observance is in force, or which are subject to
general chapters, or to certain visitors. In parish churches
also, the fruits of which are in like manner so small, that
they are insufficient to meet the necessary charges, the
bishop, if it cannot be managed by a imion of benefices, not
however those belonging to regulars, shall take care that,
by the assignment of first fruits, or tithes, or by the contri-
butions and collections of the parishioners, or in what other
way shall seem to him more convenient, as much be amassed
as may decently suffice for the necessities of the rector and
of the parish. But in whatsoever imions may have to be
made, wnether for the aforesaid, or for other causes, parish
churches shall not be imited to any monasteries soever, or
abbeys, or dignities, or prebends of a cathedral or collegiate
church, or to any other simple benefices, or hospitals, or
military orders ; and those so united shall again oe taken
cognizance of by the ordinaries, according to the decree
elsewhere made in this same synod, under Paul in.,^ of
happy memory, which shall also be equally observed in
respect to the unions [made] firom that time forth to the
present; notwithstanding an3rform soever of words which may
have been used therein, which shall be accounted as being
sufficiently expressed here. Eurthermore, all those cathe-
dral churches, the revenue of which, in real annual value,
does not exceed the sum of one thousand ducats, and those
parish churches where it does not exceed the sum of one
hundred ducats, shall not for the future be burthened with
any pensions, or reservations of fruits. In those cities and
places, likewise, where the parish churches have no certain
boundaries, neither have their rectors their own proper
people to govern, but administer the sacraments to all pro-
miscuously who seek it, the holjr synod commands bishops,
that for the more perfect security of the salvation of the
souls committed to their charge, having divided the peojple
into fixed and proper parishes, they shall assign to each its
own perpetual and peculiar parish priest, who may know
his own parishioners, and from whom alone they may law-

' See Sega, vii* de ref. c. 6.

202 BESSIOK XXIY.

fully receive the sacraments ; or they shall make such other
provision as may be more profitable, according as the cha«
racter of the place may require. And they shall also ta^e
care that the same be done, as soon as possible, in those
cities and places where there are no parish churches ; any
privileges and customs, even though immemorial, notwith-
standing.

CHAPTER XIV.

Thai no one he admitted to the Posaesnon of a Benefice, or of Distribuiions,
with a DiatribiUion of tite Fruits not to be applied to Pious Uses.

In many churches, as well cathedral as collegiate and
parochial, it is imderstood to be the practice, derived either
from their own constitutions, or from some evil custom, that
upon any election, presentation, nomination, institution, con-
firmation, collation, or other provision or admission to the
possession of any cathedral church, benefice, canonries, or
prebends, or to a participation in the revenues, or the daily
oistributions, there are introduced certain conditions, or
deductions from the fruits, payments, promises, or unlawfiil
compensations, as also the profits which are in some churches
called Tumorum lucra.y w hereas the holy synod detests
these practices, it enjoins on bishops, that they suffer not
anything of this kind to be done, unless [the proceeds there-
of] be turned to pious uses, nor permit any of those modes
of entering [on benefices] which carry suspicion of a simon-
iacal taint, or of sordid avarice ; and they themselves shall
carefiilly take cognizance of their constitutions, or customs
in the matters above mentioned ; and, those only being ex-
cepted which they approve of as laudable, the rest they shall
reject and abolish as corrupt and scandalous. And it de-
crees that those, who act in any way contrary to the things
comprised in this present decree, are liable to the penalties
set forth against simoniacs by the sacred canons, and various
constitutions of the Sovereign Pontiffs, aU which this synod
renews ; any statutes, constitutions, customs, even though

7 These seem to have been certain perquisites attached to the office of
the Turnarius, or Hebdomadarius. The word "tumus" was used in a
variety of senses, more or less analogous to the English and French
cognates. See Du Cange, and Carpenter's Supplement.

OV BEFOBKATIOK. 208

immemorial, even though confirmed bj the apostolic autho-
rity notwithstanding ; the bishop, as the delegate of the
Apostolic See, shall have power to take cognizance touching
any surreption, obreption, or defect of intention, in regard
thereof.

CHAPTEBXV.

Jfeihod of increasing the Sligkl Prtbend» of Cathedrtd cmdefemi/MnU

CoHegiaJte Churches.

In cathedral, and eminent collegiate churches where the
prebends ore numerous, and so small, that, even with the
daily distributions, they are insufficient for the decent main-
tenance of the rank of the canons, according to the character
of the place, and of the persons, it shall be lawful for the
bishop, with the consent of the chapter, either to unite
thereunto certain simple benefices, not however such as be-
long to regulars, or, if provision cannot be made in this way^
they may reduce those prebends to a less number, by sup-
pressing some of them, with the consent of the palron, if
the right of patronage belong to laymen, the firuits and pro-
ceeds of which shall be applied to the daily distributions of
the remaining prebends ; in such wise, however, that such
a number shall be left as may conveniently answer for the
celebration of divine worship, and for the dignity of the
church ; any constitutions and privileges soever, or any re-
servation whether general or special, or any application
soever notwithstanding. Nor shall the aforesaid unions or
suppressions be set aside or hindered by any manner of pro-
vision soever, not even by force of any resignation, or by
any other derogations or suspensions soever.

CHAPTER XVI.
Wh<U Duty devolves upon the Chapter during the Vacancy of a See.

The chapter, when a see is vacant, in those places where
the duty ot receiving the fruits devolves upon it, shall ap-
point one or more faithM and diligent stewards to take
care of the ecclesiastical property and revenues, of which
they shall afterwards give an account to him to whom it may
appertain. It shall also be by all means bound, within ei^ht
days after the decease of the bishop, to appoint an official.

2(>4i SESSTOK XXIY.

or vicar, or to confirm the existing one ; who shall at least
be a doctor, or a licentiate, of canon law, or otherwise as
competent a person as can be found. If the contrary be
done, such appointment shall devolve on the metropolitan.
And if the church be itself the metropolitan, or exempted,
and the chapter shall be, as has before been said, negligent,
then the oldest of the suffragans in that metropolitan, and
the nearest bishop in that [church] that is exempted, shall
have power to appoint a competent steward and vicar. And
the bishop, who is promoted to the said vacant church, shall
require, from the said steward, vicar, and iall other officers
and administrators, who during the vacancy of the see, were,
by the, chapter, or others, appointed in his room, even though
they should belong to the chapter itself, an account of those
things which concern him, touching their Auctions, juris-
diction, administration, or of any other their office soever;
and shall be able to punish those who have been guilty of
delinquency in their office or administration, even though
the officials aforesaid, having given in their accounts, may
have obtained an absolution or discharge from the chapter,
or those deputed thereby. The chapter shall also be bound
to render an account to the said bishop of any papers be-
longing to the church, if any such have come into the pos-
session of the chapter.

CHAPTER XVII.

Limit i^ set to the conf erring or retention of more than One Ben^ce,

Whereas ecclesiastical order is perverted when one clerk
fills the offices of several, it has been holily provided by the
sacred canons that no one ought to be enrolled in two
churches. But insomuch as many, through the passion of
wicked covetousness, deceiving themselves, not God, blush
not to elude, by various artifices, those things which have
been so excellently ordained, and to hold several benefices
at the same time ; the holy synod, desiring to restore the
discipline required for the government of the church, doth
by this present decree, which it commands to be observed
in regard of all persons soever, by what title soever they be
distinguished, even though it be by the dignity of the cardi-
nalate, ordain, that, for the future, one ecclesiastical benefice

ON BEFOBMATION. 20^

only sball be conferred on one and the same person. If
indeed that be not sufficient to afford a decent livelihood to
the person on whom it is conferred, it shall then be lawful
to bestow on him some other simple benefice that may be
sufficient ; provided that both do not require personal resi-
dence. And this shall hold good not only as touching
cathedral churches, but also all other benefices soever,
whether secular or regular, even those held in commendam^
of what title and quality soever thev may be. But they who
at present hold several parochial churches, or one cathedral
and one parochial church, shall be absolutely obliged, all
dispensations soever and unions for life notwithstanding,
retaining one parochial church only, or the cathedral church
alone, to resign the other parochial churches within the
space of six months. Otherwise, as well the parish churches,
as also all the benefices which they hold, shall be accounted
by the very fact void, and as void shall be freely conferred
on other competent persons ; nor shall they who previously
held them be able to retain the fruits thereof, with a safe
conscience, after the said time. But the holy synod desires
that provision be made in some convenient maimer, as may
seem fit to the Sovereign Pontiff, for the necessities of those
resigning.

CHAPTER XVIIL

Upon a Parish Church hecommg vacaitt, a Vicar (stole deputed therewnto
ly the Bishop, wrUU it he provided mith a Pariah Priest. In what Form
and by whom those nominated to Parocliial Churches ouglU to be
examined.

It is most especially expedient for the salvation of souls, to
be governed by worthy and competent parish priests. To
the end that this may more diligently and rightly be accom-
plished, the holy synod ordains, that when a vacancy [occurs]
in a parish church, whether by death, or by resignation, even
in the Roman Court, or in any other manner soever, though
it may be alleged that the cnarge devolves on the church
[itself], or on the bishop, and though it may be administered
bv one or more priests, and this even in the case of those
cturches called patrimonial, or receptive, in which the bishop
has been accustomed to assign the cure of souls to one or
more, all of whom [this synod] commands to be subjected
to the examination herein prescribed later, even though the

20& BESSIOK XXIY.

said parisli church happen to be reserved, or appropriated^
whether generally or specially, even by force oi an indult,
or privilege granted in favour of cardinals of the holy
Boman Church, or of certain abbots, or chapters ; it shall
be the duty of the bishop, at once, upon gaining information
of the vacancy of the church, to appoint, u need be, a
competent vicar to the same, with a suitable assignment, at
his own discretion, of a portion of the fruits, that he may
support the duties of the said church, until it be provided
with a rector. .< Moreover," the bishop, and he who has the
right of patronage, shall, within ten days, or some other
term, to be prescribed by the bishop, nominate, in the
presence of those to be deputed as examiners, certain clerks
as competent to govern the said church. It shall, never*
theless, be free for others also, who may know any that are
fit for that o£Bce, to give in their names, that a diligent
scrutiny may afterwards be made touching the age, morals,
and suflSciency of each. And, if it shall seem more ex-
pedient to the bishop, or the provincial synod, according to
the custom of the country, those who may wish to be
examined may be summoned by a public edict. AVlien the
time appointed has transpired, all those who have been
entered on the list shall be examined by the bishop, or, if
he be hindered, by liis vicar-general, and by the other
examiners, not fewer than three ; to whose votes, if they
should be equal, or given to distinct parties,* the bishop, or
his vicar, may add [their casting vote] in favour of whomso-
ever they shall think most fit. And as regards the exa-
miners, six at least shall be annually proposed by the bishop,
or by his vicar, in the diocesan synod ; who shall satisty,
and be approved of by the synod. And upon any vacancy
happening in any church, the bishop shall choose three out
of that number to make the examination with him ; and
afterwards, upon another vacancy following, he shall select,
out of the six aforesaid, either the same, or three others,
whom he may prefer. But the said examiners shall be
masters, or doctors, or licentiates in theology, or in canon
law, or such other clerks, whether regulars, even of the
order of mendicants, or even seculars, as shall seem most

* Singulares.

Oir BEPOBHATIOK. 207

competent thereunto ; and they shall all swear on the holy
Gt)spels of Gtoiy that they will, every human aflfection set
aside, faithfully perform their duty. And they shall beware
of receiying anything whatever, either before or after, on
account of this examination ; otherwise, both themselves
and the parties giving [such gratuities] wiU incur the guilt
of simony, from which they shall not be capable of being
absolved, until after they have resigned the benefices of
which they were possessed in any manner soever, even
before ; and they shall be rendered incapable of any others
for the future. And in regard to all these matters, they
shall be bound to render an account, not only before Gk)dt
but also, if need be, to the provincial synod, by which, at its
discretion, if it be ascertained that they have done anything
contrary to their duty, they shall be liable to be severely
punished. Then, after the examination is completed, report
shall be made of all those who shall have been judged, by the
said [examiners], competent by age,morals,leaming,prudencey
and other suitable qualifications, to govern the vacant church.
And out of these shall the bishop select him. whom he shall
judge more competent than the rest ; and to him, and to
none other, shall the church be collated by him im.to whom
it belongs to collate thereunto. But if the church be imder
ecclesiastical patronage, and the institution [thereunto]
belong to the bishop, and not to another, he, whom the
patron shall judge the most worthy from amongst those
approved of by the examiners, shafi be presented to the
bishop, that he may be instituted by him. But when the
institution is to be made by any other than the bishop, then
the bishop alone shall choose the worthiest from amongst
the worthy, whom the patron shall present to him whom the
institution concerns. But if it be imder lay patronage, the
person who shall be presented by the patron, must be
examined, as above, by those deputed, and not be admitted,
unless he be found fit. And, in all the above-mentioned
cases, to none other but to one of those who have been
examined as aforesaid, and have been approved by the
examiners, according to the aforesaid rule, shall the care
of the church be committed, nor shall any devolution, or
appeal, even interposed before the Apostolic See, or the
legates, vice-legates, or nuncios of that same see, or before

any bishops, or metropolitans, primates, or patriarchs, hinder
or suspend the report of the aforesaid examiners from being
carried into execution: for the rest, the vicar whom the
bishop has, at his own discretion, already for the time being
deputed to the vacant church, or whom he may perhaps
afterwards depute thereunto, shall not be removed from
the charge and administration of the said church, until it be
provided for, either by [the appointment of] the same [vicar],
or of another person, who has been approved and elected as
above. All provisions or institutions made otherwise than
according to the aforesaid form, shall be accounted surrep-
titious : any exemptions, indults, privileges, preventions,
appropriations, new provisions, indults granted to any
universities soever, even for a certain sum, and any other
impediments soever, in opposition to this decree, notwith-
standing.

If, however, the said parish churches should possess so
slight a revenue, that it allow not of the trouble of all this
examination; or should there be no one who seeks to subject
himself to this examination ; or if, by reason of the open
factions, or dissensions, which are K)und in some places,
more grievous quarrels and tumults mav easily be excited ;
the ordinary, omitting this formality, if, in his conscience,
with the advice of the [examiners] deputed, it shall seem to
be expedient, may have recourse to a private examination,
observing, however, the other things as above. It shall also be
lawful for the provincial synod, if it shall accoimt that there
are any matters to be added to, or retrenched from, the
above regulations touching the form of examination, to
provide accordingly,

CHAPTER XIX.

Mandates " de p^ovidendo," Expectatives, and otha* Thinr/s of the Like

Kind are abrogated.

The holy synod decrees, that mandates "de providendo,"*
and those graces which are called expectant,^ shall no more
be granted to any one, not even to colleges, universities,
senates, or to any individuals soever, even though under the

• /. e. mandates given by the pope to bishops, recommending the pro*
motion of a certain person to a vacant benefice.

^ I.e. directions to promote a certain person to the first vacant benefice.

OK BCrOBMATIOK. 209

unme of nn indult, or up to a certain sum, or under any
other colourable pretext ; nor shall it be lawful for any one
to make use of such as have been heretofore so granted. In
like manner, neither shall any mental resenrations,^' nor
any other graces soever in regard of future vacancies in
benefices, nor indults [which apply] to churches belonging
to others, or to monasteries, be panted to any, not even to
cardinals of the holy Boman Church ; and those hitherto
granted shall be looked upon as abrogated.

CHAPTER XX.

The Manner of conducting Catues appertaining to the Scdesiasttcal Court

is prescribed.

All causes in any way belonging to the ecclesiastical
court, even though they may relate to benefices, shall, in
the first instance, be taken cognizance of, before the ordi-
naries of the places only; and shall be completely terminated
within two years at latest from the time that the suit was
commenced : otherwise, after that time, it shall be free for
the parties, or for either of them, to have recoiu*se to supe-
rior, but otherwise competent, judges, who shall take up the
cause as it shall then stand, and shall take care that it be
terminated as soon as possible ; nor, before then, shall [the
causes] be committed to any others,* nor be transferred
therefrom; nor shall any appeals interposed by the same
parties be received by any superior [judges] soever; nor
shall any commission, or inhibition be issued by them^
except upon a definitive, or one that has the force of a de-
finitive sentence, and the grievance arising from which
cannot be redressed by an appeal from that definitive
[sentence]. Prom these are to be excepted those causes,
which, according to the canonical appointments, are to be
tried before the Apostolic See, or those which the Sovereign
Eoiiian Fontifi* shaU, for an urgent and reasonable cause,
judge fit to commission, or to avocate, for his own hearing,

c When no person was named in the order for promotion to the first
vacant benefice, the commissions were called menial reservoHons, See
Ba Cange, vol. v. p. 1856, who gives a concise history of the whole sub*
ject of " reservatio."

^ I, e, than the ordinaries.

by a special rescript under the signature of his Holiness,
signed with his own hand. Eiirthermore, matrimonial and
cnminal causes shall not be left to the judgment of a dean,
archdeacon, or of other inferiors, even when on their course
of visitation, but shall be left for the examination and juris-
diction of the bishop only; even though there should at
present be a suit pending, in what stage soever of the
proceedings it may be, between any bishop, and the dean,
or archdeacon, touching the cognizance of this class of
causes: and if, in his presence, one of the parties shall
truly prove his poverty, he shall not be compelled to plead
out of the province, either in the second or third stage of
the suit, in any said matrimonial cause, unless the other
party be willing to provide for his maintenance, and also for
the expenses of the suit. Legates also, even thou£;h de
latere, nimcios, ecclesiastical governors, or others, shall not
only not presume, by force of any powers soever, to hinder
bisnops in the causes aforesaid, or in any wise to forestall or
disturb their jurisdiction, but they shall not even proceed
against clerks, or other ecclesiastical persons, until the
bishop has been first applied to, and has proved negligent-
Otherwise their proceedmgs and ordinances shall be of no
avail, and they shall be bound to make satisfaction to the
parties for the damages brought upon them. Furthermore,
if any individual should appeal in those cases allowed of by
law, or lodge a complaint touching any grievance, or other-
wise have recourse, as aforesaid, to a judge, on account of
two years having elapsed, he shall be bound to transfer, at
his own expense, to the judge of appeal, all the acts of the

Eroceedings that have been carried on before tlie bishop,
aving, however, previously apprized the said bishop ; that
so, if anything seem fit to him touching the information
pertaining to the suit, he may signify it to the judge of
appeal. But if the appellee shall appear, then shall he
also be bound to bear his proportion of the costs of the acts
transferred, provided that he wish to make use thereof:
unless it be the custom of tlie place to act otherwise, to
wit, that this entire burden fall upon the appellant. More-
over, the notary shall be bound to furnish the appellant,
upon payment of a suitable fee, with a copy of the proceed-
ings as soon as possible, and within a month at latest. And

OK BEFORMATIOK. 211

should that notary be guilty of fraud in delaying the furnish-
ing such copy, he shall be suspended frt)m the exercise of
his office, at the discretion of the ordinary, and be con-
demned to pay double the costs of the suit, to be divided
between the appellant and the poor of the place. But
if the iudge also should himself be cognizant of, or an
accomplice in, this delay, or if he shall m any other way
raise obstacles to prevent the entire proceedings being
delivered over to the appellant within that term, he shall be
subjected to the same penalty of paying double [the costs],
as above; notwithstanding, as regards all the aforesaid
matters, any privileges, indidts, agreements, which only bind
the authors thereof, and any other customs soever.

CHAPTER XXI.

It is declared thai, hy certain Words previously used, the usual Manner of
treating Business in General Cotmcils is not changed.

The holy synod, being desirous that no occasion of doubt-
ing may, at any future period, arise out of the decrees which
it has published, in explanation of the words contained in a
decree published in the first session under our most blessed
lord Pius IV., to wit, " which, the legates and presidents
proposing, shall to the said holy synod appear fitting and
proper for alleviating the calamities of these times, settling
the controversies touching religion, restraining deceitful
tongues, correcting the abuses of depraved moraS, and pro-
curing for the church a true and Christian peace," declares
that it was not its intention, that, by the aforesaid words,
the usual manner of treating matters in general councils
should be in any respect changed; or that anything new,
besides that which has been heretofore ordamed by the
sacred canons, or by the form of general councils, should be
added to, or taken nrom, any one.

INDICTION OP THE NKXT SESSION.

Yet further, the same sacred and holy synod ordains and
decrees, that the next ensuing session be held on the
Thursday after the Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary,
which will be the ninth day of the month of December next,
with the power also of abridging that term. . In which

p2

212 BESSIOX XXT.

session the sixth chapter will be treated of, which is now de-
ferred till then, and the remaining chapters on Eeformation,
which have been already seti forth, and other matters per-
taining thereunto. But if it shall seem opportune, and the
time wiU permit, certain dogmas may also be treated of,
as in their proper season they shall be proposed in the
congregations.

The term of the session was abridged^

t~

SESSION THE TWENTY-FIFTH,

Being the ninth and last under the S<yvet*eign Pontiff Pius IV,, begun on
the third, and terminated on Hie fo^irth, day of December, 1563.

DECREE TOUCHING PUBGATOBY.

"Whereas the Catholic Church, instructed by the Holy-
Ghost, has, from the sacred writings and the ancient tradi-
tion of the fathers, taught, in sacred councils, and very
recently in this cecumenical synod,^ that there is a Purga-
tory, and that the souls there detained are relieved by the
suffrages of the faithlul, but chiefly by the acceptable sacri-
fice of the altar ; the holy synod enjoins on bishops that
they diligently strive that the sound doctrine touching Pur-
gatory, delivered by the holy fathers and sacred councils,
be believed, held, taught, and everywhere proclaimed by
the faithful of Christ. But let the more difficult and subtle
questions, and those which tend not to edification,B and
from which for the most part there is no increase of piety,
be excluded from popular discourses before the imeducated
multitude. In like manner, such things as are uncertain,
or which labour under an appearance of error, let them
not allow to be made public and treated of. But those
things which tend to a certain kind of curiosity or super-
stition, or which savour of filthy lucre, let them prohibit as
scandals and stumbling-blocks of the faithful. And let the
bishops take care, that the suffrages of the faithful who are
living, to wit, the sacrifices of masses, prayers, almsgivings,
and other works of piety, which have been wont to be per-

' See Seas, ri. can. SO ; Sess. xxii. 2, 3. ^ See 1 Tim. i. 4.

OW THE INTOCATION OF 8AIKTS, ETC. 213

formed by the fSsdtliful for the other faithful departed, be
piously and devoutly performed, according to the institutes
of the Church ; and that what things soever are due on their
behalf from the endowments of testators, or in other way,
be discharged, not in a negligent manner, but diligently and
accurately, by the priests and ministers of thp church, and
others who are bound to render this service* ^

TOUOHINQ THE INVOCATION, VENERATION, AND ON BEUCS OF SAINTS, AND
y SAORED IMAGES.

/The holy synod enjoins on all bishops, and others sustain-
ing the office and charge of teaching, that, according to the
usage of the Catholic and Apostolic Church, receiYedfrom \
t]ie pnmitiye times of the Christian religion, aSl accorffiag
to the consent of the holy fethers, andijcrthe'decrees of
sacred councils, they especially instruct the faithful dili-
gently touching the intercession and invocation of saints ;^ 1
the honour paid to relics ; and the lawful use of images i
cteaching them, that the saints, who reign together with
Christ, offer up their own prayers to God for men; that it
is good and useful suppliantly to invoke them, and to resort
to their prayers, aid, and hdp, for obtaining benefits from
God, through His Son, Jesus Christ oiu* Lord, who alone is^
bur Bedeemer and Saviour ; but that they think impiously^
who deny that the saints, who enjoy eternal happmess m
lieaven, are to be invoked ; or who assert either that they
do not pray for men ; or, that the invocation of them to*
pray for each of us even in particular, is idolatry ; or, that
if is repugnant to the word of God ; and is opposed to the
hQnour of the one mediator between God and men, Christ
Jesus ;^ or, that it is foolish to supplicate, orally, or inwardly,
those who reign in heaven. Also, that the holy bodies of
holy martyrs, and of others now living with Cmcist, which
were the living members of Christ, and the temple of the
Soly Ghost} and which are by Him to be raised unto
eternal life, and to be glorified, are to be venerated by the
faithful; through which [bodies] many benefits are bestowed
by God on men; so that th^y who affirm that veneration
and honour are not due to tho relics o? saints; or, that these,
and other sacred monuments, are uselessly honoured by the

^ 1 Tim. ii. 5. » 1 Cor. ui. 16, and vi. 19.

/ faithful ; and that the places dedicated to the memories of

A the saints are vainly visited for the purpose of obtaining

\ their aid ; are wholly to be condemned, as the Church has

\ already long since condemned, and doth now also condemn

\ them.

X\^\/f Moreover, that the images of Christ, of the Virgin Mother

1 ] i^^of God,J and of the other saints, are to be had and retained

particijarly in temples, and that due honour and veneration

are to be awarded them ; not that any divinity or virtue is

believed to be in them, on account of which they are to be

worshipped ; or that anything is to be asked of them ; or

that confidence is to be reposed in images^s was of old

done by the Gentiles, who placed their hope in idols jif'^ujL.

because the honour which is shown unto them is refej^rod to

the prototypes which they represent ; in such wise that by

~fKe mages which we kiss, and before which we uncover the

<liead, and prostrate ourselves, we adore 9'^^> ^^^ venerate

the saints, whose 'similitude thov beaa^^nd this, "'by tjie

•decrees of councils, and especially ofche second synod of

_ Nicsea, has been ordained against the opponents of images.

And the bishops shall carefully teach this; that, by means
/ of the histories of the mysteries of our Redemption, de-
/ picte^/!{y paintings or other representations, the people are
instructed, and strengthened in remembering, and conti-
nually reflecting on the articles of faith ; as also that great
profit is derived from all sacred images, not only because
the people are thereby admonished of the benefits .and gifts
\ which have been bestowed upon them by Christy but also

i because the miracles of Grod through the means of the

< saints, and their salutary examples, are set before the eyes

; of the faithful ; that so lor those things they may give God

0ianks ; may brder their own life and manners in imitation
■ of the saints ; and may be excited to adore and love God,

. and to cultivate piety r But if any one shall teach or think
contrary to these decrees; let him be anathema^^)^^i!lnd if
any abuses have crept in amongst these holy aaia sialutary
observances, the holy synod earnestly desires that they.be
utterly abolished; in such wise that no images conducive to
false doctrine, and furnishing occasion of dangerous error to

i^ ■ ^ Deiparae. ^^ See Ps. cxxxiv. 18 (cxxxv. 18).

OK THE nnroOATIOK OF 8AIKT8, ETC. 215

thgjineducated, be set up. And if at times, /when it shall
he, expedient for the unlearned jpeopIeTitTiappen that the
histories ahd^narriatiyes'of hohr scripture are portrayed and
re^reBep fced-; the people shall be tsnght,- that not thereby is
the Diyinity represented, as though it could be perceived
bv the eyes of the body, or be depictured by colours or
figures. Moreover, in the invocation of saints, the vene- ,^
TSEijin of relics, and the sacred use of images, eiery super- \
8tition_8halLbe removed, all filthy lucre be abolished, finally,
civiousness be avoided ; in such wise that figures shall
not be pcunted or adorned witlija wantormOTSoTbeauty; /
nor shall men also pervert the celebration of the'saihts, and ^
the visitation of rehcs, into revellings and drunkenness ; as
if festivals are celebrated to the honour of the saints by
luxury and wantonness. Finally, let so great care and dili- *"^
gence be used by bishops touching thiese matters, as that there 1
appear nothing disorderly, or jmbecominglj or^ confusedly i
arranged, notlmg jrofane, hothirig mdeCorousj ««ca~itefm !

decometh tJie home of Gdct? - • ^j

And that these things may be the more faithfully ob-
served, the holy sytiod ordains, that it be iagfiil for iLQ_QBe
to place, or cause to be placed, any unusual image in any
place, or church, howsoever exempted»iace{itit_5iall_haio
, been approved of by the bishop : also, thalTno n5Trin»ades
are to oe' admittea, or lieWTelics received, unless the said
bishop has taken cognizance and apjproved thereof; who, as
soon as he has obtained some certam information in reg^ard
of these matters, shall, after having taken advice with theo-
logians, and other pious men, act therein as he shall judge
to be agreeable to truth and piety. But if any doubtnil, or
difficult abuse is to be extirpated ; or, in fine, if any more
serious question shall arise touching these matters, the
bishop, before he decides the controversy, shall await the
sentence of the metropolitan and of the bishops of the same
province, in a provincial council ; yet so, that nothing new,
or that has not previously been usual, in the Church, shall
be decreed, without the most holy Eoman Pontiff having
been first consulted.

* Ps. xcii. 5 (xciii. 5).

CONOEBNING BE6ULABS AND NUNS.

The samo sacred and holy synod, pursuing the subject of
BeformatioUi has thought fit that the things following be
ordained.

CHAPTER I.

All Begulara shaU order (Jieir Lives raitably to what is prescribed by the
RuU which tJiey have professed. Superiors sfiaU sedulously take care thai
this be done.

Insomuch as the holy synod is not ignorant how much
splendour and utility accrue to the Church of God from
monasteries piously instituted and rightly administered ; it
has, — to the end that the ancient and regular discipline may
be the more easily and promptly restored, where it has
fallen away, and may be the more firmly maintained, where
it has been preserved, — ^thought it necessary to enjom, as by
this decree it doth enjoin, that all regulars, as well men as
women, shall order and form their lives agreeably to the
requirements of the rule which they have professed ; and
especially, that they shall faithfully observe whatsoever
belongs to the penection of their profession; such as
obedience, poverty, and chastity, as also all other vows and
precepts that may be peculiar to any rule or order, re-
spectively appertaining to the essential character of each,
and which regard the observing a common mode of living,
food, and dress. And all care and diligence shall be applied
by the superiors, as well in the general and in the provincial
chapters, as in their visitations, which they shall not omit to
make in their proper seasons, that these things be not
departed from ; since it is certain that those things which
appertain to the substance of a regular life cannot be by
them relaxed. Por if those things which are the basis and
the foundation of all regular discipline be not exactly pre-
served, the whole edifice must of necessity fall.

CHAPTER II.

Property is wholly prohibited to Begulars,

For no regulars, therefore, whether men or women, shall
it be lawful to possess, or hold as his own, or even in the

OK BE70BMATI0K. 217

name of the convent, any property immoveable or moveable^
of what quality soever it may be, or in what way soever
acquired ; but the same shall De straightway delivered up to
the superior, and be incorporated with the convent. Nor
shall it henceforth be lawful for superiors to allow any real
property to any regular, not even by way of having the
interest or the use, the administration thereof, or in com-'
mendam. But the administration of the property of monas-
teries, or of convents, shall appertain to the officials thereof
only, removable at the will of their superiors. The superiors
shall permit the use of moveables in such manner as that
the furniture of their [monasteries] shall be suitable to the
state of poverty which they have professed ; and there shall
therein be notmng superfluous, but at tho same time nothing
which is necessary shall be refused them. But if any one
should be discovered, or be proved, to possess anything in
any other manner, he shall be deprived during two years of
his active and passive voice, and also be punished according
to the constitutions of his own rule and order.

CHAPTER III.

All M<masteiie8 which are not herein excepted may possess Real P}*op&iy,
The Ntmber of Persons therein is to he determined by the Amotint of
Income or of Alms* No MoTiastery to he erected without the Bishops
Permission, '

The holy synod permits unto all monasteries and houses,
both of men and women, and of mendicants, even those
who were forbidden by their constitutions to possess it, or
who had not received permission to that effect by apostolic

Erivilege, to possess real property: with the exception,
owever, of the houses of the brethren of St. Francis
[called] Capuchins, and those called Minor Observants,
And if any of the aforesaid places, to which it has been
granted by apostolic authorify to possess such property,
have been stripped thereof, it ordains that the same shall be
wholly restored unto them. But, in the aforesaid monasteries
and houses, as well of men as of women, whether they
possess, or do not possess, real property, such a number [of
mmates] only shall be fixed upon and retained for the future,
as can be conveniently supported either out of the proper

218 8BSSI01F XXY.

revenues of those monasteries, or out of the customary
ahns ; nor shall any such places be hereafter erected, without
the permission of the bishop, in whose diocese they are to
be erected, being first obtained.

CHAPTER IV.

A Megtdar tihaU not, vnthotU the Permitnon of hU Superior, either plcice
himself (U the Service of another place or person, or retire from his
Monastery. When dbseot for the Sake of Study, he shall reside in a
MoTuisteiy,

The holy synod prohibits, that any regular, under the
pretext of preaching, or lecturing, or of any other pious
work, place himself at the service of any prelate, prince,
university, community, or of any other person, or place
soever, without the permission of his own superior ; nor
shall any privilege or faculty, obtained from others in regard
hereof at any. tune avail him. But if any one should act
contrary hereunto, he shall be punished as disobedient, at the
discretion of his superior. Nor shall it be lawful for re-
gulars to absent themselves from their own convents, even
under the pretext of repairing to their own superiors;
unless they have been sent, or summoned, by them. And
whoever shall be found to be without the aforesaid order in
writing, shall be punished as a deserter from his institute
by the ordinaries of the places. But they who are sent to
the universities for the sake of their studfies, shall dwell in
convents only; otherwise they shall be proceeded against by
the ordinaries.

CHAPTER V.

Provision is mudefai' the Safe Enclosure ofNtms, especially those who

dwell witliout Cities,

The holy synod, renewing the constitution of Boniface
VIII., which begins Fericuloso, enjoins on all bishops, by
the judgment of God to which it appeals, and imder the
threat of eternal malediction, that, by their ordinary
authority, in all monasteries subject to them, and in others,
by that of the Apostolic See, they take especial care that
the enclosure of nuns be carefully restored, wheresoever it
has been violated, and that it be preserved, wheresoever it

ON BErOBMATIOK. 219

has not been violated ; repressing, by ecclesiastical censures
and other penalties, any appeal soever being set aside, the
disobedient and gainsayers, and even calling in nnto this
end, if need be, the aid of the secular arm. The holy
synod exhorts Christian princes to furnish this aid, and
enjoins it, under pain of excommunication, to be by the
very fact incurrec^ upon all civil magistrates. But K>r no
holy nun, after her profession, shall it be lawful to go out of *
her convent, even for a brief period, under any pretext
soever, except for some lawful cause, to be approved of by
the bishop ; any indults and privileges soever notwitn-
standing. And it shall not be lawful for any one, of what
birth, or condition, sex, or age soever, to enter within the
enclosures of a monastery,™ without the permission of the
bishop, or of the superior, obtained in writing, under the
pain of excommunication to be by the very fact incurred.
But the bishop, or the superior, ought to grant this per-
mission only in necessary cases ; nor shall any other person
be able by any means [to grant it], even by force of any
&culty, or indult already granted, or hereafter to be granted.
And inasmuch as those monasteries of nuns wmch are
established without the walls of a city or town, are exposed,
often without any guard, to the plunder and other deeds of
wicked men, the bishops and other superiors shall, if it seem
expedient to them, take care that the nuns be removed £rom
those places to new or old monasteries within cities or
populous towns, even calling in, if need be, the aid of the
secular arm. But those who hinder them or disobey, they
shall by ecclesiastical censures compel to submit.

CHAPTER VI.

The Manner of choonnff Superiors,

To the end that everything may be conducted uprightly
and without any fraud, m the election of all manner soever
of superiors, temporary abbots, and other officials, and
generals, and abbesses, and other women set over [others],

*" It is well to observe that in the decrees of the Council of Trent the
popular distinction between a convent and a monastery is not preserved,
both terms being indiscriminately applied to any place of religious retire*
ment for either sex.

►

the holy synod above all things strictly enjoins, that all the
aforesaid ought to be chosen by secret voting, in such wise
as that the names of the respective voters shall never be
made known. Neither shall it, for the future, be lawful to
constitute provincials, or abbots, priors, or any other titu-
laries soever, for the purposes of an election that is to take
place J nor to supply the place of the voices and suffrages
of those absent. But if any one should be elected contrary
to the constitution of this decree, such election shall be
invalid; and he who shall have allowed himself, for this
purpose, to be created provincial, abbot, or prior, shall from
that time forth be incapable of holding any offices soever in
that order; and any faculties that have been granted in
these matters shall be looked upon as hereby abrogated;
and should any others hereafter be granted, they shall be
accounted as surreptitious.

CHAPTER VII.

WhcU Persara and in what manner Persons are to he dtosen Abbesses, or
CfovemesseSf'^ by what Name soever. No one shall be set over two Nvn-
neries.

No woman shall be elected abbess, or prioress, or by what
other name soever she who is appointed and placed over
[others] may be called, who is less than forty years of age,
and who has not passed eight of those years in a praise-
worthy manner, after having declared her profession. But
shoidd no one be found in the same monastery with these
qualifications, one may be elected out of another monastery
of the same order. But if this also shall seem inconvenient
to the superior who presides over the election, with tlie
consent oi the bishop, or other superior, tliere may be one
chosen from amongst those, in the same convent, who have
exceeded their thirtieth year, and who have, since their
profession, passed at least five of those years in an upright
manner. But no female shall be set over two convents;
and if any one is, in any way, in possession of two or more,
she shall, retaining one, be constrained to resign the rest
within six months : but after that period, if she have not
resigned, they shall be all by tlie very fact vacant. And he

" Prisfectae.

OK BEFOBMATIOK. 221

t^ho presides at the election, whether it be the bishop, or
other superior, shall not enter the enclosures of the monas-
tery, but shall listen to, or receive the votes of each, at the
little window in the gates.** In other matters, the constitu-
tion of the respective orders, or convents, shall be observed.

CHAPTER VIII.

In what maimer the BeguUUwii of Monasteries which have not Ordinary

Hegular Viakors is to he instituted.

All monasteries which are not subject to general chapters,
or to bishops, and which have not their own ordinary regular
visitors, but have been accustomed to be governed under the
immediate protection and direction of the Apostolic See,
shall be bound, within a year from the end of the present
council, and thenceforth every third year, to form them-
selves into congregations, according to the form of the
constitution of Innocent III., in a general council, which
begins In singulis ; and shall there depute certain regulars
to deliberate and ordain touching the manner and order of
establishing the aforesaid congregations, and the statutes
therein to be observed. But should they be negligent in
these matters, it shall be lawful for the metropolitan, in
whose province are the aforesaid monasteries, to convoke
them for the aforesaid purposes, as the delegate of the
Apostolic See. But if, withm the limits of one province,
there be not a sufficient number of such monasteries for the
establishing of a congregation, the monasteries of two or
three provinces may form one congregation. And when the
said congregations have been established, their general
chapters, and the presidents or visitors elected by them,
shall have the same authority over the monasteries of their
own congregation, and over the regulars dwelling therein,
as other presidents and visitors have in other orders ; and
they shall be bound to visit frequently the monasteries of
their own congregation, and to apply themselves to the
reformation thereof; and to observe what things soever
have been decreed in the sacred canons, and in this sacred
council. Also, if, at the instance of the metropolitan, they

^ Ante cancellorum fenestellam.

shall not take care to execute the above, they shall be sub-
jected to the bishops, in whose dioceses the aforesaid places
are situated, as the delegates of the Apostolic See.

CHAPTER IX.

Monasteries ofNtms immediately subject to the Apostolic See shall be governed
by the Bisfiops; but others, by those dep^tUed in the Qeneral Chapters, or
by other Eeffulars,

Those monasteries of nuns which are immediately subject
to the Apostolic See, even those which are denominated
under the name of chapters of St. Peter, or of St. John, or
by what other name soever, shall be governed by the bishops,
as delegates of the Apostolic See ; any matters soever not-
withstanding. But tnose which are governed by persons
deputed in general chapters, or by other regulars, shall be
\eu, under their care and charge.

CHAPTER X.

NwM slioU confess and communicate once a month. The Bisfiop sludl pro*
vide them vnth an Extraordinary Confessor, Tlie Eucltarist shall not be
reserved for them otU of the public Church,

Bishops and other superiors of monasteries of holy nuns,
shall attend diligently that the nuns be admonished, in their
constitutions, to make a confession of their sins, and to receive
the most holy Eucharist, at least once a month, that so they
may fortify themselves, by that salutary defence, bravely to
overcome all the assaults of the devil. But besides the
ordinary confessor, another extraordinary one shall, twice or
thrice a year, be offered to them by the bishop and other
superiors, whose duty it shaU be to hear the confessions of
all [the nuns]. But the holy synod forbids that the most
holy body of Christ be kept witnin the choir, or the enclo-
sures of the convent, and not in the public church ; any
privilege or indult soever notwithstanding.

OTX BXFOBMATIOK. 223

CHAPTER XI.

In Monasteriei upon which the Cwrt ofSoult u tharged qf Laymen, hetidei
thoee teho are of their own hovsehM, the Biikop tikcM, with certain exoqt-
tions, examine those Women^ who aretoheeet over the said CWe.

In monasteries, or houses -whether of men, or of women,
upon which is charged the cure of souls of other secular
persons besides those who are of the household of those
monasteries, or places; the persons, whether regulars or
seculars, who exercise that cure, shall be immediately sub-
ject, in whatsoever appertains to the said cure and the ad-
ministration of the sacraments, to the jurisdiction, visitation,
and correction of the bishop in whose diocese [those monas-
teries] are situated; nor shall any, not even such as are
removable at will, be deputed thereunto, save with the con-
sent of the said [bishopj, and after a previous examination
being made by him, or by his vicar ; the monastery of Cluny
with its limits being excepted ; and also those monasteries,
or places, in which abbots, generals, or the heads of orders
have their usual principal residence; as also the other
monasteries, or houses, in which the abbots, or other supe-
riors of regulars, exercise episcopal and temporary jurisoic-
tion over the parish priests and their parishioners ; saving,
however, the right of those bishops who exercise a greater
jurisdiction over the aforesaid places or persons.

CHAPTER XII.

Jtegulare, as well as Seculars, shall he equally hound*^ to the observance of

Episcopal Censwres and Festivals,

Censures and interdicts, not only those emanating firom
the Apostolic See, but also those promulgated by the ordi-
naries, shall, upon the bishop's mandate, be published and
observed by regulars in their churches. The festival days
also which the said bishop shall enjoin to be observed in ma
own diocese, shall be kept by all exempted persons, even
regulars.

P Prseficiendas. i Conformentur in observatione.

22^ SESSION XXY.

CHAPTER XIII.

Tlie BltHiop afiaU teUle Diipuies concerning Pi^cedence, Exempted Penom,
not living in the more Strict Endo9m^8, oi'e obliged to attend at Public
Procesnons,

All disputes concerning precedence, which very often,
with the greatest scandal, arise between ecclesiastics, both
secular and regular, as well at public processions, as at those
which take place in burying the bodies of the dead, or car-
rying the canopy,' and on other similar occasions, the bishop
shall settle, all appeal being set aside, and any circumstances
notwithstanding. And all exempted persons soever, as well
secular as regular clerks, and even monks, on being sum-
moned to public processions, shall be obliged to attend;
those only being excepted who live perpetually in more
strict enclosure.

CHAPTER XIV.
JBy whom Pwnishment is to he ir\/licted on a Regular who offends publicly.

A regular who, not being subject to the bishop, resides
within the enclosures of a monastery, and has, without that
enclosure, transgressed so notoriously as to be a scandal to
the people, shall, at the instance of the bishop, be severely
punished by his own superior, within a time to be appointed
by the bishop ; and [the superior] shall inform the bishop
concerning such punishment. If not, he shall himself be
deprived of his office by his own superior, and the delinquent
may be punished by the bishop.

CHAPTER XV.

Profession shaU not he made except after the Elajise of a Yearns Probation,
and at the Age of Sixteen Years completed.

In no religious body* soever, shall the profession, whether
of men or women, be made before the sixteenth year is com-
pleted; nor shall any one be admitted to the profession,
who has been less than a year under probation since taking
the habit. And any profession made earlier shall be null ;
and shall not bring with it any obligation to the observance

' Umbella. Cf. Du Cange, Glo3s. t. vi. p. 1669. ■ Religione.

OM hefobmatios. 22u

of any rule, or of any religioiu body, or order ; or entail any
other effects Boever.

CHAPTER XVL

J JIfNHMCiatUM or (Mijalion Jnadepmiovt to Oie Tvo HoHtiit •atarat
to Ihe Pn^fMiion ihall be bhK, The Probalim being etuUd. lie Jfutica
ihaUeilher be pro/ateii or diimiited. In tie Pioat Imlituteof Clerktof
d< Bociels of Jaai nothing u ijinoraUd. A cavent u intcrled, to the
egect ^mt MO part of ike Proputg of a Novice e/iail be ffivn to a Manat-
ten/ bfon Profemva.

Moreover, no renunciation,

even thongli upon oath,

obligation made earlier,
p our of any piouH object
soever, Bliall have force, unless it bo made with the pcmiinsion
of the biahop, or of his vicar, within the two mouths imme-
diately preceding profession ; nud it shall not otherwise bo
understood \o obtain its effect, unless the profession have
followed tjiereupon : but if mode in any other manner, even
though with the eipress renunciation of this privileec, even
upon oath, it shall bo invalid and of no effect. When the
period of the noviciate is ended, the superiors shall admit
those novices, whom they have found quouiied, to professioo ;
or they shall dismiss them from the monastery. By these
things, however, the holy synod does not intend to make
any innovation, or to prohibit, but that the religious order
of clerks of the Society of Jesus be able to serve God and
His Church, according to their pious institute, approved by
the holy Apostolic See. And, furthermore, before the pro-
fession of a novice, whether mole or femoje, nothing snail
be given to the monnstery out of the property of the soiue,
either by parents, or relatives, or guardians, under any jjrc-
tejt soever, except for food and clothing, for the time in
which they are under probation ; lest [tho said uovico] bo
unable to leave on tliis account, that the mouostoiy is in
possession of the whole, or of the greater port of his sub-
stanee; and he be not easily able to recover it, if he uluudd

leave. Yea rather tho ho

of anathema on the givers

means done ; and that, to

^_&SBbn, all thin^l^lt were

ml (-iijoins, under llie pain

rni\rrN, that this he hy no

■ lio leave boforo tlioir pro-

■ restored to thom. And

even by cculoaiaatical

226 BssaiOK xzr.

CHAPTER XVII.

A Girl more than Twdve Years of Age who wi^ies to talx the JUgtUar
Hahit afiall be examined by tJie Ordinary and again befwe Professtum,

The holy synod, considenng the freedom of the profession
on the part of virgins to be dedicated to God, ordains and
decrees, that if a girl who desires to take the religious habit,
be more than twelve years of age, she shall not take that
habit, neither shall she herself, nor any other, at a later
period, make her profession, until the bishop, or, if he be
absent or hindered, his vicar, or some one deputed there-
unto by them, and at their expense, has diligently examined
into the inclination of the virgin, , whether she has been,
constrained or seduced thereunto, or knows what she is doing;
and if her. will be found pious and fi*ee, and she have the
qualifications required by the rule of that monastery and
order ; and if also the monastery be a suitable one ; it shall
be free for her to make her profession. And lest the bishop
be in ignorance as to the time of the said profession, the
governess of the monastery shall be bound to give him
notice thereof a month beforehand. And if the governess
do not inform the bishop thereof, she shall be suspended
from her office, for as long a time as shall seem fit to the
bishop.

CHAPTER XVIII.

No one, except in the Cases expressed by Law, shall compel a Womam to enter
a Monastery ; or prevent her, if desirous to enter. The Constitutions of the
Penitents or Convertites, sfiall be preserved.

The holy synod subjects to anathema all and each those
persons, oi what quahty or condition soever they may be,
whether clerks or laymen, seculars or regulars, or sustaining
what dignity soever, who shall, in any way soever, force any
virgin, or widow, or any other woman soever, except in the
cases laid down in law, to enter a monastery against her
will, or to assume the habit of any religious order, or to
declare her profession ; as also all those who shall lend their
counsel, aid, or favour thereimto; and those also who,
knowing that she does not voluntarily enter into the monas-
tery, or take the habit, or declare her profession, shall, in
any way, interfere in that act, either by their presence, or

09 BXrOBHATiaK. 227 '

consent, or authority. It also subjects to a like anathema;
those who shall, in any way, without a just cause, hinder
the holy wish of virgins, or other women, to take the veiL-
or declare their tows. And all and each of those things which
ought to be done before profession, or at the profession
itself^ shall be observed not only in monasteries subject to:
the bishop, but also in all others soever. Prom thesa
[rules], however, are excepted those women who are called
penitents, or convertites ; in regard to whom their consti^
tutions shall be observed.

CaaAFTER XIX.

How to proceed tn CauB of those loho \wUh to\ give wxyfrom, a Hdigunu

Body.

Whatsoever regular shall pretend that he entered into a
religious order through violence and intimidation ; or shall
even allege that he made profession before the fitting ae^ ;
or any such [pretext] ; and would wish to lay aside his habit,
be the cause what it may ; or would even withdraw with his
habit without the permission of his superiors; shall be
listened to, unless it be within five years only fix)m the day
of his profession, and not then either, unless he have pro-
duced before his own superior, and the ordinary, the reasons
which he pretends. But if, before [doing so], he has of his
own accord laid aside his habit; he shall in no wise be
admitted to allege any cause soever ; but shall be compelled
to return to his monastery, and be punished as an apostate;
and meanwhile shall not have the benefit of any privilege of
his order. Also, no regular shall, by force of any faculty
soever, be transferred to a less rigid order ; nor shall pet*
mission be granted to any regular to wear secretly the habit
of his order.

CHAPTER XX.

Superiors of Orders not subject to Bishops shaU visit and correct inferior
Mon{tsterieSf even though held in conunendam.

Abbots, who are heads of orders, and the other superiors
of the aforesaid orders, who are not subject to bishops, but
possess a lawful jurisdiction over other inferior monasteries,
or priories, shall, each in his own place and order, offici-

q2

ally visit the said monasteries and priories subject to them,
even though they be held in commendam, "Which, seeing
they are subject to the heads of their own orders, the
holy synod declares that they are not included in what
has been elsewhere decreed touching the visitation of
monasteries held in commendam; and those who preside
over monasteries of the aforesaid orders shall be bound
to receive the aforesaid visitors, and to execute their pr«
ders. Also, those monasteries themselves which are the
heads of orders, shall be visited according to the consti-
tutions of the holy Apostolic See, and of each respective
order. And so long as such commendatory [monasteries]
fihall continue, there shall be appointed, by the general
chapters, or by the visitors of the said orders, priors claus-
tral, or superiors in those priories that have a convent, who
may exercise spiritual authority and correction. In all
other matters the privileges and faculties of the aforesaid
orders, which concern the persons, places, and rights thereof,
shall be firm and inviolate.

CHAPTER XXI.

Monastetnes shall he conferred upon Regulanra. Tlie Headships of Jieligious
Bodies shall be commended to no one in posterum.

. "Whereas very many monasteries, even abbeys, priories,
and provostries, have suffered no light injuries, both in
spiritual and temporal matters, through the mal-administra-
tion of those to whom they have been intrusted, the holy
synod desires by every means to restore them to a discipline
befitting a monastic life. But so hard and difficult is the
present state of the times, that a remedy can neither be
applied forthwith to all, nor common to all places, as it
would desire. Nevertheless, that it may not omit anything
by which wholesome provision may in time be made against
tne evils aforesaid, it trusts in the first place, tliat the most
holy Roman Pontiff" will, of his piety and prudence, take
care, as far as he sees that the times will permit, that over
those monasteries which are at present held in commendam^
xind which possess their own convents, there be appointed
regulars, expressly professed of the same order, who are able
to guide and govern the flock. And as to such as shall

09 BErOBlCATIOK. 229

hereafter become yacant, they shall be conferred solely on
regidars of ascertained virtue and holiness. But as regards
those monasteries which are the heads and chiefs of orders,
whether the filiations of their heads be called abbeys or
priories,^ those who at present hold them in commendam
shall be bound, unless provision be made for a regular suc-
cessor thereunto, either to make, within six months, a solemn
profession of the religious life peculiar to the said orders, or
to resign them ; otherwise the aforesaid places held in com^
mendam shall be accounted by the very fact vacant. But,
lest any fraud may be used as regards all and each of the afore-
said matters, the holy synod commands, that in the appoint-
ments to the said monasteries, the quality of each individual
be specifically expressed ; and any appointment made other-
wise shall be accounted surreptitious, and shall not be ren-
dered valid by any subsequent possession, even though for
the term of three years.

CHAPTER XXII.

2%e Decrees touching the lUformation of BegtUart shall be carried iiUo

exectUion without delay.

The holy sjnoi enjoins, that all and each of the matters
contained in the above decrees be observed in all convents
and monasteries, colleges and houses of all monks and
regulars soever, as also of all religious virgins and widows
soever, even though they live under the conduct of the mili-

S orders, of the order even [of St. John] of Jerusalem,
by what name soever they may be designated, under
what rule or constitutions soever they may be, or under the
charge or government of, or in subjection to, connection
with, or dependence on, any order soever, whether of mendi-
cants or not mendicants, or of other regular monks, or
canons of what kind soever : any privileges soever of all and
each of the above named, under what form of words soever
expressed, even those called mare magnum, even those ob-
tained at their foundation, as also any constitutions and
rules soever, even though sworn to, and also any customs
or prescriptions soever, even though immemorial, notwith-

* Sive abbatise give prioratus filiee illorum capitum nuncupantur.

v280 BESSIOK XXT.

standing. But, if there be any regulars, whether men or
women, who are living under stricter rtde or statutes, the
holy synod does not intend to remove them from their in-
stitute and observance, except as touching the power of
Eossessing real property in common. And msomuch as the
oly synod desii*es that all and each of the things aforesaid
be put in execution as soon as possible, it enjoins on all
bishops that, in the monasteries subject to them, and in all
the rest especially committed to them in the former decrees ;
and on all abbots, and generals, and other superiors of the
aforesaid orders ; that they forthwith put in execution the
matters aforesaid. And if there be anything which is not
carried into execution, the provincial councils shall remedy
and punish the negligence of the bishops ; and that of regu-
lars, their provincial and general chapters ; and, in default
of general chapters, the provincial councils shall, by the
deputing of certain persons of the same order, provide
herein.

The holy 83mod also exhorts all kings, princes, republics,
and magistrates, and by virtue of holy obedience enjoins
ihem, that they vouchsafe to interpose, as often as they
shall be requested, their help and authority in support of
the aforesaid bishops, abbots, generals, and other superiors
in the execution of the matters of reformation comprised
above, that so they may, without any hindrance, nghtly
execute the preceding matters unto the praise of AlmigWy
God.

DECREE CONCERNING REFORMATION.

CHAPTER I.

'Cardinals and all Prelates of the Churches shall have a Modest ffomehold
and Table. They shall not enrich their Relatives or Domestics out of the
Property of the Church.

It is to be wished, that those who undertake the office of
:a bishop should understand what is their portion ; and com-
prehend that they are called, not unto their own conve-
nience, not to riches or luxury, but to labours and cares for
the glory of God. For it is not to be doubted, that the rest
of the faithful also will be more easily excited to religion
And innocence, if they shall see those set over them not fix-

09 BSJOBMATIOir. '281

iii|^ tbeir thoughts on the things of this world, but on the
saiVation of souls, and on their heavenly country.'* Whereas
hhe holy synod, perceiving that these things are of chiefest
importance towards restoring ecclesiastical discipline, ad-
monishes all bishops, that, oflen meditating within them-
selves thereon, they show themselves conformable to their
office, by their actual deeds, and the actions of their lives ;
which is, as it were, a kind of perpetual sermon ; but, abovo
all, that they so order their whole manners, as that others
mAy from them be able to derive examples of fruplity,
modesty, continency, and of that holy humility which so
much recommends us to Qod. Wherefore, after the ex-
ample of our fathers in the Council of Carthage, it not only
ordars that bishops be content with modest fimiiture, and a
frugal table and diet, but that they also give heed that in
the rest of their manner of life, and in their whole house,
4ihere appear nothing that is alien from this holy institution,
and which does not manifest simplicity, zeal towards God,
and entire contempt of vanities. Also, it forbids them to
strive to enrich their own kindred or domestics out of the
revenues of the church ; seeing that even the canons of the
Apostles^ hinder them from giving to their kindred the
property of the Church, which belongs to God ; but if [their
cindred] be poor, let them distribute to them thereof as to
poor, but not misapplv or waste it for their sakes. Tea,
the holy synod, with all earnestness, admonishes them that
they completely lay aside all this human and carnal affection
towards brothers, nephews, and kindred, which is the seed-
plot of many evils against the Church. And what things
nsve been said concerning bishops, the same are not only to
be observed by all who hold ecclesiastical benefices, whether
secular or regular, each according to the condition of his
rank, but [the synod] decrees that it also appertains to the
cardmals of the holy Soman Church ; for wnercas the. ad-
ministration of the universal Chin*ch depends upon their
advice to the most holy Boman Pontiff, it would scorn to bo
shameful, if they did not at the same time shine so pre-
eminently in virtue and in the discipline of their lives, as
■deservedly to turn unto themselves the eyes of all men.

« See Heb. zL 16. * S«e Cml Ap, 89.

232 BBssioK xxy.

CHAPTER II.

By whrna specificaUy the Decrees of the Cov/ncU are to he solemnly received

and taught.

The calamitousnesa of tlie times, and the malignity of the
increasing heresies, constrain, that nothing be omitted which
may seem in an3rwise capable of appertaining to the edifica>
tion of the people, and to the defence of the Catholic faith.
Wherefore the holy synod enjoins on patriarchs, primates,
archbishops, bishops, and all others who, of right or custom,
ought to be present at the provincial council, that, in the
very first provincial synod to be held after the close of this
council, they publicly receive all and each of the things that
have been denned and ordained by this holy synod ; as also
that they promise and profess true obedience to the Sove-
reign Eoman Pontiff; and at the same time publicly express
their detestation of and anathematize all the heresies which
have been condemned by the sacred canons and general
councils, and especially by this some synod. And hence*
forth all those who shall be promoted to be patriarchs, pri-
mates, archbishops, and bishops, shall by all means observe
the same in the first provincial synod at which they shall
themselves be present. And should any one of all the
aforesaid refuse, which far be it ! the bishops of the same
province shall be bound, under pain of the divine indigna-
tion, at once to give notice thereof to the Sovereign Eoman
Pontiff, and shall meanwhile abstain from communion with
the said person. And all others who hold, either now or
in future, ecclesiastical benefices, and who are bound to be
present at the diocesan synod, shall do and observe the
same, as above [stated], in the synod' that shall be held on
the very first occasion, otherwise they shall be punished
according to the form of the sacred canons. Moreover, all
those to whom appertain the charge, visitation, and reforma-
tion of imiversities and of [places of] general studies, shall
diligently take care that the canons and decrees of this holy
flvnod be, by the said universities, entirely received; and
that, according to their ride, the masters, doctors, and others,
in the said universities, teach and interpret those things
which are of the Catholic faith, in conformity therewith ;
and that at the beginning of each year they bind themselves

ON BXrOBMATION. 283

by solemn oath to this institution. And also if there be an j
other things that need correction and reformation in the
muTersities aforesaid, they shall be amended and ordained
by those whom it regards, for the adyancement of relidon
and of ecclesiastical mscipline. But those tmiversities which
are immediately subject to the protection and visitation of
the Sovereign Pontiff, his Blessedness shall take care that
they be, by his delegates, wholesomely visited and reformed
in the manner aforesaid, and as shall seem to him most
advantageous.

CHAPTER III.

The Sword of Excommunicaiion is not to he nuihly uted. Wficti an Exeett-
turn can be made on Property or Pereon, Cewuret are to be abstained
from. It thall be a Cfrimefor the Civil Magittraiee to interfere therein.

Although the sword of excommunication is the very
sinews of ecclesiastical discipline, and very salutary for
keeping the people in their auty, yet is it to be used with
sobrie^ and great circumspection ; seeing that experience
teaches, that if it be rashly or for slight causes wielded, it is
more despised than feared, and produces destruction rather
than safety. Wherefore, those excommunications which,
after certain admonitions previously made, are wont to be
issued with the view, as it is termed, of causing a revelation,
or on account of things lost or stolen, shall be issued by no
one soever but the bishop ; and not then, otherwise than on
account of some circumstance of no common kind, and a
cause which, having been diligently and very maturely
weighed by the bishop, moves his mind. Nor shall he l)e
induced to grant the said excommunications by the authority
of any secular person soever, even though a magistrate ; bub
the whole shaU be left to his own discretion ana conscience,
when, considering the circumstances, place, person, or time,
he shall himself judge that such are to be resolved on. But
as regards judicial causes, it is enjoined on all ecclesiastical
judges, of what dignity soever they may be, that, both during
proceeding, and in giving judgment, they abstain from eccle-
siastical censures, or interdict, whensoever an execution on
the person or property can, in each stage of the process, be
effected by them of their own proper authority; but in civil
causes, which in any way appertain to the ecclesiastical

■■i

The calatnitoM
increasing l;eve.u

mav seem "^ »"-\ ,

tlOU "»• 'L 1 ^ \^,

\f' ^Kyproimse av>.

"f ^ .Station of al-
itor (lettav ^ ^„e<l

fortU aU \n?f , pa, ftw\
mates, arc\v^«^»^j:,,tv

.foresail rU .^ ^^^^.

I'outiw, anu ^mjL

i,v futv»-e, ''^';;^ ^. ^eaau

V-^"' .;tbSo l.tatc<ll, _
saiue, as a» .^asum, '
the very 1 y^^ y^^.u „t •
aceordn'g ^ *''•:' ertain
those to ^^•^'""^.S and of

avuod ^''' ,V> \,, their rule, <

in the s'^'^J'Se Cathohc i.

,vhieh f % 'iJtgin^i^S "^ '•
and that at the b

\

S^ nifissioisr zxT.

court, it shall be lawful for them, if it shall seem to be ex-
pedient, to proceed against all persons soever, even laymen,
and to terminate suits, by means of pecuniary fines, which,
by the very fact of being levied, shall be assigned to the
pious places there existing;. or by distress upon the pro-
perty, or seizure of the person, to be made either by their
own or other officers ; or even by deprivation of benefices,
:and other remedies at law. But if the execution cannot be
made in this manner, either upon the person or property of
the guilty, and there be contumacy towards . the judge, he
may then, in addition to the other penalties, smite them also
with the sword of anathema, at his own discretion. In like
manner, in criminal causes, where an execution can, as above,
be effected upon the person or property, [the judge] shall
abstain from censures. But if there cannot easily be oppor-
rtunity for that execution, it shall be lawful for the judge to
employ the said spiritual sword against delinquents; pro-
vided, however, the quality of the offence so require, and
after two monitions at least ; and even this by public edict.
And it shall be a crime for any secular magistrate to pro-
hibit an ecclesiastical judge from excommunicating any one ;
or to command that he revoke an excommunication issued ;
under pretext that the things contained in the present de-
cree have not been observed ; whereas, the cognizance hereof
^oes not appertain to seculars, but to ecclesiastics. And
avery excommunicated person soever, who, after the lawful
monitions, does not change his mind, shall not only not be
received to the sacraments, and to communion and inter-
course with the faithful ; but if, being bound with censures,
he shall, with obdurate heart, remain for a year in the defile-
ment^ thereof, he may even be proceeded against as suspected
of heresy.

CHAPTER IV-

.Where the Number of Maaaes to he celebrated is excessive, Bishops, Abbots,
and Generals of Rdigyyas Orders shall ordain what shall seem to them
£xpedient.

It often happens, in certain churches, either that so great
a number of masses is required to be celebrated on account
of various legacies from persons deceased, that it is not pos-

^ Insorduerit.

OK BITOBICATIOB. '286

sible to give satisfaction thereto on the particular days
prescribed hj the testators ; or, that such alms left for the
celebration thereof, is so slight that it is not easj to find
any one willing to subject himself to the duty ; whereby the
pious intentions of the testators are' frustrated, and occasion
IS given for burthening the consciences of those whom the

. aforesaid obligations concern. The holy -synod, desiring that
these legacies for pious uses be satisfied in the most com-
plete and useful maimer possible, gives power to bishops in

' diocesan synod, and likewise to abbots and generals of orders,
that, in their general chapters, they shall ordain, in regard

V hereof, whatsoever in theur consciences they shall, upon a
diligent examination of the circumstance, ascertain to be
most expedient for Qod's honour and worship, and the good
of the churches, in those churches aforesaid which they shall
find to stand in need of such provision ; in such wise, how-

. ever, that a commemoration be always made of the departed
who, for the wel&re of their souls, hove left the said legacies
for pious uses.

CHAPTER V.

. iVb AUercUion fkaU he made in the CtmdUiont and Ohligationi impoted on

Benefices righUy established,

[Reason demands, that, from those matters which have
• been well established, no alteration be made by any ordi-
nances to the contrary. Whenever, therefore, by virtue of
the erection or foundation of any benefices, or in consequence
of other regulations, certain qualifications are required, or
certain obligations attached tnereunto, they shall not be
derogated from in the collation, or in any other arrangement
soever in regard of the said benefices. The same also shall
be observed as regards prebends assigned to professors of
theology, masters, doctors, priests, deacons, or subdeaconB,
whenever such prebends have been so established, in such
sort that, in no provision whatever shall anything be altered
in regard of sucn qualifications and orders ; and any provi-
sion made otherwise shall be accounted surreptitious.

CHAPTER VI.

Hwo the Bishop ought to act in regard to the Vmtaiion of Exempted

Chapters,

The holy synod ordains that the decree, made under Paul
HI., of happy memory, beginning Capitula Cathedralium^
shall be observed in all cathedral and collegiate churches^
not only when the bishop makes his visitation, but also as
often as he proceeds, according to the duties of his office, or
at the petition of another, against any one of those com-
prised in the said decree ; yet so, however, that whenever he
institutes proceedings out of visitation, all the particulars
here subjomed shau have place : to wit, that the chapter
shall, at the beginning of each year, select two persons
belonging to the chapter, with whose counsel and consent
the bishop, or his vicar, shall be bound to proceed, both in
instituting the process, and in all the other acts thereof,
imtil the end of the cause inclusively, in the presence, how-
ever, of the notary of the said bishop, and in his (the
bishop's) house, or his ordinary court. The two deputies
shall, however, have but one vote ; and either of them may
give his vote in accordance with [that of] the bishop. But
if, in any proceeding, or in any interlocutory or definitive
sentence, they shall both differ from the bishop, they shall
in such case, within the term of six days, choose, in con-
junction with the bishop, a third person ; and should they
also differ respecting the election of that third person, the
choice shall devolve upon the nearest bishop ; and the point
whereon they differed shall be decided, according to the
opinion with which that third person agrees ; otherwise, the
proceedings, and what follows thereupon, shaU be null, and
shall have no effect in law. Nevertheless, in crimes arising
from incontinency, whereof mention has been made in the
decree concerning concubinaries, as also in the more heinous
crimes which require deposition or degradation; where there
is apprehension of flight, and where, that judgment may not
be eluded, it is necessary to detain the person, the bishop
may at first proceed singly to a summary information, and
to the necessary detention [of the person] ; observing, how-
ever, in the rest of the proceedings, the order above laid
down. But in all cases regard is to be had to this, that the

oir BEJOBMATioir. 287

delinquents be kept in custody in a suitable place, according
to tbe quality of the crime and of tbe persons. MoreoTer,
there shall everywhere be rendered to bishops that honour
which is due to their dignity ; and in choir, in the chapter,
in processions, and other public transactions, they shall naye
the first seat, and the place which they themselves shall
make choice of, and theirs shall be the chief authority in
everything to be done. And if they shall propose anything
to the canons to bo deliberated on, and the matter treated
of be not one which concerns any benefit to them or theirs,
they shall themselves convoke the chapter, demand the votes,
and decide according to them. But, in the absence of the
bishop, this shall be entirely done by those of the chapter,
to whom of right or custom it appertains, nor shall the
bishop's vicar be permitted to do it. But in all other things,
the jurisdiction and power of the chapter, if any belong
thereunto, and the administration of their property, shaU
be left wholly sound and imtouched. But those who do
not possess any dignities, and are not of the chapter, they
shall all be subject to the bishop in ecclesiasticfd causes ;
notwithstanding, as regards the things aforesaid, any privi-
leges accruing even from any foundation ; as also any
customs, even though immemorial ; any sentences, oaths,
concordates, which only bind the authors thereof ; saving,
however, in all things, those privileges which have been
sranted to imiversities for general studies, or to the mem-
bers thereof. But all and each of these things shall not
have effect in those churches in which the bishops, or their
vicars, by force of constitutions, or privileges, or customs,
or concordates, or by any other right soever, have a power,
authority, and jurisdiction greater than what is included in
the present decree. From the which [powers] this holy
synod does not intend to derogate.

CHAPTER VII.

The Access and JRcffitss in regard to Ben^cea are abolished. In what
Manner, to whom, and for what Cause, a Coadjutor is to he ffr anted.

Whereas, as regards ecclesiastical benefices, those matters
wliicli carry with them the appearance of hereditary succes-
sion are odious to the sacrecl constitutions, and contrary to

288 BEBSIOlf

the decrees of the fathers ; no Access or Begressi^ ia
regard to any ecclesiastical benefice, of what quality soeyer,
shall, eyen tnough by consent, be henceforth granted to any
one ; nor shall those heretofore granted be suspended, ex* •
tended, or transferred. And this decree shall haye place in
regard to all ecclesiastical benefices soeyer, and as regards
all manner of persons soeyer, eyen though distinguished
with the honour of the cardinalate. In like manner, aa
regards coadjutorships with future succession, the same
shall hereafter be obseryed ; [to wit], that they shall not be
permitted to any one in regard of any ecclesiastical benefices
soeyer. But if at any time the lU'gent necessity, or the
eyident adyantage of a cathedral church, or of a monasteiy,
demands that a coadjutor be granted to a prelate, such
coadjutor, with [the right of] mture succession, shall not
otherwise be granted but after the said cause has first been
diligently taken cognizance of by the most holy Eoman
Pontiff; and it is certain, that all those qualifications are
united in him, which, by law, and by the decrees of this
holy synod, are required in bishops and prelates. Other-
wise, the concessions made touching these matters, shall be
accounted surreptitious.

CHAPTER VIII.

The Duty of the Administrator a of Hospitals. By whom, and in wluit
Mantur, their Negligence is to be pimished.

The holy synod admonishes all persons soever who hold
any ecclesiastical benefices, whether secular or regular, that
they accustom themselves, as far as their revenues will
permit, to exercise promptly and kindly the office of hospi-
tality, frequently commended by the holy fathers; being
mindftil that those who love hospitality receive Christ in
the person of their guests.y But as regards those who
hold in commendam, or by way of administration, or imder
any other title soever, or even have united to their own

' For a complete account of these words in their ecclesiastical
application, I must refer the reader to Du Cange^ but luore espe-
cially to the " Dictionnaire de Droit Oanonique'' of Durande and
Mabillon.

y See Matt. xxv. 35, sqq.

OK SXFOlKAnOK. 239

clmrclies the places commonly called hospitals, or other
pioTis places instituted espedallj for tiie nse of pilgrims, of
the infirm, the aged, or the poor ; or, if the parish chnrcheff
should chance to be united to hospitals, or nave been con*
Terted into hospitals, and have been granted to the patrons
thereof to be administered, the synod bj all means enjoins^
that they administer the charge and office imposed upon
tiiem, and that they actually exercise that hospitality, which
is due at their hands, out of the fruits set apart for that
purpose, according to the constitution of the Council of
Vienne, renewed elsewhere* by the same holy synod under
Paul III., of happy memory, which begins, Quia contingit.
But if these hospitals were instituted to receive a certain
class of pilgrims, or of infirm persons, or of others ; and in
l^e place where the said hospitals are situated, there be no
such persons, or very few to be foimd, it doth moreover
command, that the fruits thereof be converted to some other
pious use, that may be nearest to their origin^ destination^
and the most usenil for that time and place, as shall seem
to be most expedient to the ordinary, aided by such two of
the chapter as may be experienced m matters of business,
to be chosen by him ; unless it happen that the contrary be
expressed, even with reference to this event, in the founda-
tion, or institution thereof; in which case, the bishop shall
take care that what was ordadned be observed, or, if that be
not possible, he shall, as above, provide for the matter in a
useml manner. Wherefore, if all and each of the aforesaid
persons, of what order soever, and religious body and
dignity they may be, even if they^ be laymen, who have the
administration of hospitals, provided, however, they be not-
subject to regulars where regular observance is in force,
shall, after having been admonished by the ordinary, have
ceased really to mscharge the dutjr of hospitality, applying
all the necessary conditions to which they are bound, thej
may be compelled thereunto not only by ecclesiastical
censures, and other legal remedies, but may also even be
deprived for ever of the adminisln^tion and care of the
hospital itself; and others shall be substituted in their
place, by those whom this may regard. And the persons

* See Seas. vii. de re£ c. IjT.

240 8E8SIOK XXT.

aforesaid shall, nevertheless, be bound, in the court of con-
science, to the restitution of the fruits which they have
received contrary to the institution of the said hospitals ;
which [restitution] shall not be pardoned them by any
remission or composition: nor shall the administration or
government of such places be henceforth intrusted to one
and the same person longer than for three years, imless it
be found to be otherwise provided in the foundation thereof;
notwithstanding, as regards all the above-stated matters,
any union, exemption, and custom, even from time imme-
morial, to the contrary, or any privileges or indults soever.

CHAPTER IX.

In Vihat manner Right of Patronage is to he proved, and to wliom granted.

Forbidden Accessories,

Even as it is not just to abolish the legitimate rights of
patronage, and to violate the pious intentions of the faithful
m the institution thereof, so also neither is it to be per-
mitted, that, under this pretence, ecclesiastical benefices be
reduced to a state of servitude, as is impudently done by
many. To the end, therefore, that fitting reason may be
observed in all things, the holy synod decrees, that the title
to the right of patronage shall be [derived] 'from a founda-
tion or endowment ; which [title] shall be shown from an
authentic document, and the other [proofe] required by law ;
or, also, by repeated presentations during a course of time
of sucli ancient date that it exceeds the memory of man ;
or, otherwise, according to the directions of the law. But
as regards those persons, or communities, or universities, by
which that right is for the most part presumed to have been
arrived at rather by usurpation, a fuller and more exact
proof shall be required to show a true title ; nor shall the
proof derived from time immemorial be otherwise of avail in
their regard, unless, besides other things necessary for that
proof, presentations, even continuous, during the space of at
least not less than fifty years, all of which presentations
have been carried into effect, shall be proved from authentic
writings. All other rights of patronage, in regard of bene-
fices, as well secular as regular, or parochial, or in regard of
dignities, or any other benefices soever, in a cathedral or

ON BEFOBMATIOK. 241

ooUeginto church ; as ftlso faculties and privileges, whether
grouted so as to have the force of patronage, or, by virtue
of any other right soever, to nominate, elect, present to the
said [benefices J when they are vacant, excepting the rights of
patronage which belong to cathedral churches, and excepting
such others as appertain to the emperor, to kings, or to
those who possess kingdoms, and to other high and supreme
princes who possess the rights of sovereignty within their
own dominions, as also those which have been bestowed in
favour of places of general studies, shall be understood to
be wholly abrogated and made void, together with the quasi-
possession which is consequent thereupon. And benefices
of this kind shaU be conferred, as being free, by the colla-
tors thereimto ; and such appointments shall obtain full
effect. Furthermore, it shall oe lawful for the bishop to
reject the persons presented by the patrons, if they bo not
competent. But it the institution appertain to inferiors^
they shall, nevertheless, be examined by the bishop, accord-
ing to what has been elsewhere ordained by this holy synod;
otherwise the institution made by those inferiors shall be
null and void. But the patrons of benefices, of what order
and dignity soever they may be, even if they be commimities^
universities, or any colleges soever, whether of clerks or
laymen, shall not in any way, nor for any manner of cause
or occasion, interfere in the receiving of the fruits, incomes,
or revenues of any benefices soever, even though those
benefices be truly, by foundation or endowment, under their
riffht of patronage ; but shall leave them to the free disposal
of the rector, or of the beneficiary, any custom whatever to
the contrary notwithstanding. Nor shall they presume to
transfer to others, contrary to the sanctions of the canons,
the said right of patronage, by sale, or under any other title
soever. If they shall act otherwise, they shall be subjected
to the penalties of excommunication and interdict, and shall
be by the very fact deprived of the aforesaid right itself of
patronage. Moreover, those accessions made by way of
union oi free benefices with churches subject to the right
of patronage, even of laymen, whether those churches be
parochial, or benefices of any other kind soever, even such
as are simple, or are dignities, or hospitals, in such wise that
the free benefices aforesaid are made to be of the same

242 SESsioir xxv.

nature with those unto which they are united, and are
placed under the right of patronage ; such [accessions], if
they have not as yet been carried into full effect, as also
sucn as shall henceforth be made, at the instance of any
person soever, by what authority soever, be it even apostoHcy
shall, together with the said unions themselves, be regarded
as having been obtained by surreption; notwithstanding
any form of words therein employed, or any derogation
which may be held as expressed ; nor shall [such unions] be
any more carried into execution, but the benefices them-
selves so united, shall, when they fall vacant, be freely
conferred as previously. But those accessions, which, having
been made within the last forty years, have obtained their
effect and a complete incorporation ; such shall nevertheless
be reviewed and examined by the ordinaries, as the delegates
of the Apostolic See ; and those which shall have been
obtained by surreption, or obreption, shall, together with
the unions, be declared invalid, and the benefices themselves
shall be separated, and be conferred upon other persons.
In like manner also whatsoever rights of patronage over
churches, and any other benefices of what kind soever, even
dignities previously free, which have been acquired within
the last forty years, or that may henceforth be acquired,
whether through an increase of the endowment, or in con-
sequence of rebuilding, or from some other like cause, even
though with the authority of the Apostolic See, shall be
carefully taken cognizance of by tlie said ordinaries, as
delegates as aforesaid; and they shall wholly revoke such
[rights of patronage] as they shall find not to have been
legitimately established on account of some most evident
necessity of the church, or benefice, or dignity ; and they
shall brmg back benefices of this kind to their former state
of liberty ; without injury, however, to the incumbents
thereof, and after having restored to the patrons whatsoever
they may have given for this purpose ; any privileges, con-
stitutions, and customs, even though immemorial, notwith-
standing.

OK lunroBKATioK. 24a

CHAPTER X.

Judge» who may he ddegaJted ly the Apottolie See are to le nominated by
the Synod : by whom and by the Ordinariea Caueee shall be terminated
speedily.

Insomuch as on account of the malicious suggestion of
suitors, and sometimes also bj reason of the mstance of
places, a knowledge of the persons to whom causes are com-
mitted, cannot be adequately obtained ; and hence causes
are sometimes referred to judges on the spot who are not
-tiioroug^hly competent ; the holy synod ordains, that, in each
proyincial or diocesan council, there shall be designated
certain persons who shall possess the qualifications required
by the constitution of Boniface VIII., which begins, Statufum,
and who are otherwise suited thereunto ; that, to them also,
besides the ordinaries of the places, may henceforth be
committed those ecclesiastical and spiritual causes, belong-
ing to the ecclesiastical court, which may be to be delegated
to their districts. And if it shall happen that one of these
so designated die in the interim, the ordinary of the place,,
with the advice of the chapter, shall substitute another in
his stead, until the next provincial or diocesan synod ; in
such wise that each diocese shall have at least four, or even
more, persons approved and qualified as above, to whom
causes of this kmd may be committed by any legate, or
nuncio, and even by the Apostolic See. Otherwise, after
the said designation has been made, which the bishops shall
straightway transmit to the Sovereign Eoman Pontiff*, any
delegations soever of other judges, made to any others but
the above, shall be accounted surreptitious. The holy synod
furthermore admonishes as well the ordinaries as dl other
ludges soever, to strive to terminate causes with as much
brevity as possible ; and to meet in every way, either by
prescribing a given term, or by some other adequate means,
the artifices of lawyers, whether in delaying the trial* of the
duit, or any other part of the judicial process.

■ Contestatione litis.

b2

244 BESSIOK XXY.

CHAPTER XI.

Vei'tain Leases of Ecdesiastical Property are prohibited ; certain others,

v)hen made, are annulled.

It is wont to bring great ruin upon churclies, when the
property thereof is, to the prejudice of the successors, leased
out to others upon the present payment of a sum of money.
All leases, therefore, of this kind., if they be made for pay-
ments in advance, shall in nowise be considered as valid, to
the prejudice of the successors; any indult or privilege
soever notwithstanding; nor shall such leases be confirmed
in, or out of, the Itoman court. Neither shall it be lawful
to let out^ ecclesiastical jurisdictions, or the faculties of no-
minating, or of deputing vicars in spirituals ; nor for the
leaseholders** to exercise them in person or by others ; and
any grants to the contrary, even though made by the Apos-
tolic See, shall be accounted surreptitious. But those
leases of ecclesiastical things, even though confirmed by
apostolic authority, the hol)r synod declares to be invalid,
which, having been made within the last thirty years, for a
long term, or as they are designated in some places, for
twenty-nine, or for twice twenty-nine years, the provincial
synod, or the deputies thereof, shall judge to have been con-
tracted to the injury of the church, and contrary to the
ordinances of the canons.

CHAPTER XII.

Tillies to he paid entirely. Those withholding the Payment thereof are to he
excommunicated. The JRectora of Poor Churches are to he piously
assisted.

Those are not to be borne who, by various artifices, endea-
vour to withhold the tithes accruing to the churches ; nor
those who rashly take possession of, and apply to their ovim
purpose, the tithes which ought to be paid by others;
whereas the payment of tithes is due to God ;^ and they
who refuse to pay them, or hinder those wlio give tliem,
usurp the property of others. The holy synod therefore enjoins

*• Locare. * Conductoribus.

<* Cf. Exod. xxii. 29; Lev. xxvii. 30, sqq.

OK BEFOBICATIOK. 245

on all, of what rank and condition aoever they be, to whom
the payment of tithes belongs, that they henceforth pay in
fiill the tithes, to which they are bound in law, to the cathe-
dral church, or to what other churches, or persons soever,
they are lawfully due. And they who either withhold them,
or hinder them [from being paid], shall be excommunicated ;
nor be absolved uxym this crime, until full restitution has been
made. It further exhorts all and each, that of their Christian
charity, and the duty owed to their own pastors, they grudge
not, out of the good things bestowed on them by God[, bounti-
fully to assist uiose bishops and parish priests who preside
over the poorer churches ; to the praise of God, and to
maintain the dignity of their own pastors who watch for
them,

CHAPTER Xni.

Cathedral or Parish Churchet tkaU receive the Fourth qf Funeral [Dues],

The holy synod decrees, that in what places soever, forty
years ago, a fourth, as it is called, of funerals, was accusp*
tomed to be paid to the cathedral or parish church, but has
subsequently, by virtue of what privilege soever, been
granted to other monasteries, hospitols, or any other kind of
pious places ; the same shall henceforth, with full rights,
and in the same proportion as was formerly usual, be paid
to the cathedral or parish church ; all grants, graces, privi-
leges, even those called mare magnum, or any others soever,
notwithstanding.

CHAPTER XIV.

The MawMT of Proceeding against Clerks guilty of hccjnng Concubines ts^

prescribed.

How shameful, and how unworthy it is the name of clerks
who have devoted themselves to the divine service, to live
in the filth of immodesty, and imclean concubinage, the thing^
itself doth sufficiently testify, in the common offence of all
the faithful, and the extreme disgrace entailed on the clerical
order.® To the end, therefore, that the ministers of the
Church may be recalled to that continency and integrity of
life which becomes them ; and that the people may hence

• Milltise, solliery.

2A& 8ESSI0K XKT.

the more learn to reverence them, the more pure of life thej
know them to be : the holy synod forbids all clerks soever
to dare to keep concubines, or any other women of whom
any suspicion can be entertained, either in or out of their own
dwellings, or to presume to have any commerce with them:
otherwise they sliall be punished witn the penalties imposed
by the sacred canons, or by the statutes of the churches.
But if, having been admonished by their superiors, [they
ahall not refrain from these women, they shall be by the very
fact deprived of the third part of the fruits, revenues, and

firoceeds of all the benefices and pensions whatsoever ; which
third part-} shall, at the discretion of the bishop, be applied
to the fabric of the church, or to some other pious place.
If, however, persisting in the same crime, with the same or
some other woman, they shall not yet have obeyed a second
admonition, not only shall they thereupon forfeit all the
fruits and proceeds of their benefices, and their pensions,
which shall be applied to the places aforesaid, but they shaU
abo be suspended from the administration of the benefices
themselves, for as long a time as the ordinary shall think fit,
even as the delegate of the Apostolic See. And if, having
been thus suspended, they shtul nevertheless not send away
those women, or if they shall even have intercourse with
them, then shall they for ever be deprived of their ecclesias-
tical benefices, portions, offices, and pensions of what kind
; soever, and be rendered thenceforth incapable and unworthy
of any manner of honours, dignities, benefices, and offices,
imtil after a manifest amendment of life, it shall seem good
to their superiors, for a [just] cause, to grant them a dispen-
sation. But if, after they have once put them away, they
shall have dared to renew the interrupted connection, or to
take to themselves other scandalous women of this sort, they
. shall, in addition to the penalties aforesaid, be smitten with
the sword of excommunication. Nor shall any appeal, or
exemption, hinder or suspend the execution afcresaid ; and
the cognizance of all the matters above mentioned shall not
belong to archdeacons, or deans, or other inferiors, but to the
bishops themselves, who may proceed without the noise
and the formality of justice, and by the sole investigation
of the truth of tlie fact. But clerks, who hold not ecclesias-
*tical benefices or pensions, shall, according to the quality of

Oir BSFOSICATIOK. 247

their criine and contumacy, and their persistence therein, be
pushed, by the bishop himself, with tne penalty of imprison-
ment, suspension from their order, and inability to obtain
benefices, or in other ways according to the sacred canons.
Bishops also, if, which far be it! they abstain not from
<nrime of this nature, and, being admonished by the pro-
yincial synod, do not amend, shall be by the very fact sus-
pended ; and if they persevere, they shall even be reported
oy the said synod to the most holy Eoman Pontiff, who shall
animadvert upon them according to the chatacter of their
guilt, even with deprivation, if need be.

CHAPTER XV.
The lUeffUinuUe Soub of Clerica are to he excluded from certain JBen^ficet,

That the memonr of paternal incontinency may be banished
as far as possible from places consecrated to Grod, the which
purity and holiness do most especially become ; it shall not
be lawful for the sons of clerks, who are not bom from lawful
wedlock, to hold, in those churches wherein their fathers
"have, or have had an ecclesiastical benefice, any benefice
isoever, even though a different one; nor to minister in
any way in the said churches ; nor to have pensions out of
the fruits of benefices which their fathers hold, or have at
another time held. And if a father and son shall be found,
at this present time, to hold benefices in the same church ;
the son shall be compelled to resign his benefice, or to ex-
change it for another out of that church, within the space
of three months ; otherwise he shall by the very fact be
deprived thereof ; and any dispensation touching the afore-
said shall be accounted surreptitious. Moreover any reci-
procal resignations which shall heretofore be made by fathers
who are clerks in favour of their sons, that one may obtain
the benefice of the other, shall be absolutely regarded as
made with a view to the fraudulent evasion of this decree,
and of the ordinances of the canons ; nor shall the collations
that have followed, by force of resignations of this kind, or
of any otlicrs soever which have been made fj audulently, be
of avail to the said sons of clerks.

CHAPTER XVI. • •

Bm^ces with Cure ahaU not he converted into Simple Ones, A SuitahU
Portion tHioll he aligned to him who exercises the Cure of Souls.
Vicarages sfiall cecae when the Cwre is recalled to the Titles.

The holy synod ordains, that those secular ecclesiastical
benefices, by what name soever they may be called, which,
by their earliest institution, or in any other way soever, have
the cure of souls, shall not henceforth be converted into a
simple benefice, even though a suitable portion be assigned
to a perpetual vicar; any graces soever which have not
obtained their fiill efiect notwithstanding. But, as regards
those [benefices] in which, contrary to the institution op
foundation thereof, the cure of souls has been transferred
to a perpetual vicar, even though they be found [to have
been] in this state from time immemorial, if a suitable por-
tion of the fruits have not been assigned to the vicar of the
church, by what name soever he may be designated, the
same shaU be assigned as soon as possible, and within a year
at the latest from the end of the present council, at the dis-
cretion of the ordinary ; according to the form of the decree
made under Paul III., of happy memory. But if this can-
not conveniently be done, or if it be not done within the
said terra, as soon as, whether by the resignation or decease
of the vicar, or rector, or in what way soever either of the
above shall be vacant,^ the benefice shall again receive the
cure of souls ; and the name of the vicarage cease, and it
shall be restored to its ancient state.

CHAPTER XVII.

Bishops shall maintain tJieir Dignity hy Gravity of Demeanour ; nor con-
duct themselves with Unworthy Servility towards the Ministers of Kings,
towards Nobles,^ or Barons.

The holy synod cannot but grievously lament hearing that
certain bishops, forgetful of their own estate, do in no light
manner disgrace the pontifical dignity; comporting them-
selves, both in church and out of it, with an unseemly kind
of servility, toAvards the ministers of kings, nobles, and

' Alterum oorum vacaverit. ^ Re^^ulis.

oir BxroBMATiOK. 249

barons ; and, as if thej were inferior ministers of the altar,
not onlj most unworthily give them place ; but even serv^e
them in person. Wherefore, the holy synod, detesting this
and the like behaviour, doth, by renewing all the sacred
canons, the general councils, and other apostolical sanctions
appertaining to the decorum and weight of the episcopal
dignity, enioin, that bishops in future abstain from such
conduct ; charging them that, both in church and out of it,
having before their eyes their own rank and order, they
everywhere remember that they are fathers and pastors;
[enjoining] also on others, as well princes as all other per-
sons soever, to pay them paternal honour and due reverence.

CHAPTEB XVIII.

The CamoM 8haU he exactly olaemed. If, at any time, a Dispensation is
to he granted in regard thereof, it shall be done Validly, with Mature
Deliberation, and Gratuitou^y.

As it is expedient for the public good, to relax at times
the fetters of the law, thereby more completely to meet, for
the common advantage, the cases and necessities which arise;
so also, to dispense too ofben with the law, and to yield to
petitioners on account of precedent,^ rather than upon any
certain discernment in regard of persons and circumstances,
is nothing else but to open a way for each one to transgress
the laws : Wherefore, know all men, that the most sacred
canons are to be exactly observed by all, and, as far as is
possible, without distinction. But if any urgent and just
reason, and at times a greater advantage, shau require that
some be dispensed with; this shall be granted, after the
cause has been taken cognizance of, and after the most
mature deliberation, and gratuitously, by all those soever to
whom that dispensation appertains; imd any dipensation
granted otherwise shall be esteemed surreptitious.

CHAPTER XIX.
DueUing is punished with the most Severe Penalties,

The detestable custom of duelling, introduced by the con-
trivance of the devil, that by the bloody death of the bodies

* Exemplo.

he ma;^ accomplish the ruin of the souls, shall be utterly
exterminated from the Christian world. Any emperor, kings,
dukes, princes, marquises, counts, and temporal lords by
what other name soever entitled, who shall grant a place
within their territories for single combat between Christians,
shall be thereupon excommunicated, and shall be understood
to be deprived of jurisdiction and dominion over any city,
castle, or place, in or at which they have permitted the duel
to take place, which they hold of the church ; and if those
places be held as a fief, they shall forthwith be escheated to
•their direct lords. But those persons who have fought, and
.those who are called their seconds,^ shall incur the penalty
of excommunication, and the forfeiture of all their property,
and of perpetual infamy, and are to be punished as homi-
cides, according to the sacred canons; and if they have
perished in the conflict itself, they shall for ever be deprived
of ecclesiastical sepulture. Those also who have given
counsel in the case of a duel, whether touching right, or
fact, or have in any other way soever persuaded any one
thereunto, as also the spectators thereof, shall be bound by
the bond of excommunication, and of perpetual malediction ;
any privilege soever, or evil custom, though immemorial,
notwithstandiDg.

CHAPTER XX.

Maiteri appertaining to Ecclesiastical Law are recommended to Secular

Princes,

The holy synod being desirous that ecclesiastical disci-
pline may not only be restored amongst the Christian people,
but that it also may be for ever preserved sound and safe
from all manner of hindrances ; besides those things which
it has ordained respecting ecclesiastical persons, has thought
fit, that secular princes also be admomslied of their duty ;
trusting that they, as Catholics, whom God hath Allied to
be the protectors of holy faith and Church, vidll not only
grant that to the Church her own right be restored, but will
also recall aU their own subjects to the reverence due
towards the clergy, parish priests, and the superior orders ;
nor permit that their officials, or inferior magistrates, through

* Patroni.

OK RirOBMATIOK. ^151

any eftgemcss of coyetousness, or any want of consideration,
violate that immimitj of the Church and of ecclesiastical
persons, which, by the ordinance of G-od, and by the sanc-
tions of the canons, has been established ; but that they ren-
der, together with the princes themselves, due observance to
the sacred constitutions of Sovereign Pontiffs and of coun-
cils. It decrees, therefore, and enjoins, that the sacred
CEUions, and all the general councils, as also all other apos-
tolic sanctions, published in favour of ecclesiastical persons,
of the liberty of the Church, and a^^st the violators thereof,
— all which it also renews by this present decree, — be ex-
actly observed by all men. And on this account it admo-
nishes the emperor, kin^, republics, princes, and all and
each, of what state and dignity soever they be, that, the more
abundantly they are adorned with temporal goods, and with
power over others, so much the more religiously should
they respect whatsoever is of ecclesiasiacal right, as being
commanded by God, and as being under the cover of His
protection ; and that they suffer not mich to be injured by
any barons, lords, governors, or other temporal masters, and
above all by the immediate officers of the masters them-
selves ; but animadvert severely on those, who obstruct her
liberty, immunity, and jurisdiction. Unto whom let they
themselves be an example in regard of piety, religion, and
the protection of the cnurches, imitating tiiose most excel-
lent and religious princes their predecesrora, who not only
defended from injury at the hands of others, but, by their
own authority and munificence, especially advanced the
interests of the Church. And therefore let each one herein
earnestly discharge his duty; that so the divine worship
may be devoutly exercised, and prelates and other clerks
remain, quietly and without hindrances, in their own resi-
dences and in the discharge of their duties, to the profit and
edification of the people.

GHAFTEB XXI.

In all iJdngB ike Authority cf the Apostclie See ihaU remain wnUmched.

Lastly, the holy synod declares, that all and each of the
things which, unaer what clauses and words soever, have
been ordained in this sacred council^ touching the reformo-

tion of morals and ecclesiastical discipline, as well under the
Sovereign Pontiffs Paul III. and Julius III., of happy
memory, as under the most blessed Pius IV., have been sa
decreed, as that the authority of the Apostolic See both is,
and is understood to be, ever untouched thereby.

SEOREB FOB CONTINUINO THE SESSION ON THE FOLLOWING DAT.

Whereas all those matters which had to be treated of in
the present session cannot, because of the late hour, be con-
veniently despatched ; therefore, according as was resolved
on by the fathers in general congregation, those matters
which remain are deferred till to-morrow, in continuation of
this same session.

CONTINUATION OF THE SESSION,
On ihefowth day of December.

SEOBEE CONCERNINa INDULGENCES.

Whereas the power of conferring indulgences was granted
by Christ to the Church ; and she has, even in the most
ancient times, used the said power,J delivered unto her of
God ; the sacred and holy synod teaches and enjoins, that the
use of indulgences, most salutary for the Christian people,
and approved of by the authority of sacred councils, is to be
retained in the Church ; and it condemns with anathema
those who either assert that they are useless, or who deny
that there is in the Church the power of granting them. In
granting tliem, however, it desires that, acpording to the
ancient and approved custom in the Church, moderation
be observed, lest, by excessive facility, ecclesiastical disci-
pline be enervated. And desiring that the abuses which have
crept into these matters, and by occasion of which this ex-
cellent name of indulgences is blasphemed by heretics, be
amended and corrected, it ordains generally by tliis decree,
that all evil gains for the obtaining thereof, whence a most
abundant cause of abuses amongst the Christian people has
been derived, be entirely abolished. But as regards the
other [abuses], wliich luivo proceeded from superstition^

i See Matt. xvi. ID ; John xx. 23,

ON TUE Iin>£X OF BOO£S, ETC. 253

ignorance, irreverence, or from Trhat other source soever,
since, by reason of the manifold corruptions in the places
and provinces where the said abuses are committed, they
cannot conveniently be specially prohibited ; it comihands
all bishops, that they, each in his own church, diligently
collect all abuses of this nature, and report them in the £u*st
provincial synod ; that, after the opuiions of the other
bishops have also been ascertained, thej may forthwith be
referred to the Sovereign Boman Pontiff, by whose autho-
rity and prudence that which may be expedient for the
universal Church will be ordained ; that thus the gift of holy
indulgences may be dispensed to all the fiuthful, piously,
holily, and incorruptly.

ON CHOICE OF FOOD ; ON FASTS, AND FESTIVAL DATS.

The holy synod furthermore exhorts, and, by the most
holy advent of our Lord and Saviour, conjures all pastors,
that, like good soldiers, they sedulously recommend to all
the faithful all those things which the holy Boman Church,
the mother and mistress of all churches, has ordained, as
also those things which, as well in this council as in the
other oecumenical councils, have been ordained, and that
they use all diligence, to the end that they be obsen^ant of
all things thereof, and especially of those which conduce to
mortifjT the flesh, such as the choice of food and fasts ; as
also tnose which tend to promote piety, such as the devout
and religious celebration of festival days ; often admonishing
the people to obey those set over them,*^ whom they who
hear shall hear God as a rewarder, whilst they who contemn
them shall feel G-od himself as an avenger.

ON THE INDEX OF BOOKS, AND THE OATEOmSM, BBEVIART, AND MISSAL.

The sacred and holy synod, in the second session cele-
brated under our most holy lord Pius IV., gave commission
to certain chosen fathers, that they should consider what
ought to be done touching various censures, and books
either suspected or pernicious, and to make a report thereon
to the said holy synod. Hearing now that tne finishing
hand has been put to that labour by those fathers ; which,
however, by reason of the variety and multitude of books

^ Luke z. 16 ; Heb. xiii. 17.

254 ' SESSION XXT.

cannot be distinctly and conveniently judged of by the holy-
synod ; it enjoins that whatsoever has been by them done
shall be laid before the most holy Eoman Pontiff, that it
may by his judgment and authority be terminated and made
public. And it commands that the same be done in regard
of the Catechism, by the fathers to whom that work was
consigned, and as regards the Missal and Breviary.

ON THE FLAGS OF AMBAB8AD0BS.

The holy synod declares, that, by the place assigned to
ambassadors, as well ecclesiastics as seculars, whether in
session, procession, or in any other acts soever, no prejudice
has been created in regard of any amongst them ; but that
all their own rights and prerogatives, and those of their own
emperor, kings, republics, and princes, are uninjured and
sound, and continue in the same state as they were before
the present council.

ON BECEIVINa AND OBSEBVINa THE DECBEES OF THE COUNCIL.

So great has been the calamitousness of these times, and
the inverate malice of the heretics, that there has been
nothing ever so clear in the statement of our faith, or so
surely settled, which they, at the persuasion of the enemy
of the human race, have not defiled by some sort of error.
Eor which cause the holy synod hath taken especial care to
condemn and anathematize the principal errors of the
heretics of our time, and to deliver and teach the true and
Catholic doctrine ; even as it has condemned, anathematized,
and defined. And whereas so many bishops, summoned
from the various provinces of the Cnristian world, cannot
be absent for so long a time without great casting away of
the flock committed to them, and without universal danger ;
and whereas no hope remains that the heretics, after having
been so often invited, even with the public faith which they
desired, and so long expected, will come hither later ; and as
it is therefore necessary to put an end at length to the
sacred council : it now remains for it to admonish in the
Lord all princes, as it hereby does, so to aftbrd their assist-
ance as not to permit the things which it has decreed to be
corrupted or violated by heretics ; but that they be by them
and all others devoutly received and faithfully observed.

OK TID9 CIiOSB 01* THX OOtTKOIL. 255

But if any difficulty should arise in regard of receiving those

(decrees], or shotdd any things occur, which it does not be-
ieve, which require explanation or definition, the holjr synod
trusts that, besides the other remedies appointed in this
coimcil, the most blessed Eoman Pontiff will take care that^
for the glory of God and the tranquillity of the Church, pro-
vision be made for the necessities of the provinces, either
by summoning, particularly out of those provinces where
the diffictdtv shall have arisen, those whom he shall deem it
expedient, m treating of the said matters ; or even by the
celebration of a general council, if he shall judge it neces-
sary; or in such other way as shall seem to him most
convenient.

ON REOinNO^ IN SESSION, THE DECREES OF THE COUNCIL UNDEB PAUL III.

AND JULIUS m.

Insomuch as, at divers times, as weQ under Paul III. as
under Julius III., of happy memoir, many things have, in
this sacred council, been ordained and defined touching
dogmas and reformation of manners, the holy synod wills
that they now be recited and read.

5%ey were recited.

ON THE CLOSE OF THE COUNCIL, AND ON SUING FOB CONFIBIIATION FBOK

OUR HOST HOLT LORD.

Most illustrious lords and most reverend fathers, doth it
please you that, to the praise of Almighty Gted, an end be
put to this sacred oecumenical synod P and that the confirmar
tion of all and each of the things which have therein been
decreed and defined, as well imder the Eoman pontiffs
Paul III. and Julius III., of happv memory, as under our
most holy lord Pius IV., be asked, in the name of this holy
synod, by the presidents, and the legates of the Apostolic
See, from the most blessed Eoman pontiff?

Theif answered : It pleaseth us.

Afterwards, the most illustrious and most reverend Cardinal
Morone, the first legate and president, blessing the holy synods
said: After having given thanks to Qod, most reverend
fiftthers, go in peace.

Who answered : Amen.

25G ACCLAMATIONS OF THE FATHEBS.

ACCLAMATIONS OF THE FATHERS AT THE CLOSE OF THE COUNCIL.

Tlie Cardinal of Lorraine. To the most blessed Pius, pope,
and our lord, pontiff of the holy and universal Church, many
years and eternal memory.

Answer of the Fathers, O Lord God, do Thou very long
preserve the mostHoly Father unto thy Chureh,formany years.

The Cardinal, To the souls of the most blessed sovereign
pontiffs Paul III. and Julius III., by whose authority this
sacred general council was begun, peace from the Lord, and
eternal glory, and happiness in the light of the saints.

Answer, Be their memory in benediction.

The Cardinal, Of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and of
tlie most serene kings, who have promoted and protected this
universal council, be the memory in benediction.

Answer, Amen, amen.

5%^ Cardinal, To the most serene Emperor Ferdinand,
ever august, orthodox, and pacific, and to all our kings,
republics, and princes, many years.

Answer, Preserve, O Lord, the pious and Christian
emperor. Oh, Heavenly Emperor, protect earthly kings,
the preservers of the right faith.

The Cardinal. To the legates of the Apostolic Homan
See, and presidents in this synod, many thanks, with many
years.

Answer, Many thanks : the Lord reward them.

The Cardinal, To the most reverend cardinals, and most
illustrious ambassadors.

Answer. Many thanks ; many years.

The Cardinal, To the most holy bishops, life, and a happy
return to their own churches.

Ansioer. To the heralds of truth, perpetual memory ; to
the orthodox senate, many years.

The Cardinal. The sacred and holy oecumenical Synod of
Trent : let us confess its faith ; let us ever keep its decrees.

Answer. Ever let us confess, ever let us keep.

The Cardinal. We all thus believe; we all think the
very same ; we all, consenting and embracing them, sub-
scribe. This is the faith of blessed Peter, and of the apostles :
this is the faith of the fathers : this is the faith of the
orthodox.

ACCLAHATI05S OF THX FATHZBS. 257

Answer. Thus we believe ; thus we think ; thus we sub-
scribe.

The Cardinal, To these decrees adherini^, may we be
rendered worthy of the mercies and grace of the first and
great supreme priest, Jesus Christ Gk)a ; our inviolate Lady,
the holy mother of God, also interceding, and all the saints.

Answer. So be it : so be it. Amen, amen.

Cardinal. Anathema to all heretics.

Answer. Anathema, anathema.

After this, it was enjoined on all the fathers, by the legates
and presidents, under pain of excommunication, that, before
they departed from the city of Trent, they shoidd subscribe
with their own hand to the decrees of the council, or approve
thereof by some public instrument ; all of whom then sub-
scribed, and they were in number 255 ; to wit, four legates,
two cardinals, three patriarchs, twenty-five archbishops, one
hundred and sixty-eight bishops, seven abbots, thirty-nine
proctors of absent [prelates] with lawful commission, seven
generals of [religious] orders.

Praise he unto Ood.

It agrees with the original : in faith whereof we have sulh
scribed :

I, Anselus Massabelli, bishop of Telesia, secretary

of the sacred Council of Trent.
I, Marcus Antonius Febeobinus, of Como, notary of

the said council.
I, Cynthius Pamphilus, clerk of the diocese of

Qamerino, notary of the said council.

s

258 DISCOUBSS OF

DISCOURSE DELIVERED AT THE NINTH AND LAST
SESSION OF THE SACRED COUNCIL OF TRENT,

Celebrated on two successive days, the third and fowtJi of December, 1563,
Pius IV. being Sovei'tign Pontiff, by the Reverend Patlitr in Ood
. Mieronymus Ragasonus, a Venetian, Pisfiop of Naziamum, and Coad-
jutor at Fama Ayosta.

HEBEIN ARE SUMMABILT RECOUNTED ALL THE HATTERS DEFINED IN THB
COUNCIL OF TRENT WHICH APPERTAIN UNTO PIOUSLY BEUEVINa AND
LIYINO WELL.

Hear this, all people ; receive it Mdth your ears, all ye
who inhabit the earth. The Council of Trent, long since
begun, for a season delayed, variously harassed and torn
asunder, is, at length, by the great ana incredible good-will
of all orders and nations, united in its parts, and brought to
a close. Most happily, indeed, hath this day dawned upon
the Christian people, on which the temple of the Lord,
oftentimes disturbed and scattered asunder, is restored and
completed, and this only ship, fraught with good things, after
the severest and most lasting tempiests and billows, is safely
lodged in its port. And would that they had been willing
to embark with us, for whose sake most especially this very
voyage was undertaken, and that they, who had given us
tins occupation, had been partakers iu the construction of
the edifice — then, indeed, should we now have had cause for
even greater joy. But this happened certainly not through
our fault.

We made choice of this city, at the very entrance of Ger-
many, aye, almost at the very threshold of their dwelling ;
we provided no guard for ourselves, lest we shoidd excite
any suspicion on their part that the place was not perfectly
free ; we granted them the public faith, whicli they had
stipulated tor themselves ; we awaited them here for a long
season, nor ceased we even to exhort and entreat, that they
should draw nigh to know the true light. Yet, even in
their absence, I think, we have sufiiciently consulted their
interest. Por whereas there were two matters, in which
medicine was to be applied to their sickening and infirm
minds, — one being the doctrine concerning the Catholic and
truly evangelical faith, in those mutters which are called in
ijuestion by themselves, and in such as seemed to be oppor-

HIEBOmrMUS BAOA80KXJ8. 259

tune at this season, being explained and confirmed; the
other, the restoration of ecclesiastical discipline, the corrup-
tion of which they affirm was the chief reason of their sepa-
ration from us ; — ^both these thin^ we, as far as lay in us,
have abundantly furnished, according to the exigencies of
these times.

Por, at the commencement, this holy synod (having, ac-
cordiBg to the praiseworthy custom of oi^ ancestorTmade
a profession of its faith), to the end that it might lay down,
as it were, a foimdation for its future proceedings, and might
show upon what testimonies and safeguards men must rely
in the ordaining of dogmas, did, after the example of the
most approved ancient councils, piously and prudently enu-
merate the books of the Old and New Testaments which are
to be received without any hesitation; and, lest any diffi-
culty might arise from various versions, did approve a certain
and definite translation from the Greek and Hebrew. Hence,
attacking the head and citadel of all heresies, it ordained
those tlungs [to be believed] touching the corrupt begin-
nings of human natiu^, which truth itself, could it speak,
would express. Concerning justification thenceforth (a seri-
ous question, and in a wondrous manner opposed both by
ancient heretics, and by those of our own time) it laid down
definite statements, which should both meet the most perni-
cious opinions on that head, and by which the manner of
thinking rightly was set forth in a wondrous order, and
with admirable wisdom, in such wise that the Spirit of Qod
might easily be perceived therein. By this, the most excel-
lent decree within the memory of man, almost all heresies
are destroyed, and, even as darkness by the sun, are th^
dissipated and dispersed, and such brightness and such
glory of truth shines forth, that no man can now pretend
that he perceiveth not so ^^t a light. An wholesome
consideration of the seven divine sacraments of the Church
followed ; first concerning all, and afterwards of each sepa-
rately. And herein who does not see, how distinctly, ex-
plicitlv, copiously, and (which is the head of all) how truly
the whole subject of these heavenly mysteries is contained ?
Who, in so great and so multifarious a doctrine, can in any
way doubt what is to be either followed or avoided ? Who,
in all those matters, will find room or opportunity tor erring ?

260 ' DIBCOUBSE OF

Who, in fine, can hereafter doubt concerning the virtue and
efficacy of these sacraments, when it is perceived that that
grace, which daily, like certain droppings of water, is, hy
means of those said [sacraments], instilled into the minds of
the faithful, was then so abundantly present unto us ? To
these matters were added decrees touching the sacred and
holy sacrifice of the mass, and the communion under both
forms, and [the communion] of little children ; than which
[decrees] nothing is more holy, nothing more useful, so that
they may seem to have fallen from heaven, not to have been
composed by men. To these a certain doctrine will this
day be added, touching indulgences, purgatory, the venera-
tion, invocation, images, and relics of the saints; by which not
only will resistance be made to the frauds and calumnies of
heretics, but full satisfaction will also be given to the con-
sciences of pious Catholics.

These matters, touching the things appertaining to our
salvation, which are calleof dogmas, have been prosperously
and happily settled, nor will anything else on that head be
expected from us at this season.

But whereas, in the administering of certain of the afore-
said matters, there were some points wliich were not fitly
and rightly observed, you, most noble fathers, took most
earnest care that they sliould be treated of purely and holily,
and after the manner and ordinance of our ancestors. Thus did
ye remove all superstition, all search after gain, all so-called
'irreverence' from the divine celebration of masses; ye forbade
vagrant, unknown, and sinful priests offering tliis sacrifice ;
recalled the use of this most sacred thing from private
and profane houses to sacred and religious places; removed
effeminate songs and symphonies, walkings to and fro, con-
versations, and traffic, from the temple of the Lord; and
those laws were by you prescribed to each ecclesiastical
degree, in such wise that, the order being divinely handed
down to them, no opportunity of abusing it can be left.
Thus ye have removed certain impediments to matrimony,
which seemed to give, as it were, a handle for violating the
precepts of the Church ; ye have shut off" the easy way of
obtaining excuse from those who entered into the compact
of matrimony in a manner scarcely lawful. What should
I say touching stealthy and secret marriages ? In truth I

HIEBOinrMUB BAaABOKUS. . 261

so conceive, that if there had been no other causes (which
yet were many and most important) for calling together
this council, it should certainly have been done on this one
account. For whereas this matter regards all, nor is any
comer found in the whole orb of the earth, which this plague-
spot has not invaded, with reason was care to be taken, that
provision for this common evil should be made also by com-
mon counsel. By that most prudent and almost divine
sanction of yours, O most holy fathers, the occasion of
countless and most grievous offences and wickednesses has
been entirely removed, and the wisest provision made
for the government of the Christian commonwealth. To
these matters is to be added an especially useful and necessary
interdiction of many abuses touching the subjects of purga-
tory, veneration of saints, worship of images and relics,
and also of induleences, which seemed to deface and defile
the most beautiful aspect of the things aforesaid.

But the other 'part, in which it was necessary to treat of
the relaxed and almost falling ecclesiastical discipline, was
also most diligently completed and perfected. Hereafber
those men will be chosen to fulfil ecclesiastical functions
who surpass in virtue, not in ambition, and who may consult
the people's advantage, not their own, and may rather profit
than rule over them.^ The word of God, more penetrating
than any two-edged sword, will more frequently and more
earnestly be announced and explained.

The bishops and those others to whom the cure of souls
is committed will be present, and will watch over their
flocks, nor will they wander beyond the charge intrusted to
them. Privileges will avail no one either for living in a
state of uncleanness and crime, or for teaching evilly and
perniciously ; no crime will be left without punishment, no
virtue without reward. Excellent provision has been made
for the multitude of poor and mendicant priests ; each man
will be assigned to a certain church and appointed ofiGlcey
whence he may be able to be supported.

Avarice, than which no vice, is more deadly, especially in
the house of God, is absolutely abolished therefrom ; all the
sacraments will, as is meet, be conferred gratuitously. Out

I £t prosint potiui qiiam prmiiit | lil. " be lisr rather than be over."

■ Sm-L^m^- «»i'->

262 DISCOUBSE OF

of one clmrch several, out of several one, according as the
advantage and state of the people shall demand, will be
formed. Those who quest for alms, who, by seeking after
their own interest, not after the things of Jesus Christ,
brought great damage, great disgrace upon our religion,
will — ^which must be put in the place of extreme happiness —
be utterly rooted out of the whole memory of men. Hence
our present calamity took its rise ; hence the infinite evil
ceased not to glide and flow wider and wider daily, nor could
it hitherto be met by the cautions and provisions made by
many councils. Who, therefore, will not say that it has
most wisely been brought to pass, that this member, in the
healing of which long and great trouble has been spent in
vain, should be cut off? Moreover, worship will be offered
unto God in a more piu*e and correct manner; and they
who bear the Lord's vessels will be cleansed, that they may
draw others to imitate them. Eor which it was most excel-
lently devised, that they who were to be initiated into holy
orders should in each church be instructed in such morals
and letters from their earliest years, that it might be as it
were a seminary of all Airtues. But now, the provincial
synods being restored, the visitations renewed, for the
benefit of the people, not for complaint and expense ;"* the
power being delivered unto pastors of more conveniently
governing and feeding their oy^ti; public penance being
brought back to use ; hospitality enjoined both on ecclesias-
tical persons and on pious places ; a memorable and almost
heavenly system laid down respecting conferring priesthoods
having cure [of souls] ; plurality (as it is called) of benefices
removed ; the hereditary possession of the sanctuary of God
prohibited; the manner of excommunication imposed and
determined ; the first trials being assigned to those places
where the quarrels arise; duelling interdicted; a certain
curb, as it were, which cannot easily be shaken off*, being
imposed upon the luxury, avarice, and licentiousness of all
men, especially in holy orders ; kings and princes being ad*
monished of their duty, and other matters of this kind most
prudently ordained, who does not see that you, most excel-
lent fathers, have fulfilled your parts in this affair to the
fullest extent? In former councils measures have been

*" Ad querelam et sumptum.

HIEBOlTTKrS KAGABOKTIS. 263:

taken touching the explanation of our faith and the correc-
tion of morals, but I know not whether ever more diligently
and distinctly. Here, especially during this two last years,
we have had [assembled] not only the fathers, but the am-
bassadors of aU people and nations, in which the truth of
the Catholic religion is acknowledged. And what men!
If we consider their learning, most erudite; if their expe-
rience, most skilled ; if their intellects, most penetrating ;
if their piety, most religious ; if their life, most innocent.
Such also was the number, that, if the present straits of the
Christian world be considered, this synod appears to be
more numerous than any of those wnich have been held
heretofore. Here were the individual woimds of all laid
open, here was their conversation of life exposed, nought
was dissembled. The arguments and reasons of our adver-
saries were treated of in such a manner, that their cause^
not ours, then seemed to be the one at stake. Some mat-
ters were discussed a third and even a fourth time; the
dispute was ofben carried on with the greatest contention^
witn that design, forsooth, that as gold by the fire, so might
the strength and sinews of truth be approved by certain
struggles, as it were, of truth. For what oiscord could exist
between those who were of one mind, and who regarded one
object ?

Smce matters stand thus, although (as I said at the be-
ginning) it were greatly to be wished that these things
could have been treated of in the presence of those on whose
account they have chiefly been discussed ; nevertheless, such
provision has been made for the safety and health of those
absent, that it would seem that, had they been present, pro-
vision could have been made in no other manner. Let them
humbly, as becometh a Christian man, read what we have
ordained touching our faith, and, if any light shall shine
upon them, let them not turn away their faces ; and, if they
have heard the voice of the Lord, let them not harden their
hearts ; and, if they wish to return to the common embrace
of Mother Church, from which they have torn themselves,
let them not doubt that all clemency and mercy will be
afforded them. But that, most august fathers, is the
chiefest mode of conciliating the minds that dissent from
us, and of retaining those who consent in faith and duty, if

264 DISGOUBSE 07

those things which we have in this place ordained in words,
we ourselves exhibit practically in our own churches. Laws,
although they be the best, are yet a dumb thing. What
availed the Hebrew people the laws given by the mouth of
God himself ? What advantage did the laws of Lycurgus
bring to the Lacedtemonians, of Solon to the Athenians, in
retaining the liberty on account of which they were written ?
But wherefore do I call to mind foreign and too ancient
things ? What instructions or precepts for living well and
happily can or ought we to lack, besides the life and teach-
ing of Christ our Lord alone? What, moreover, was
omitted by our ancestors, appertaining both to thinking
rightly or doing gloriously ? Long since, indeed, we had a
salutary medicine composed and prepared ; but, if it has to
expel a disease, it must be taken, and through the veins
diffused throughout the whole body. Let us, dearest
[brethren], for the first time be drunken with this cup of
salvation, and let us be living and speaking laws, and, as it
were, a rule and canon to which the actions and studies of
others may be directed ; and let each man so persuade him-
self, that nothing will turn out to the advantage and dignity
of the Christian republic, except he earnestly contribute all
in his own power.

That was both before to be our care, and will hereafter be
so, with yet more accuracy. Por if, after the example of
our Master and Saviour, we ought to do before we teach ;
what excuse can there be, but that we should do after we
have taught ? Who will be able to bear with or endure us,
if, after we have shown that theft is not to be committed,
we ourselves be guilty of theft ? if, [when we have shown]
that fornication is a crime, we [ourselves] be fornicators ?
Little does it become the holy to dissent from the holy coun-
cil — the innocent and blameless from the precepts of in-
tegrity and innocence — the firm and constant in faith from
the established doctrine of our faith. And such, indeed, do
our people expect us [to be], who, having long time borne
with our absence, consoled themselves with the hope that,
when present, we should atone for this concession of time
by greater zeal. But that will, as I hope, most holy fa-
thers, be diligently brought about by yourselves ; and, as ye
have done in this place, so also will ye at home do enough

HISBOKTMUS RAOASOITUS. 265

in the sight of God and men. Now (as doth appertain to
the present moment), let us first have and offer immortal
thanks unto the most mighty and immortal God him-
self, who hath rewarded us, not according to the sins which
we hare committed, nor according to our iniquities, but
hath, of his own great kindness, granted unto us not only
to behold this day, which many have longed to behold, but
also to celebrate it with the incredible consent and appro-
bation of the whole Christian people. To Pius IV., our
supreme and most excellent pontiff, perpetual and special
thanks are next to be acknowledged ; who, when first he
ascended the seat of the blessed Peter, was inflamed with so
great desire of restoring; this synod, as to fix all his cares
and thoughts thereupon! He forthwith sent nuncios, men
of the most approved character, to indict a council to those
nations and provinces concerning whose especial salvation
it was callea together. These passed through almost
every district of the north — asked, entreated, conjured, pro-
mised all iriendly things, and even contrived to pass over
into England. Afterwards, when he was unable, as he had
most earnestly desired, to be present at the synod, he
sent his legates, men most surpassing in piefy and learning,
two of whom (whose memory is blessed) he willed to be

E resent here on the appointed day, although scarcely any
ishops had assembled. These, and a third shortly after
addea to them, for two months and more, unoccupied,
waited at this place for a number of bishops sufficient to
form the council, while, in the interim, the Pontiff himself
was doing and meditating; nought else, but that as many and
as excellent fathers, and as soon as possible, might come
hither, and that all the kings and princes of the Christian
name might send their ambassadors hither, to the end that
this, the most weighty and most great common cause of all,
might be debated with the common votes and counsel of all.
And what did he afterwards omit, either in care, anxiety, or
expense, that in any manner seemed to appertain to the
magnitude, freedom, and convenience of tins council? O
the singular piety, and prudence of our pastor and father !
O the supreme happiness of him under whose authority and
auspices this council, so long tossed about and disturbed,
now stands still and is at rest ! Upon you, Paul III., upon

266 DISCOUBSE OF HTEBOKYMUS BAGASOKUS.

you, Julius, now dead, I call, to witness how long and with
now great earnestness ye longed to behold what we behold !
how many expenses, how many labours ye bestowed for that
purpose ! Wherefore, most holy and blessed Pius, we truly
and with our genuine feelings congratulate thee, because the
Lord (which is the greatest proof of the divine goodwill to-
wards thee) hath reserved so great joy for thee, so great a
praise for thy name. Him do we, suppliant with all prayers
and vows, beseech tliat he will with all haste restore thee,
and for as long a time as possible preserve thee safe, for the
advantage and honour of his holy Church. AVe ought also,
with the best reason, to return thanks and congratulations
to our most serene emperor. He, representing the disposi-
tion, as he did the place, of the most powerful Ccesars,*^ who
burned with a certain wondrous desire to propagate the
Christian religion, preserved this city free from all danger,
and by watchmlness contrived that we should enjoy a safe
and tranquil peace, and, by the presence, and almost by the
pledge, of three of his legates, most excellent men, inspired
great feeling of safety in our minds. He, in his surpassing
piety, was wondrously anxious on this our behalf.

He laboured greatly to draw forth men from the most
misty darkness in which they were dwelling, and to lead
them to behold the most brilliant light of this holy synod.
Yet further, the especially pious goodwill of the Christian
kings and princes in adorning this council with their most im-
portant embassies, and in submitting their insignia of state *^
to your authority, is to be cherished by grateful remem-
brance on our part. But now who is there, most illustrious
legates and cardinals, who does not confess that he is much
indebted to you ? Ye have been the best leaders and re-
gulators of our actions. You have, with incredible patience
and diligence, taken care lest our liberty, either in speaking
or in decreeing should in any respect be infringed. You have
spared no labour of body, no exertion of mind, to the end
that the matter might as quickly as possible be brought to
the wished-for result, which many others like you had vainly
striven to attain. In which matter you, most illustrious and
accomplished Morone, ought to have a certain chief and par-

■ The emperora of Germany always bore this title. " Fasces.

CONFIBMATIOSr OF THE OOUITCIL. 267

ticulor joy, who, when thou hadst laid the first stone for
this most famous edifice twenty years ago, dost now, after
many other architects have given their efibrts to this work,
happUy, in % supreme and almost divine Trisdom, put
the last stroke to this work. This great and peculiar
deed of thine will be celebrated by the perpetual dis-.
course of all, nor will any age ever be silent concerning
these thv praises. "What shall I say concerning you,
most holy fathers, how well, by these most surpassing
deeds, ye have deserved of the Christian republic ? How
great will be the commendation attached to the name of
each of you, how great glory will be awarded you by the
whole Christian people ! All will acknowledge and celeorate
you as truly fatners, truly pastors ; to you will every man
most willingly refer the liie and salvation received. O day
most pleasant and joyous for our people, on which it shall
befall them first to again behold us, and embrace us on
our return from building up the temple of the Lord !

But, O thou Lord our God, grant that we, by ^reat deeds^
may answer to so excellent on opinion concemmg us, and
that this seed, which thou hast sown in thy field, may bring
forth abundant fruit, and that thy word may flow like dew ;
and, that that which thou hast sometime promised should
be, may take place in our times, that there be one fold, and
one shepherd over all, and that he may most especially be
Pius IV., unto the everlasting glory of thy name. Amen.

CONFIRMATION OF THE COUNCIL.

We, Alessandro di Famese, cardinal-deacon of Samt Law*
rence in Damaso, vice-chancellor of the holy Roman Church,
do certify and attest, that, on this day, being Wednesday,
the twenty-sixth of January, 1564, in the fifth year of the
pontificate of our most holy lord Pius IV., by the providence
of God, Pope, the most reverend my lords the Cardinals
Morone. and Simonetta, lately returned from the sacred
Council of Trent, whereat they had presided as legates of
the Apostolic See, did, in a secret consistory, held at St.
Peter's, petition our said most holy lord as follows :
^ MoH blessed JFather ; in a decree concerning the closing of

268 COKFIBMATIOK 07

the cecumenical Council of Trent, published the day "before
the nones of December^ last, it was ordained, that, through the
legates and presidents of your Holiness, and of the holy
jfyostolic See, confirmation should be requested from your
Moliness, in the name of the said council, of all and each
of the said things which were therein decreed and defined,
as well under IPaul IIL and Julius IIL, of happy memory,
as under your Holiness. Wherefore, we, John, Cardinal
Morone, and Louis, Cardinal Simonetta, who were then
legates and presidents, wishing to execute what was settled
in that decree, do humbly petition in the name of the said
cecumenical Council of lh*ent, that your Holiness would
vouchsafe to confirm all and each of the things which have
therein been decreed and defined, as ^ well under JPaul III,
and Julius III,, of happy memory, as under your Holiness*

Upon hearing which, his Hohness, having regarded and
read the tenor of the said decree, and having taken the votes
of the most reverend lords the cardinals, replied in these
words :

Acceding to the petition made to us by the legates afore-
said, in the name of the oecumenical Council of Trent, touch-
ing the confirmation thereof. We, with apostolic authority,
and with the counsel and assent of our venerable brethren
the cardinals, having previously held mature deliberation with
them, do confirm all and each of the things which have^ been
decreed and defined in the said council, as well under Paul
III. and Julius III, of happy memory, as during the time
of our pontificate ; and we command that the same be received
and inviolably observed by all the faithful of Christ ; In
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ohost, Amen.

So it is. A. Cardinal Fabnese,

Vice- Chancellor.

BULL OF OUB MOST HOLT LORD PIUS FOURTH, BY THE PROVIDENCE OF GOD
POPE, TOUCHING THE CONFIRMATION OF THE OiCUMENICAL (aND) GENERAL
COUNCIL OF TRENT.

Pius, bishop, servant of the servants of God, for the per-
petual memory hereof.

Blessed be Ood, even the Father of our Lord Jesus

P December 4th.

THB COUKCIL. 260

Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort,'^
who, having vouchsafed to look down upon His holy Church,
agitated and harassed by so many storms and tempests, and
wnilst it was every day more grievously distressed, hath at
length given relief thereunto by a suitable and wished-for
remedy. To extirpate very many and most pernicious
heresies, to correct manners, and to restore ecclesiastical
discipline, to procure the peace and concord of the Christian
people, an oecumenical and general council had been, a long
time since, indicted by our predecessor, Paul III., of pious
memory, and had been begun by holding several sessions.
Having been by his successor recalled to the same cifcy, the
council, after several sessions had been celebrated, could not,
on account of various impediments and difficulties which oc-
curred, be even then brought to a conclusion: it was, therefore,
for a long time interrupted, not without the greatest grief
on the part of all pious persons, whilst the Church daily more
and more implored that remedy. But we, afber having entered
upon the government of the Apostolic See, undertook to
accomplish so necessary and salutary a work, even as our
pastoral solicitude admonished us ; with confidence in the
Divine mercy, and aided by the pious earnestness of our
most beloved son in Christ, Ferdinand, emperor elect of the
Bomans, and by that of other Christian \ings, re|)ubUc8,
and princes, we have at length attained to that which wo
have not ceased to toil for by daily and nightly cares, and
which we have assiduously besought of the Father of lights?
Por whereas a most numerous assembly of bishops and of
other distinguished prelates, and one worthy an oecumenical
council, had, upon being convoked by our letters, and im-
pelled also by their own piety, assembled together from all
sides out of the nations of Christendom, at the said ciiy ;
besides very many other persons of piety, men pre-eminent
for skill in sacred letters, and knowledge of divine and
human law ; the legates of the Apostolic See presiding in
the said synod ; ourselves so favourable to the liberty of the
council, that we, even by letters written to our legates, had
voluntarily left the said council free to determine touching
matters properly reserved for the Apostolic See ; such things

' 2 Cor. i. 3. ' Jamea i. 17.

270 COKTIBMATION OF

as remained to be treated of, defined, and ordained, toncIuDg
the sacraments and other matters, which seemed to be
necessary for confuting heresies, abolishing abuses, and
amending morals, were by the sacred and holy synod, with the
greatest liberty and diligence, treated of, and accurately and
with the utmost deliberation defined, explained, and ordained.
Which things being completed, the council was brought to a
close with so great unanunity on the part of all who assisted
thereat, that it was evident that such agreement was brought
about by the Lord, and it was very wonderful in our eyes,
and those of all. Por which so singular a gift of Gk)d, we
straightway indicted solemn processions in this noble city,
which were celebrated with great piety by the clergy and
the people; and we took care that the thanksgivings so
justly due should be paid to the divine majesty ; forasmuch
as the issue of that council has brought with it a great
and almost certain hope that greater fruits will daily be
derived unto the Church from the decrees and constitutions
thereof. And whereas the said holy synod, in its reverence
towards the Apostolic See, and adhering also to the footsteps
of the ancient councils, has, in a decree made on that
subject, in public session, requested of us the confirmation
of all its decrees, passed in our time and that of our pre-
decessors ; We being acquainted with the request of the
said synod, first by the letters of our legates, then, after
their return, by what they diligently reported in the name
of the synod ; after mature deliberation held thereon with
our venerable brethren, the cardinals of the holy Boman
Church ; and, above all, having invoked the assistance of the
Holy Spirit ; after that we had ascertained that all those
decrees were Catholic, and useful and salutary to the Chris-
tian people. We, to the praise of Almighty God, with the
counsel and assent of our brethren aforesaid, have this day,
in our secret consistory, confirmed by apostolic authority
aU and each of those decrees, and have ordained that the
same be received and observed by all the faithful of Christ ;
as also, for the clearer information of all men, We do, by
the tenor of this letter, confirm them, and ordain that they
be received and observed. Moreover, in virtue of holy
obedience, and under the penalties appointed by the sacred
canons, and others more grievous, even those of depriva-

THB couirciL. 271

tion, to be inflicted at our discretion, We do also command
all and each of our venerable brethren, the patriarchs, arch-
bishops, bishops, and all other prelates soever of the churches,
of what estate, grade, order, and dignity soever they may be,
even though they be distinguished with the honour of the
cardinalate, that they observe diligently the said decrees
and statutes in their churches, cities, and dioceses, both
within and without their courts of justice, and that they
cause the same to be inviolably observed, each by his own
subjects, in so far as in any way concerns them ; silencing
gainsayers and the contumacious, by means of the sen-
tences, censures, and ecclesiastical penalties also contained
in the said decrees ; even calling in, if need be, the help
of the secular arm. And, by the bowels of the mercy
of our Lord Jesus Christ, We admonish and conjure our
said most beloved son the emperor elect, and the other
Christian kings, republics, and princes, that with the same
piety with which they assisted, by their ambassadors, at the
coimcil, with that same piety and equal zeal, for the sake of the
divine honour, and the salvation of their people, in reverence
also of the Apostolic See, and the sacred synod, to support,
when there be need, with their aid and countenance, the
prelates in executing and observing the decrees of the said
council ; and that they do not permit opinions adverse to the
sound and salutary doctrine of the council to be received by
the people under their sway, but utterly interdict them.
Purtnermore, in order to avoid the perversion and confusion
which might arise, if each one were permitted, as he might
think fit, to publish his own commentaries and interpretations
on the decrees of the council ; We, by apostolic authority,
forbid all persons, as well ecclesiastics, of what order, concn-
tion, and rank soever they may be, as laymen, with what
honour and power soever invested ; prelates to wit, imder
pain of being interdicted from entering the church, and all
others, whosoever they be, under pain of excommunication
incurred by the fact,' that they presume, without our
authority, to publish, in any form, any commentaries, glosses,
annotations, scholia, or any kind of interpretation soever
touching the decrees of the said council ; or to settle any-

' Latse sententire.

272 COKPIBMATION OF

thing'in regard thereof, under any plea soever, even under
pretext of greater corroboration of the decrees, or the
execution thereof, or under any other colourable pretext
soever. But if anything therein shall seem to any one to
have been expressed and ordained obscurely, and it shall,
on that account, appear to stand in need of an interpreta-
tion or decision, let him go up to the place which the Lord
hath chosen ;* to wit, to the Apostolic See, the mistress of all
the faithful, whose authority the holy synod also has so
reverently acknowledged. Por if any difficulties and con-
troversies shall arise touching the said decrees, "We reserve
them to be by us explained and decided, even as the holy
synod has itself in like manner decreed ; being prepared, as
that [sjnod] has justly expressed its confidence in regard of
us, to provide for the necessities of all the provinces, in such
manner as shall seem to us most convenient ; decreeing that
whatsoever may be attempted to the contrary touching these
matters, whether wittingly or unwittingly, by any one, by
what authority soever, is, notwithstanding, null and void.
And to the end that these things may come to the know-
ledge of all men, and that no one may be able to use the
excuse of ignorance ; We will and ordain, that in the
Vatican Basilica of the prince of the apostles, and in the
Lateran church, at the time when the people is wont to
assemble there in order to be present at the solemnization
of masses, these letters be publicly read in a clear tone by
certain officers of our court ; and that after they have been
read, they be affixed to the doors of those churches, and
also to the gates of the Apostolic Chancery, and to the
usual place in the Campo di Fiore ; and be left there for
some time, to be read by, and to come to the knowledge of
all men. But when they shall be removed thence, copies
being, according to custom, left in those same places, they
shall be committed to the press in our noble city, that so
they may more conveniently be made known throughout the
provinces and kingdoms of the Christian name. And we
command and decree, that without any doubt, faith be given
to copies thereof, which are written or subscribed by the
hand of a public notary, and guaranteed by the seal and

* Deut. xvii. 8.

THE COUNCIL. 273

signature of some person constituted in ecclesiastical di^ty.
Let it be lawful, tnerefore, for no one to infringe this our
letter of confirmation, admonition, inhibition, reservation,
tfHI, mandate, and decree, or with rash daring go contrary
thereunto. But if any one shall presume to attempt this,
let him know that he will inciu* the indignation of Almighty
God, and of his blessed apostles Peter and Paul. Given
at Eome, at St. Peter* s, in the year of the Lord's incarna-
tion lone thousand five hundred and sixty-four, on the
seventh of the calends of February,'* in the fifth year of our
pontificate.

THE BULL OF OUR SACRED LORD PIUS, BY DIVINE
PROVIDENCE FOURTH POPE,

TOUCmNa THE DECLARATION OF THE TIME TO OBSERVE THE DECREES OF
THE SACRED OCUMENIOAL AND GENERAL COUNCIL OF TRENT.

PiTJS, bishop, servant of the servants of God, to the per-
petual memory hereof.

As the authority and confirmation of the Apostolic See
both ought, and is wont to ratify the decrees and canons of
the sacred councils ; so, any doubt which may have arisen
regarding them is to be Amoved by the /udgment and
declaration of the same see. It has reached our ears, that
there are many who entertain doubts from what period the
decrees of the sacred general Council of Trent, those at least
regarding reform and positive law, began to be binding (fa
those to whom they appertain, those of them especuilly
which preordain certain times for holding provincial and
diocesan synods, for undertaking holy orders, for making
religious profession, for resigning parish churches and other
ecclesiastical benefices, the retention of which has been
forbidden by the decrees of the same council, and for the
execution of several matters of this kind, and all other mat-
ters regarding the aforesaid reform and positive law only, as
to what ought to be observed or avoided. To the end, there-
fore, that all controversy and doubt may be removed, we have
thought fit, of our own proper motion, that this matter
should be clearly set forth, even as we deemed to be agree-

* January 26th.
T

able to reason, law, and equity. For though the decrees of
the council itself, even accoraing to the counsel and assent
of our venerable bretlu^n the cardinals of the holy Eomau
Church, were confirmed by us in our secret consistory
towards the end of the month of January, and even from
that time began to be observed at this Holy See ; because,
however, not a little time was necessarily consumed in
printing them care&Uy and correctly at Borne, and it was
also ratified by common right, that the new constitutions
should not possess their full force until after a certain
period, — ^it seemed to us meet and just, that all the aforesaid
decrees, those at least regarding the said reform and positive
law, had commenced to be binding on all from the calends
of last May,^ and that after that day the excuse of no one
soever, that he was ignorant of them, is to be admitted : and
accordingly we declare and define by apostolical authority,
and we command and ordain that it ought to be judged so
by all ; decreeing as null and void any contrary judgment
held by any other person, no matter what station, authority,
and power he may possess; any apostolical constitutions
and ordinations and other regulations to the contrary not-
withstanding. Be it lawful, therefore, for no person soever
to infringe this page of our declaration, definition, mandate,
statute, and decree, or by rash presumption to contravene it.
But if any one shall presume to attempt it, be it known to
him that he will incur the indignation of Almighty God, and
of his blessed apostles Peter and Paul. Given at Rome, at
St. Peter's, in the year of the incarnation of our Lord
1561j, on the 15th of the calends of August,^ the fifth year
of our pontificate.

Ped. Card. Caesius,
Cae. Gloriebius.

H. CUMYN.

Registered before Caisar, Secretary, in the year from
the nativity of our Lord 1564, on the seventh indic-
tion, on the 20th day of tlie month of July, in the
fifth year of the pontificate of our most holy father in
Christ, and of our lord, Lord Pius, by divine providence
Pope IV., the rescript letter was affixed, read, and published

" May iLt. . « July 18th.

fOB OBSEBYANCB OF THB DECBEES. 275

oh the doors of the palaces of the prince of the apostles^
and of Saint John of Lateran, and likewise of the Apostolic
chancery, and in the Campo di Fiore, by ns James Carra,
and Julius Farinus, ushers y of our holy lord the Fope.

Antonius Cleeici, Master of the Ushers.

MOTUS PROPRIUS OF OUR HOLY LORD PIUS, BY
DIVINE PROVIDENCE FOURTH POPE.

SIOHT CARDINALS ARB DEPUTED TO ENFORCE THB OBSERVANCE OF THB
CONSTITUTIONS AND ORDINANCES BET FORTH BT PIUS IV., AS ALSO THE
DECREES OF THE SACRED GSCUMENICAL AND GENERAL COUNCIL OF TRENT,

Fius lY., pope.

Of our own proper motion, Ac "We have elsewhere
issued some other constitutions and ordinances, concerning
the reformation of the poenitentiarius major and of our
sacred penitentiary, of our vicar, and of his office, as also of
the chamberlain and the apostolic chamber, and of the causes
assigned to that auditor, and also of the auditors of the
causes of the apostolic palace, and of the governor, and of the
courts of the Capitol, and of the courts of appeal and other
tribunals of our noble city, and of the Eoman court, which,
however (as we have ascertained), are not observed with
sufficient care by the prefects and officials of the said officers
and tribunals. But whereas it is our most earnest wish,
that those, and in like manner the decrees of the sacred
Council of Trent, sliould be absolutely observed by the same
in those matters regarding their offices: for that reason we,
considering that it is not enough to grant laws, unless there
be those who majr take care that they be put in force, and
in the matters aK)resaid, even as we are bound by what is
due to the pastoral office enjoined on us (how undeserv-
ing soever we may be), to take wholesome and use useful
precautions, and wishing that the aforesaid constitutions and
ordinances, and decrees of the council, such as we here wish
them to be held as expressly indicated, be inviolably ob-
senxd : we commit and intrust to our venerable brethren,
£the cardinals] John Morone, bishop of Tusculum, John

y Cursores.

t2

276 MOTUB FBOFBIUS.

Michael Saracenus, of St. Anastasia, Giovanni Eattista
Cicada, of St. Clement, Michael Alexandrinus, of St. Sabina,
Clement of Saint Mary in Ara Caeli, Louis Simoneta, of
St.Cyriacus atThermsB, Carlo Borromoeus,of Saint Martin on
the Mounts, all priests, and further to Yetellotius, cardinal-
deacon of Saint Mary in the portico of Vitellius, to the end
that they themselves, or the majority of them, conjointly or
separately, by their free will, and even as executors of the
aforesaid letters, constitutions, and decrees, may cause the
constitutions and ordinances and decrees aforesaid, according
to their tenor, and that of the letters sent forth to this
effect, to be observed steadfastly and effectually, through all
the judges and officials of the courts of penitentiary,^
vicariate,** of the chambers and the aforesaid tribunals, under
the penalty of excommunication to be thereby incurred, and
deprivation of offices, and other such [penalties] as may
seem fit to the same cardinals, even pecuniary miucts to be
incurred by the same fact (unless in the execution as well
of the aforesaid decrees of the council, as of our letters
already mentioned, some doubt or difficulty shall have
arisen, in which case they may refer to us), even the aid of
the secular arm being called in, if need shall be, and let
them take care, announce, decree and declare, as we by these
presents® denounce, decree, and declare, that those who shall
not comply with the aforesaid letters and decrees, and the
commands of the same cardinals, from the present time, as
from the same day, being deprived of such offices, and also
considered as unfit in future to obtain those and other offices
of the Homan court, and they themselves being thus
deprived of the offices, [let them take care, announce, de-
cree, and declare, as we do,] that those offices being vacant
by privation, be sold by our datarius,*^ and may be purchased

* Pcenitentiaria : the Koman tribunal over which an ecclesiastic pre«
sided, called the Pcenitentiarivs major. To this functionary was assigned
the office of deciding cases reserved for the bishops. The dignity is said
to have been instituted in cathedral churches by the Council of Trent,
Sess. xxiv. cap. 8, Sess. xiv. cap. 7. See Du Cange, Gloss. 8. v. Pomi-
tentiariua major,

•* See Du Cange. vol. vi. p. 1549, sqq. « Harum serie.

^ The datarius is the chief officer of the Koman chancery, always at
prelate, and sometimes a cardinal, so called from the letters issued, ta

BULL Toxrcniiro the jobm of oath, etc. 277

freely and lawfully by any proper persons soeyer at a suitable
price, bj our authority ; notwithstanding anj constitutions
and apostolical ordinances soeyer, and the statutes of the
penitentiary, and courts, as also of the aforesaid tribunals,
eyen though strengthened by an oath, &c. ; [notwithstand-
ing also] ill priyileges, indults, and apostolic letters granted
to them, and to the aforementioned officials and tribunals
under any tenor or forms soeyer, and with what clauses, and
decrees soever, eyen by a mottis proprius or after any other
manner. By all which, &c., we this time most absolutely
abrogate their tenor, &c., and we desire that they should
not be, by any means, yaUd in opposition to what is here
set forth.

Thus it seems good to us by our first special motion.

Giyen at Eome, at Saint Mark's, on the 4th nones of
August,® in the fifth year.

THE BULL OF OUR HOLY LORD, THE LORD PIUS, BY
DIVINE PROVIDENCE FOURTH POPE,

TOUOHINO THE FOBM OF THE OATH OF THE PBOFSSSION OF FAITH.

Pius, bishop, servant of the servants of God, for the
perpetual memory hereof.

The ofiice of apostolic servitude enjoined on us requires,
that those matters, which Almighty God has voucnsafed
divinely to inspire into the minds of the holy fathers
assembled in his name for the provident guidance of his
Church, we should hasten unhesitatingly to execute, unto
his praise and glory. Whereas, therefore, according to the
resolution of the Council of Trent, all who may happen
henceforward to be placed over cathedral and superior
churches, or who may have to take care respecting their
dignities, canonries, and any other ecclesiastical benefices
soever having the cure of souls, are bound to make a public
profession of the orthodox faith, and to promise and swear
that they will continue in obedience to the Church of Eome :
"We, willing that the same thing be observed likewise by all

which he adds the form, " given at Rome," &c. Du Cange, vol. ii.
p. 1313. • Aug. 2nd.

persons soever, who shall have the charge [of monasteries,
convents, houses, and any other places soever, of all regular
orders soever, even of military ones, under what name or
title soever, and besides, to the end that the profession of
one and the same faith be uniformly exhibited by all, and
that one only, and a certain form of it be made known unto
all, we, [willing] that a want of our solicitude should by no
means be felt by any one in this particular, by strictly
prescribing the tenor of these presents, we, by virtue of our
apostolic authority, command, that the form itself be pub-
lished, and be received and observed everywhere by those
whom it concerns ; in consequence of the decrees of the
council itself, as well as the other parties aforesaid, and that
the aforesaid profession be made solemnly according to this,
and no other form, under the penalties enacted by the
council itself against all contravening, under the following
terms : —

J, -Z\r. with steadfast faith believe and profess all and every
particular contained in the symbol of faith, which the Soty
Moman Church uses, to wit : " I believe in one Qod the
Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, of all things
visible and invisible ; and in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only
begotten Son of Ood, and boim of the Father before all ages,
God of Ood, light of light ; very God of very God, begotten
not made, consubstantial with the Father ; by whom all things
were made ; who for us men and for our salvation came doivn
from heaven, and was incarnated of the Holy Ghost from the
Virgin Mary, and was made man; teas crucified also for us
under Fo7itius Filate, suffered, and was buried; and rose
again on the third day according to the scriptures, and
ascended into heaven, sitteth at the right hand of the Father^
and will again come with glory to judge the living and the
dead, of whose kingdom there shall not be an end ; and in the
Holy Ghost, the Lord, and giver of life, xvho proceeds from
the Father and the Son ; who together with the Father and
Son is adored and glorified ; who spake through the prophets;
and one Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church. I confess one
baptism for the remission of sins, and I aivait the resurrection
of the dead, and the life of the world to come. Amen^ The
apostolical and ecclesiastical traditions, and the other observ-
ances and constitutions if the same Church, I most steadfastly/

OP THE FBOFSSSIOir OF FAITH. 279*

admit and embrace. I likewise admit the Holy Scripture
according to that sense which our Holy Mother Church has
held and does hold, whose province it is to judge of the true
sense and interpretation cf the sacred scriptures, Nor mlt
I ever understand or interpret it, except according to the
unanimous consent of the holy fathers, I also profess that
there are truly and properly seven sacraments of the new Law
instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ, and necessary for the
salvation of mankind, though not all necessary to each indi-
vidual; to wit, JBapiism, Confirmation, the JEucharist, Penance,
^Extreme Unction, Orders, and Matrimony, and that they
confer grace, and that of these. Baptism, Confirmation, and
Orders cannot be reiterated without sacrilege, I also receive
and admit all the received and approved ceremonies of the-
Catholic Church in the solemn administration of all the above-
mentioned sacraments, I embrace and receive all and every'
thing which in the holy Synod of Trent has been defined and
declared concerning original sin and justification, I profess
likewise that in the Mass is qffered to Ood a true,proper, and
propitiatory sacrifice for the living and the dead, and that in
the most holy sacrament of the JSucharist there is truly, really,
and substantially the body and blood, together with the soul
and divinity, of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that there takes^
place a conversion of the entire substance of the bread into
the body, and of the entire substance of the wine into the-
blood, which conversion the Catholic Church calls transub-
stantiation, I also confess that under one kind alone, Christ
is taken whole and entire, and a true sacrament, I stead-
fastly hold that there exists a purgatory, and that the souls^
there detained are assisted by the stiffrages of the faithful ; in
like manner also that the saints reigning along with Christ
are to be venerated and invoked, and that they qffer up prayers
for us, and that their relics are to be venerated, I steadfastly
assert that the images of Chinst and of the ever Virgin-
Mother of Ood, and in like manner of other saints, are to be
kept and retained, and that due honour and veneration is to
be awarded to them; J also maintain that the power of
indulgences has been left by Christ in his Church, and that the
use of them is most wholesome to the Christian people, I
recognize the Holy Catholic and jLpostolic Roman Church as
the mother and mistress of all churches ; and I promise and

swear true obedience to the Roman pontiff, successor of
St, iPeteTy prince of the apostles, and vicar of Jesus Christ,
All other things also delivered, defined, and declared hy the
sacred canons and oecumenical councils, and particularly hy
the holy Synod of Trent, I undouhtinyly receive and profess,
and at the same time all things contrary, and any heresies
soever condemned by the Church, and rejected and anath^
matized, I, in like manner, condemn, reject, and anathematize.
This true Catholic faith, outside of which no one can be saved,
which at present I readily profess and ti*uly hold, I, I^, pro-
mise, vow, and swear, that I will most steadfastly retain and
confess the same entire and undefiled to the last breath of life
(with God^s help), and that I will take care, as far as shall
be in my power, tliat it be held, taught, and preached by my
subjects, or those whose charge shall devolve on me in virtue
of my office. So help me God, and these holy gospels of
God,

But we will that the present letter be read according to
custom in our Apostolic chancery. And that they may the
more readily be open to all, let them be written out in its
Quintemum/ and also be printed.

Be it, therefore, lawful for no person soever to infringe
this page of our will and command, or to contravene it by
any rash daring. But if any one shall presume to attempt
this, let him Icnow that he will incur the indignation of
Almighty Qod, and of his blessed apostles Peter and Paul.
Given at Bome, at St. Peter's, in the year of the incarnation
of our Lord 1564, on the ides of November, and in the fifth
year of our pontificate.

Fed. Cabdinal Caesius.
Cae. Glomeiiius.

The above-written letter was read and published at Bome
in the Apostolic chancery, in the year of the incarnation of
our Lord 1564, on the Sabbath, 9th of the month of
December, in the fifth year of the pontificate of our most
holy father and lord in Christ, Pius IV. Pope.

A. LOMELLINUS, CustOS,

' The quinternum, or quinterino, was a volume, so called from the
number of leaves it contained. See examples in Du Cange, vol. v.
p. 1077.

BULL BETOKIira CEBTAIK FBIYILEOES, ETC. 281

BULL OF OUR HOLY LORD PIUS IV., BY DIVINB

PROVIDENCE POPE.

THE PRIVILEOES, EXSMFTIONS, IVMUKITIES, FACULTIES, DISPENSATIONS,
CONSEBVATORIES, INDULT8, ETC., TO WHAT PLACES AND PERSONS SOEVER
CONCEDED, IN THOSE PARTICULARS WHEREIN THET ARE AT VARIANCE
WITH THE STATUTES AND DECREES OF THE HOLT COUNCIL OF TRENT, ARE
REVOKED.

Piirs, bisliop, servant of the servants of God, for the per-
petual memory hereof.

Appointed to the see of the prince of the apostles, how
inferior soever in deserts, we can do nothing either more
wholesome for the universal Church committed unto our care
and solicitude, or more becoming the office of the apostolic
service enjoined on us, than [to take care that] the oecume-
nical Council of Trent, as it has^ chieflj under our auspices,
terminated happily, and amid the greatest unanimity of the
holy fathers, tnrough the mercy of God, so by the ministry
of our care it may be everywnere received by all who are
reputed for Christian piety, and, all obstacles removed, be
equally observed by all. Whereas, therefore, very many
decrees and statutes of a wholesome nature, and extremely
conducive to the universal reformation of morals, have been
put forth in the said council, preceded by the matured
examination of those present, to which many and different
privileges, exemptions, immunities, dispensations, faculties,
conservatories, indults, and confessionals, as they call them,
and the great sea,B and other graces, which have been £;ranted
to various cathedral, metropolitan, as well as to collegiate
churches, monasteries, convents, and other religious houses
and orders, even to those of mendicant brethren, and also to
those of the Holy Ghost in Saxia, of St. John of Lateran,and of
the Incurables of the City, of St. Anthony of yieima,and of St.
Bernard of Jura, and other hospitals, mintary orders, and their
chapters and convents, and universities, even to colleges of ge-
neral studies, as well secular as ecclesiastic, to confraternities,

K Gf. Goncil. Lai. Y. Sess. xi. p. 1835. "Seu aliquod prsemissorum
eisdem ordinibus concessis, etiam in mari magno conientis. This name
-was applied to a specific bull. See the indexes to Harduin*B Concilia,
and ThomasinuB de Disciplina Ecclesiastica.

societies, and as well to buildings of the prince of the apostles
of the city, as to pther manufactories, those of the holy cross,
and other pious places and works, as also to patriarchs, arch-
bishops, bishops, prelates, abbots, abbesses, priors, provosts, and
to other ecclesiastics as well seculars as regulars of different
orders and military services, and even to lay persons of what
dignity and state and degree soever, and of distinction, and
also to persons of both sexes distinguished by ducal, royal,
and imperial dignity, and also to some notaries, and also to
legates de latere and nuncios, as well perpetual as tempo-
rary, by several Eoman pontiffs oiu^ predecessors, and our-
selves and the Apostolic See and its legates, even by our
own proper motion, and with the certain knowledge and out
of the Mness of the apostolic power, or even with the con-
templation and in the sight of emperors, kings, dukes, and
other princes, in various ways, and at different periods,
generally or specifically, under any even fair pretext, and
also have been confirmed or renewed several times, are in
most particulars opposed : We, to whom it is especially at
heart, that so holy and most wholesome decrees of the
Church of Qod should, as is meet, everywhere obtain their
due effects, and be observed obediently by all, holding by
these presents as sufficiently expressed and fully insertea,
the tenor of the privileges, exemptions, immunities, facul-
ties, conservatories, indults, confessionals, the great sea, and
the other graces aforesaid, and of all apostolic and other
letters soever drawn up thereon, and of processes and de-
crees and whatever else have followed from them, as if they
were inserted word for word, by our proper motion, and
from our certain knowledge, and from the fulness of the
apostolic power, by the apostolic authority, by the tenor of
these presents declare, and even decree and ordain, that the
eame privileges, all and every one of the exemptions, immu-
nities, faculties, dispensations, conservatories, indults, con-
fessionals, the great sea, and other graces in each and every
point in which they are at variance with the statutes and
decrees of the council, are by right revoked, made null and
void, and reduced to the terms and limits of the council
itself, and should be considered as sucli, and that nothing is
in any respect to support them in opposition to the decrees
and statutes themselves, so that they should not be observed

CEBTAIK PBIYILEOES, ETO. • 283

everywhere and among all, but that thej ought to be held
and accounted as thoush thej hod never gone forth. De-
creeing, nevertheless, that all and every one of those parti-
culars which were traiisacted and done in any manner soever,
and shall for the ftiture be done by virtue of privileges,
exemptions, immunities, and dispensations, faculties, con-
servatories, indults, confessionals, and any other boons
soever of this kind, after the time when the council began to
be binding, are and are deemed to be, null, void, and invalid
in those points in which they are opposed to the decrees of
the aforesaid council, and that they can and ought to sup-
port no one, however circumstanced or qualified he may be,
as well in the forum fori,^ as they say, as in the forum con-^
scientia, and that it ought to be so judged and defined in
both forums by all the ordinaries of the several places what-
soever, and the other judges and commissaries whatsoever
exercising authority, likewise by the cardinals of the holy
Boman Church, the power of juoging otherwise being taken,
from them, and from any of them, and whatever may hapnen
knowingly or igiiorantly to bo attempted by any one, of wnat
authority soever, we decree to be null and void; notwith-
standing what may have preceded, and the apostolic consti-
tutions and ordinances, and other contrary [enactments].
"Wherefore let it be lawful for no one soever to infringe this
page of our declaration, statute, ordinance, and decree, or by
rash daring to contravene it. But if any one shall presume
to attempt this, let him know that he will incur the indig-
nation of Almighty God, and of his blessed apostles Peter
and Paul.

Given at Eome, at Saint Peter's, in the year of the incar-
nation of our Lord 1565, the 13th of the calends of March^
and the sixth year of our pontificate.

Cae. Glorieeixts,
P. Bishop op Naent.

H. CUMTK*

In the year from the nativity of our Lord 1565, on the
6th indiction, on the 24th day of Pebruary, in the sixth year

* /. e. the real court of justice, opposed to the supposed one of con-
science. The phrase " forum poenitentifle " is also in use. Cf. Bu Cange,
vol. iii. p. 654.

284 coKCEEKnra pbohibited books.

of the pontificate of our most Holy Father in Christ and our
lord Pius IV., by divine providence Pope, the apostolic
rescript was affixed and puhlished in the Campo di Eiore,
and on the doors of the Apostolic chancery, by us, Niccolo
de Mattheis and Camillo Gherubini, ushers of our holy lord
the Pope.

Philibebtus Phapuis, Master of the Ushers.

CONCERNING PROHIBITED BOOKS.

TEN BULES DBAWN UP BT THE FATHERS SELECTED BY THE SYNOD OF TBENT

AND APPROVED BY POPE PIUS IV.

EULE I.

Let all the books which before the year 1515 were con-
demned, whether by the sovereign pontiffs or by cecumenical
councils, and are not in this index, be considered to be con-
demn^ after the same manner as they were formerly con-
jdemned.

Eule II.

The books of arch-heretics, as well of those who invented
or excited heresies after the year above mentioned, as of
those who are or were the heads or leaders of heretics, such
as Lutlier, Zuinglius, Calvin, Balthazar, Pacimontanus,
Swenchfeldius, and such like, of what name, title, or argu-
ment soever, are utterly prohibited. And the books of
other heretics, such as professedly treat of religion, are
altogether condemned. Eut such as do not treat of religion
are permitted, after having been examined and approved by
Catholic theologians, by order of the bishops and inquisitors.
But Catholic books written as well by those who have after-
wards fallen into heresy, as by tliose who after falling have
returned to the bosom of the Church, being approved by the
theological faculty of some Catholic University or by a general
inquisition, may De permitted.

Eule III.

, Versions also of ecclesiastical writings, which have hitherto
been set forth by condemned authors, provided they contain

coKCEBKnra fbohibited books.' 285

nothing against sound doctrine, are permitted. But ver-
sions of the books of the Old Testament maybe allowed only
to learned and pious men at the discretion of the bishop,
provided they use such versions as elucidations of the Vul-
gate to understand the sacred scripture, but not as the
sound text. But let versions of the New Testament, made
by authors of the first class of this index, be allowed to no
one, because but little utility, but very much danger is to
flow from their perusal. . But if any annotations are made
public with such versions as are permitted, or with the Vul-
gate edition, the suspected passages being expunged by the
theolo^cal faculty of any Catholic University, or by a ge-
neral mquisition, they may be allowed to the same persons,
to whom the versions also [were permitted]. On which
conditions the entire volume of Biblia, which is commonly
called the Bible of Vatablus, or parts of it, may be granted to
pious and learned men. But, £rom the Bible of Isidore, let
the prologue and prolegomena of Clarius Brixianus be cut
out ; but let no one consider the text of it as the text of the
Vulgate edition.

EULE IV.

"Whereas it is evident from experience, that, if the sacred
books be permitted in the vulgar tongue indiscriminately,
more harm than utility arises therefrom by reason of the
temerity of men, in this respect let it depend on the dis-
cretion of the bishop or inquisitor, so that with the counsel
of the parish priest or the confessor, they can grant to them
the reading of the books translated by CathoHc authors in
the vulgar tongue, such persons as they may consider may
derive not injury, but an mcrease of faith and of piety from
such reading ; which power they may have with respect to
the scriptures. But whosoever shall presume to read them
without such power, let him not be able to obtain abso-
lution of his sms, unless he has first given back the books
to the ordinary. But the booksellers, who shall sell the
Bible written in the vulgar tongue, to a person not having
the aforesaid power, or shall in any other way grant it, is to
lose the price of the books, which shall be converted by the
bishop to pious purposes, and they shall be subject to other
penalties, accorcung to the quality of the oflence, at the dis-

286 OOKCBBKIKa PBOHIBITED BOOKS.

cretion of the same bishop. But regulars are not to haye
the power of reading or buying them, unless they have
power to do so from their prelates.

Bulb V.

Those books, which sometimes come forth as the works of
heretical authors, in which they set down little or nothing
of their own, but collect the words of others ; such as lexi-
cons, concordances, apophthegins, similes, indexes, and such
like, should they contain any matter mixed with them, which
may require expurgation, those matters being first taken
away or corrected by advice of the bishop or inquisitor
together with the advice of Catholic theologians, may be
permitted.

EULE VI.

Books treating in the vulgar idiom of controversies be-
tween Catholics and the heretics of our time, are not to
be allowed indiscriminately ; but let the same thing be ob-
served with regard to them as has been ordained respecting
Bibles written in the vulgar tongue. But there is no
reason why books written in the vulgar tongue on the sub-
ject of living well, of contemplating, confessing, and such
subjects, if they contain sound doctrine, should be prohi-
bited ; the same may be said of popular sermons in the
vulgar tongue. But if in any kingdom or province any
books have been prohibited, because they contained some
things which it would not bo expedient should be read by
all without selection, if their authors are Catholic, after they
have been emended, they may be permitted by the bishop
and the inquisitor.

EuLE yii.

Books which professedly treat of, relate, or teach lascivious
or wanton subjects, since regard must be had not only of
faith, but of morals also, which are wont readily to be cor-
rupted by the reading of such books, are ^,bsolutely prohi-
bited, and those who may possess them are to be severely
punished by the bishops. But the ancient books ^Titten by
the heathens, are permitted by reason of the elegance and pro-
priety of their language ; on no account, however, are they
to be used by boys in their lessons.

COVOEBiriKa PBOHIBITED BOOKCl. 287

EuLB vm.

Books, whose prominent subject is good, in whicli, how-
ever, some things are incidentallj inserted, which have a
tendency to heresy or impiety, diyination or superstition,
may be allowed, when expurgated by Catholic theologians,
by the authority of a geneittl inquisition. Let the same
judgment be fomed touching profogues, summaries, or an-
notations, which have been annexed by condemned authors
to books not condemned. But let them afterwards not be
printed unless emended.

EULE IX.

AH books and writings in ge6mancy. hydromaney, aero-
mancy, pjrromancy, oueuromancy, chiromancy, necromancy,
or those in which drawing lots, sorceries, auguries, auspices,
incantations of the magic art are contaaned, are altogether
rejected. But let the bishops carefully see, that books,
treatises, indices of judicial astrology be not read or kept,
which dare to afi&rm something certain as likely to happen
regarding future contingent successes, or fortuitous casu-
alties, or those actions which depend on the human will.
But judgments and natural observations are allowed, which
are written for the purpose of aiding navigation, agriculture,
or the medical art.

EuLE X.

In the printing of books or other writings, let that which
was enacted in the Council of Lateran under Leo X.,
Session 10, be observed. Wherefore, if in the noble city
of Eome any book is to be printed, let it be first examined
by the vicar of the supreme pontiff, and the master of the
sacred palace, or by persons to be deputed by our most holy
lord. But in other places, let the approbation and examina-
tion of it appertain to the bishop or another person
acquaiilted with the book or writing to be printed, such
person to be deputed by the same bishop, and an inquisitor
of heretical depravity of that state or diocese in which
the printing will take place, and under the penalties and
censures contained in the same decree, let it be approved by
their hand, to be imposed by their own subscription, gratm-
tously, and without delay, this law and condition being

288 COKQEBNIKa FBOHIBITED BOOKS.

added, that an authentic copy of the book to be printed,
and one subscribed by the author's hand, should remain
with the examiner; but those who publish manuscript
treatises, unless they are first examined and approved, the
deputed fathers have judged ought to be subjected to the
same penalties as the printers ; and those wno may keep
and read them, unless they give up the authors, are to be
considered as the authors. But let the approbation itself be
given in writing, and let it appear authentically in firont of
the book, whether written or printed, and let the proving
and examination of the book, and all the rest be done
gratuitously. Moreover, in each state and diocese, let the
houses or places where the art of printing is nractised, and
the libraries of books for sale be frequently visited by
persons to be deputed for the purpose by the bishop or his
vicar, and also by the inquisitor of heretical depravity, so
that none of those things which are prohibited, may be
printed, or sold, or kept. But let all librarians and book-
sellers soever keep in their libraries a catalogue of the
books for sale, which they possess, with the subscription
of the aforesaid persons, and let them have or sell no other
books, or by any means deliver them without the license of
the same persons to be deputed, under pain of the loss of
the books, and other penalties to be imposed at the discretion
of the bishops or inquisitors. And let the buyers, readers,
or printers of the same, be punished at the pleasure of the
same. . But if any persons shall introduce any books soever
into any state, let them be bound to report them to the
same persons to be deputed, or, if a public place has been
appointed for such wares, let the public servants of such
place intimate to the aforesaid persons that such books have
been brought. But let no one dare to deliver a book which
he himself or another has brought into a city, to any person
to read, or in any way to transfer or lend it, unless he has
first shown the book, and has had a license from the persons
to be deputed, or, unless it be notoriously ascertained that
the book is now permitted to all. Let the same thing, also,
be observed by the heirs and executors of last wills, so that
they offer books which have been left by deceased persons,
or a list of them, to the persons to be deputed, and let them
obtain license from them, before they use them or in any

BULL OF APPBOBATIOK, iETC. 289

way transfer them to other persons. But in all and each
of these particulars^ let the penalty be determined either of
the loss of the books, or any other, according to the dis-
cretion of the same bishops or inquisitors, according to the
nature of the contumacy or offence.

But regarding the books which the deputed fathers have
examined or expurgated, or have deliverea to be expurgated,
or have allowed, on certain conditions, to be again printed ;
whatever appears to have been enacted by them, let book-
sellers, as well as others, observe. Let it, however, be
optional with bishops or general inauisitors, according to
the powers which they possess, to prohibit even those books
which seem to be permitted by these rules, if they should
judge this to be expedient in their kingdoms, or provinces,
or dioceses. But the names as well of the books which
have been expurgated by the fathers deputed, aa of those
to whom they assigned this province, have, by order of our
most holy lord, been delivered, copied out by the secretary
of the same deputed persons to the notary of the sacred
imiversal Eoman inquisition.

Finally, it is enjoined on all the faithful, that no one dare,
contrary to the direction of these rules, or to the prohibition
of this index, to read or keep anj books. But if any one
shall read or keep books of heretics, or the writings of any
author condemned and prohibited for heresy, or for the
suspicion of a false dogma, let him forthwith incur the
sentence of excommunication. But, whoever shall read or
keep books interdicted on any other pretext besides the
guilt of deadly sin, with which he is affected, let him be
severely punished at the discretion of the bishops.

THE BULL OF OUR HOLY LORD PIUS IV., BY DIVINE

PROVIDENCE POPE.

APPROBATION OF THE INDEX OF PROHIBITED BOOKS, WITH THE RULES
CONFIRMED BY THE FATHERS DEPUTED BY THE HOLY COUNCIL OF TRENT,
AND THE PROHIBITION TO KEEP OR READ THESE BOOKS.

Pius IV., pope, for the future memory hereof.
Appointed over the protecting the Lord's flock by the
disposition of the Lord, like unto a wakeful shepherd, we

29Q IBXnH 0? iJPPBOBATIOK, ETC.

cease not to guard the flock itself with the utmost care and
diligence from imminent dangers, lest through our negligence
the sheep may perish, which were redeemed by the most
precious blooa of our Lord Jesus Christ. Eut although
those matters which appertain to ky open the truth of faith
and to confiite the heresies of modern times were so
enucleated and defined in the oecumenical and general
Council of Trent, by the influence of the grace of th&
Holy Ghost, that it is now easy for each person to dis-
tinguish sound and Catholic doctrine &om that which is
false and spurious ; yet, whereas the reading of books
published by heretics is wont not only to corrupt mere
simple men, but also to lead learned and erudite men into
yarious errors and opinions, foreign to the truth of the
Catholic fidth, for this matter, also, wo deemed it necessary
to proyide.

But, knowing that the fittest remedy for that eyil was, if
an index or catalogue of the books which are either heretical,,
or suspected of heretical deprayity, or at least, are injurious
to morals and piety, were drawn up and published, we
referred that matter to the sacred Synod of Trent : this

f synod], out of so great a number of bishops and other most
earned men, chose for drawing up that index many prelates
distinguished as well for learning as judgment, from nearly
all nations. They, indeed, perfected that index by God's
help, not without the greatest labour and much watching ;
certain most distinguished theologians also being called in
to the council. But, the council being over, when, in
pursuance of the decree of the synod itself, that index had
been presented to us, so that it should not be published
before it had been approved by us, we delivered it to certain
most learned and approved prelates, to be read over most
carefully, and to be examined, and we ourselves read it.

"When, therefore, we had ascertained that it had been
drawn up with great study, keen judgment, and long care,
and besides, moat conveniently digested ; we, desiring to
consult for the salvation of souls, and for that reason to
take care that no books and writings of any kind, which are
disapproved in it either as heretical, or as suspected of
heretical depravity, or as detrimental to piety and purity of
morals, or at least, as requiring any correction, should here-

BTIIiL OP jiPPBOBATIOKy ETC. 291

after be read by the faithful in Christy by our apostdic
anthorily do approve bj theise presents tne index itself,
together with the rules prefixed to it, and wa command and
decree that it be printed and published, and that it bo
receiyed everywhere hj all Cauiolic universities and all
others soever, and that these rules be observed ;. prohibiting
all and every one, as well ecclesiastical persons, secular and
regular, of ^hat ^e. order, or dignity ^soever they may be.
as lay persons endowed with any honour and dignity soever,
that no one should dare to reaa or keep any books contrary
to the prescriptions of these rules, and the prohibition of
the index itself.

But if any one shall act in opposition to these rules and

Erohibition, ne, indeed, who shall read or keep the books of
eretics, or the writings of any author condemned and
Srohibited on account of heresy or the suspicion of &Ise
ogma, shall, by the very feet, fall under tne penalty of
excommunication, and for that reason it may be law&l to
inquire into, and proceed against him as one suspected of
heresy, besides the other penklties appointed for this by the
Apostolic See and the sacred canons. But let him who shall
read or keep books prohibited for any other cause besides
the guilt of deadly sin, know that ne is to be severely
punished at the discretion of the bishops ;. notwithstanding
any constitutions and ordinances soever to the contrary ; or
if an indult has been spranted to any coUectively or separately
by the same see, so that they may not be excommunicated
by apostolic letters, not makmg mil and express and word
for word mention of such indult.

But that these things may come to the knowledge of all
men, and that no one may be able to make use of the plea
of ignorance, we will ana command,, that these letters be
read out openly and with a loud voice by some ushers of our
court in the Vatican Basilica of the prmce of the apostles,
and in the Lateran church, at the time when the people is
wont to be assembled therein, in order to be present at the
solemn sacrifice of the masses, and after they have been read
out, they be affixed to the doors of these churches, and also
of those of the apostolic chancery, and in the usual place of
the Campo di Piore, and let them be left there for some
time, that they may be read and become known to all. But

v2

292 AKOIEKT OOKSTITUTIOKS.

when th&7 shall be removed thence, let copies of them
remain affixed in the same places. But hj this reading,
publication, and affixing, we will that each and every person
mcluded in these letters, in three months, to be reckoned
from the day of its publication and affixion, be [thereby]
bound and obliged in the same manner as if they nad been
published and read out to themselves. To copies also of it,
which copies have been written, subscribed by the hand of
some public notary, and vouched for by the seal and sub-
scription of some person constituted in ecclesiastical dignity,
we command and decree that credit be attached without any
doubt.

Given at Eome, at St. Peter's, imder the seal of the
Pisherman, on the 24th day of March, 1564, the fifbh year of
our pontificate.

AkTONIUS ElOBABELLUS LAVELLnOJS.
