Canons of the Synods of Sardica, Carthage and Constantinople Received by the Ecumenical Councils
Translation: Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Second Series, vol. 14, ed. Henry R. Percival (1900), Public Domain
Source: https://archive.org/details/EarlyChurchFathers38Volumes

THE CANONS OF THE SYNODS OF SARDICA, 
CARTHAGE, CONSTANTINOPLE, AND CARTHAGE 
UNDER ST. CYPRIAN 

THE CANONS OF THE SYNODS OF SARDICA, CARTHAGE, CONSTANTINOPLE, AND 
CARTHAGE UNDER ST. CYPRIAN, WHICH CANONS WERE RECEIVED BY THE COUNCIL 
IN TRULLO AND RATIFIED BY II. NICE. 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE. 

I have placed the canons of Sardica and those of Carthage and those of the Council held at Constantinople 
under Nectarius and Theophilus, and that of the Council of Carthage under St. Cyprian, immediately after the 
Council in Trullo, because in file second canon of that synod they are for the first time mentioned by name 
as being accepted by the Universal Church. 

THE COUNCIL OF SARDICA. 

A.D. 343 OR 344. 

Emperors.-CONSTANTIUS AND CONTANS. 
Pope.-Julius I. 

Elenchus. 

Introduction on the date of the synod. 

Note on the text of the canons. 

The Canons with the Ancient Epitome and Notes. 

Other Acts of the Synod. 

Excursus as to this synod's claim to ecumenical character. 

INTRODUCTION ON THE DATE OF THE COUNCIL. 

(Hefele, Hist. Councils, Vol. II., pp. 86 et seqq.) 

Our inquiries concerning the Synod of Sardica must begin with a chronological examination of the date of 
this assembly. Socrates and Sozomen place it expressly in the year 347 A.D., with the more precise 
statement that it was held under the Consuls Rufinus and Eusebius in the eleventh year after the death of 
Constantine the Great, therefore after the 22d of May, 347, according to our way of reckoning. 
This was the most general view until, rather more than a hundred years ago, the learned Scipio Maffei 
discovered at Verona, the fragment of a Latin translation of an old Alexandrian chronicle (the Historia 
Acephala), and edited it in the third volume of the Osservazioni Litterarii in 1738. This fragment contains the 
information that on the 24th Phaophi (October 21), under the Consuls Constantius IV. and Constans II., in the 
year 346, Athanasius had returned to Alexandria from his second exile. As it is universally allowed, however, 
as we shall presently show more clearly, that this return certainly only took place about two years after the 
Synod of Sardica, Mansi hence saw the necessity of dating this synod as early as the year 344. In this he is 
confirmed by St. Jerome, in the continuation of the Eusebian chronicle, who, in accordance with the Historia 
Acephala, has assigned the return of St. Athanasius to the tenth year of the reign of the Emperor 
Constantius, in 346. 

Many learned men now followed Mansi, the greater number blindly; others, again, sought to contradict him, 
at first the learned Dominican, Mamachi; then Dr. Wetzer (Professor at Freiburg); and latterly, we ourselves 
in a treatise, "Controversen aber die Synode von Sardika," in the Tubinger Theol. Quartalschrift, 1 852. Soon 
after there was a fresh discovery. Some of the Paschal Letters of St. Athanasius, which until then were 
supposed to be lost, were discovered in an Egyptian monastery, with a very ancient preface translated into 
Syriac, and were published in that language by Cureton in London, and in the year 1852 in German by 

Professor Larsow, at the Grey Friars Convent, in Berlin. 

Among these Festal Letters, the nineteenth, intended for Easter 347, and therefore composed in the 
beginning of that year, had been rewritten in Alexandria, as the introduction expressly states. This confirms 
the statement of the Historia Acephala, that Athanasius was already returned to Alexandria in October, 346, 
and confirms the chief points of Mansi's hypothesis; while, on the other hand, it unanswerably refutes, by 
Athanasius' own testimony, the statements of Socrates and Sozomen (which, from their dependence on 
each other, only count as one), with reference to the date 347. 

As we said, Mansi placed this Synod in the year 344; but the old preface to the Festal Letters of St. 
Athanasius dates it in the year 343, and in fact we can now only hesitate between the dates 343 and 344. If 
the preface were as ancient and as powerfully convincing as the Festal Letters themselves, then the 
question concerning the date of the Council of Sardica would be most accurately decided. As, however, this 
preface contains mistakes in several places, especially chronological errors-for instance, regarding the 
death of Constantine the Great-we cannot unconditionally accept its statement as to the date 344, but can 
only do so when it corresponds with other dates concerning that time. 

Let us, at all events, assume that Athanasius came to Rome about Easter, 340. As is known, he was there for 
three whole years, and in the beginning of the fourth year was summoned to the Emperor Constans at Milan. 
This points to the summer of 343. From thence he went through Gaul to Sardica, and thus it is quite possible 
that that Synod might have begun in the autumn of 343. It probably lasted, however, until the spring; for when 
the two envoys, Euphrates of Cologne, and Vincent of Capua, who were sent by the Synod to the Emperor 
Constans, arrived in Antioch, it was already Easter 344. Stephen, the bishop of the latter city, treated them in 
a truly diabolical manner; but his wickedness soon became notorious, and a synod was established, which 
deposed him after Easter 344. Its members were Eusebians, who therefore appointed Leontius Castratus 
as Stephen's successor, and it is indeed no other than this assembly which Athanasius has in mind, when 
he says it took place three years after the Synod in Encoeniis, and drew up a very explicit Eusebian 
confession of faith, the <greek>makrostikos</greek>. 

The disgraceful behaviour of Bishop Stephen of Antioch for some time inclined the Emperor to place less 
confidence in the Arian party, and to allow Athanasius's exiled clergy to return home in the summer of 344. 
Ten months later, the pseudo-bishop, Gregory of Alexandria, died (in June, 345), and Constantius did not 
permit any fresh appointment to the see of Alexandria, but recalled St. Athanasius by three letters, and 
waited for him more than a year. Thus the see of Alexandria remained unoccupied for more than a year, until 
the last six months of 346. At length, in October, 346, Athanasius returned to his bishopric. 
We see then that by accepting the distinct statements of the Paschal Letters of St. Athanasius and the 
preface, we obtain a satisfactory chronological system in which the separate details cohere well together, 
and which thus recommends itself. One great objection which we formerly raised ourselves against the date 
344 can now be solved. It is certainly true that in 353 or 354 Pope Librius wrote thus: "Eight years ago the 
Eusebian deputies, Eudoxius and Martyrius (who came to the West with the formula 
<greek>makrostikos</greek>), refused to anathematize the Arian doctrine at Milan." But the Synod of Milan 
here alluded to, and placed about the year 345, was not, as we before erroneously supposed, held before 
the Synod of Sardica, but after it. We are somewhat less fortunate as regards another difficulty. The 
Eusebians assembled at Philippopolis (the pseudo-synod of Sardica) say, in their synodal letter: "Bishop 
Asclepas of Gaza was deposed from his bishopric seventeen years ago." This deposition occurred at an 
Antiochian synod. If we identified this synod with the well-known one of 330, by which Eustathius of Antioch 
also was overthrown, we should, reckoning the seventeen years, have the year 346 or 347, in which to place 
the writing of the Synodal Letter of Philippopolis, and therefore the Synod of Sardica. There are, however, 
two ways of avoiding this conclusion, either we must suppose that Asclepas has been already deposed a 
year or so before the Antiochian Synod of 330; or that the statement as to the number seventeen in the Latin 
translation of the Synodal Letter of Philippopolis (for we no longer possess the original text) is an error or 
slip of the pen. But in no case can this Synodal Letter alter the fact that Athanasius was again in Alexandria 
when he composed his Paschal Letter for the year 347, and that the Synod of Sardica must therefore have 
been held several years before. 

NOTE ON THE TEXT OF THE CANONS. 

The Canons of Sardica have come down to us both in Greek and Latin, and some writers such as Richer 
(Histoire Cone. Generale, Tom. i., p. 98), have been of opinion that the Latin text alone was the original, while 
others, such as Walch (Gesch. der Kirchenvers., p. 179), have arrived at a directly opposite conclusion. 
Now, however, chiefly owing to the investigations of the Ballerini and of Spittler, the unanimous opinion of 
scholars-so says Hefele-is that the canons were originally drawn up in both languages, intended as they 
were for both Latins and Greeks. I may perhaps remind the reader that in many Western collections of 
canons the canons of Sardica immediately follow those of Nice without any break, or note that they were not 

enacted at that council. It will also be well to bear in mind that they were received by the Greeks as of 

Ecumenical authority by the Council in Trullo, and as such are contained in the body of the Greek Canon 

Law. 

I have provided the reader with a very accurate translation of each text. 

THE CANONS OF THE COUNCIL OF SARDICA. 

The holy synod assembled in Sardica from various provinces decreed as follows. 

(Found in Greek in John of Constantinople's collection of the sixth century and several other MSS. Found 
also in the works of the Greek scholiasts. Found in Latin in the Prisca, in Dionysius Exiguus, and in Isidore, 
genuine and false.) 

CANON I. 

(Greek.) 

HOSIUS, bishop of the city of Corduba, said: A prevalent evil, or rather most mischievous corruption must 
be done away with from its very foundations. Let no bishop be allowed to remove from a small city to a 
different one: as there is an obvious reason for this fault, accounting for such attempts; since no bishop 
could ever yet be found who endeavoured to be translated from a larger city to a smaller one. It is therefore 
evident that such persons are inflamed with excessive covetousness and are only serving ambition in order 
to have the repute of possessing greater authority. Is it then the pleasure of all that so grave an abuse be 
punished with great severity? For I think that men of this sort should not be admitted even to lay 
communion.AII the bishops said: It is the pleasure of all. 

(Latin.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: A prevalent evil and mischievous corruption must be done away with from its 
foundation. Let no bishop be allowed to remove from his own city to another. For the reason of such 
attempts is manifest, since in this matter no bishop has been found who would remove from a larger city to a 
smaller one. It is therefore evident that these men are inflamed with excess of covetousness, and are 
serving ambition and aiming at the possession of power. If it be the pleasure of all, let so great an evil be 
punished right harshly and sternly, so that he who is such shall not even be admitted to lay communion. All 
with one accord answered: Such is our pleasure. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON I. 

NO bishop is to be found passing from a smaller to a greater city. If anyone should move from an humble to 
a more important see, he shall be excommunicated through his whole life as proud and grasping. 

VAN ESPEN. 

(Dissert, in Synod. Sard., 11.(1)) 

What Peter de Marca says (De Concordia Sacerdotii et Imp., Lib. V., cap. iv.), "Hosius presided over" this 
council as legate of the Roman bishop, rests upon no solid foundation, and no trace of any such legation is 
found in Athanasius or in any of the other writers who treated of this synod. Moreover such a thing is contrary 
to the form of subscription used. For of those who signed the first is Hosius, and Athanasius designates him 
simply as "from Spain," without any addition; and then next he mentions "Julius of Rome, by Archidamus 
and Philoxenus, his presbyters," etc. What is clearer than that, by the testimony of Athanasius, Julius was 
present by these two presbyters only, and that they only were his legates or vicars, who in his room were 
present at this synod? 

The first part of this canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici; Raymund's Decretales, De Clericis non 
residentibus, Cap. ii. 

CANON II. 

(Greek.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: But if any such person should be found so mad or audacious as to think to advance 
by way of excuse an affirmation that he had brought letters from the people [laity], it is plain that some few 
persons, corrupted by bribes and rewards, could have got up an uproar in the church, demanding, forsooth, 
the said man for bishop. I think then that practices and devices of such sort absolutely must be punished, so 
that a man of this kind be deemed unworthy even of lay communion in extremis. Do ye therefore make 
answer whether this sentence is approved by you. They [the bishops] answered: What has been said is 
approved of. 

(Latin.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: Even if any such person should show himself so rash as perhaps to allege as an 
excuse and affirm that he has received letters from the people, inasmuch as it is evident that a few persons 
could have been corrupted by rewards and bribes-[namely] persons who do not hold the pure faith— to 
raise an uproar in the church, and seem to ask for the said man as bishop; I judge that these frauds must be 
condemned, so that such an one should not receive even lay communion at the last. If ye all approve, do ye 
decree it. The synod answered: We approve. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON II. 

If anyone shall pass from one city to another, and shall raise up seditions, tickling the people and be 
assisted by them in raising a disturbance, he shall not be allowed communion even when dying. 

VAN ESPEN. 

To understand this canon aright it must be remembered that in the first ages of the Church the people were 
accustomed to have a share in the election of their bishop; and he whom the people demanded was 
usually ordained their bishop. 

ARISTENUS. 

This [penalty] is something unheard of and horrible, that he should not be deemed worthy of communion 
even at the hour of death; for it is a provision found nowhere else imposed by any canon, nor inflicted upon 
any sin. 

VAN ESPEN. 

The Greek author Aristenus [in the above remarks] probably has not erred from the truth when he asserts 
that to no crime was this penalty attached, if he refers to the Eastern Churches; for Morinus himself (in the 
xixth chapter of the ixth book, De Penitentia), confesses that this penalty was never attached to any crime 
among the Easterns: nevertheless in some Churches in the first ages the three crimes of idolatry, murder, 
and adultery were thus punished: that is, that to those who admitted any one of these, reconciliation was 
denied even at his death, "and this," says Morinus, "I think no one can deny, who is at all versed in the 
testimony of the ancients on this point." 

HEFELE. 

The addition in the Latin text, qui sinceram fidem non habent, is found both in Dionysius Exiguus and in 
Isidore and the Prisca, and its meaning is as follows: "In a town, some few, especially those who have not 
the true faith, can be easily bribed to demand this or that person as bishop." The Fathers of Sardica plainly 
had here in view the Arians and their adherents, who, through such like machinations, when they had gained 
over, if only a small party in a town, sought to press into the bishoprics. The Synod of Antioch moreover, in 
341 , although the Eusebians, properly speaking, were dominant there, had laid down in the twenty-first 
canon a similar, only less severe, rule. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Raymond's Decretales, cap. if, De electione, but with the 
noteworthy addition "unless he shall have repented." These words do not occur in the other Latin versions, 

and Hefele thinks them to have been added by Raymond of Pennaforte. 

CANON III. 

(Greek.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: This also it is necessary to add,-that no bishop pass from his own province to 
another province in which there are bishops, unless indeed he be called by his brethren, that we seem not 
to close the gates of charity. 

And this case likewise is to be provided for, that if in any province a bishop has some matter against his 
brother and fellow-bishop, neither of the two should call in as arbiters bishops from another province. 
But if perchance sentence be given against a bishop in any matter and he supposes his case to be not 
unsound but good, in order that the question may be reopened, let us, if it seem good to your charity, honour 
the memory of Peter the Apostle, and let those who gave judgment write to Julius, the bishop of Rome, so 
that, if necessary, the case may be retried by the bishops of the neighbouring provinces and let him appoint 
arbiters; but if it cannot be shown that his case is of such a sort as to need a new trial, let the judgment once 
given not be annulled, but stand good as before. 

(Latin.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: This also it is necessary to add, -that bishops shall not pass from their own province 

to another province in which there are bishops, unless perchance upon invitation from their brethren, that we 

seem not to close the door of charity. 

But if in any province a bishop have a matter in dispute against his brother bishop, one of the two shall not 

call in as judge a bishop from another province. 

But if judgment, have gone against a bishop in any cause, and he think that he has a good case, in order 

that the question may be reopened, let us, if it be your pleasure, honour the memory of St. Peter the Apostle, 

and let those who tried the case write to Julius, the bishop of Rome, and if he shall judge that the case 

should be retried, let that be done, and let him appoint judges; but if he shall find that the case is of such a 

sort that the former decision need not be disturbed, what he has decreed shall be confirmed. Is this the 

pleasure of all? The synod answered, It is our pleasure. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON 

No bishop, unless called thereto, shall pass to another city. Moreover a bishop of the province who is 
engaged in any litigation shall not appeal to outside bishops. But if Rome hears the cause, even outsiders 
may be present. 

VAN ESPEN. 

According to the reading of Dionysius and Isidore, as well as of the Greeks, Balsamon, Zonaras and 
Aristenus, as also of Hervetus the provision is that bishops of one province shall not pass to another in 
which there are NOT bishops. 

ZONARAS. 

Not only are bishops prohibited from changing their cities, and passing from a smaller to a larger one, but 
also from passing from one province to another in which there are bishops, for the sake of doing any 
ecclesiastical work there unless they are called by the bishops of that province. 

On the phrase "if it pleases you" the following from St. Athanasius is much to the point (cit. by Pusey, 
Councils, p. 143). "They [i.e., the Council of Nice] wrote concerning Easter, 't seemed good' as follows: for it 
did then seem good, that there should be a general compliance; but about the faith they wrote not 'It 
seemed good,' but 'Thus believes the Catholic Church'; and thereupon they confessed how the faith lay, in 
order to shew that their sentiments were not novel, but apostolic." 

TILLEMONT. 

This form is very strong to shew that it was a right which the Pope had not had hitherto. 

VAN ESPEN. 

Peter de Marca (De Concordia Sacerdotii et Imperii, Lib. VII., Cap. iij., 8) says that Ho-sins here proposed to 
the fathers to honour the memory of St. Peter that he might the more easily lead them to consent to this new 
privilege; for, as De Marca has proved, the right here bestowed upon the Roman Pontiff was clearly 
unknown before. 

It has been urged that the mention of the pope by name, intimates clearly that the provision of these canons 
of an appeal to Rome was of a purely temporary character; and some famous authors such as Edmund 
Richer, of the Sorbonne, have written in defence of this view, but Hefele quotes with great force the words of 
the learned Protestant, Spittler (Critical Examination of the Sardican Decisions. Spittler, Sammtlichen 
Werken, P. viii., p. 129 sq.). 

SPITTLER. 

It is said that these Sardican decisions were simply provisional, and intended for the present necessity; 
because Athanasius, so hardly pressed by the Arians, could only be rescued by authorizing an appeal to 
the Bishop of Rome for a final judgment. Richer, in his History of the General Councils, has elaborately 
defended this opinion, and Horix also has declared in its favour. But would not all secure use of the canons 
of the councils be done away with if this distinction between provisional and permanent synodal decisions 
were admitted? Is there any sure criterion for distinguishing those canons which were only to be provisional, 
from the others which were made for all future centuries? The Fathers of the Synod of Sardica express 
themselves quite generally; is it not therefore most arbitrary on our part to insert limitations? It is beyond 
question that these decisions were occasioned by the very critical state of the affairs of Athanasius; but is 
everything only provisional that is occasioned by the circumstances of individuals? In this way the most 
important of the ancient canons might be set aside. 

HEFELE. 

According to the Greek text, and that of Dionysius, those who had pronounced the first judgment were to 
write to Rome; and Fuchs rightly adds, that they were to do this at the desire of the condemned. But, 
according to Isidore and the Prisca, the right or the duty of bringing the affair before Rome, also belonged to 
the neighbouring bishops. I believe that the last interpretation has only arisen through a mistake, from a 
comment belonging to the next sentence being inserted in the wrong place. It only remains to be remarked 
here, that Isidore and the Prisca have not the name Julio, ... But Hardouin's conjecture, that instead of Julio, 
perhaps illi may be read, is entirely gratuitous, contrary to the Greek text, and plainly only a stratagem 
against the Gallicans. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris (Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa VI., Quaest. iv., Canon 
j. 7, in Isidore's version. Dionysius's version is quite wrong as given by Justellus and in the Munich edition, 
changing the negative into the affirmative in the phrase ne unus de duobus. 

CANON IV. 

(Greek.) 

BISHOP GAUDENTIUS said: If it seems good to you, it is necessary to add to this decision full of sincere 
charity which thou hast pronounced, that(1) if any bishop be deposed by the sentence of these neighbouring 
bishops, and assert that he has fresh matter in defence, a new bishop be not settled in his see, unless the 
bishop of Rome judge and render a decision as to this. 

(Latin.) 

BISHOP GAUDENTIUS said: It ought to be added, if it be your pleasure, to this sentence full of sanctity 
which thou hast pronounced, that-when any bishop has been deposed by the judgment of those bishops 
who have sees in neighbouring places, and he [the bishop deposed] shall announce that his case is to be 
examined in the city of Rome-that no other bishop shall in any wise be ordained to his see, after the appeal 
of him who is apparently deposed, unless the case shall have been determined in the judgment of the 

Roman bishop. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON IV. 

If a bishop has been deposed and affirms that he has an excuse to urge, unless Rome has judged the 
case, no bishop shall be appointed in his room. For he might treat the decree with scorn either through his 
nuncios or by his letters. 

There are two distinct understandings of this canon. The one view is that the "neighbours" of this canon are 
the same as the "neighbours" of the preceding canon (number iij.) and that the meaning of this canon 
therefore is— If the court of second instance, correlating of the bishops of the neighbouring province, has 
pronounced the accused guilty, he still has one more appeal to a third court, viz., Rome. This is the view 
taken by the Greeks, Zonaras and Balsamon, by the Ballerini, Van Espen, Palrod, Walter, Natalis 
Alexander and many others. 

In direct opposition to this is the view that there is no third but only a second appeal mentioned by the canon. 
The supporters of this interpretation are Peter de Marca, Tillemont, Dupin, Fleury, Remi Ceillier, Neander, 
Stolberg, Echhorn, Kober, and with these Hefele sides and states his reasons for doing so. 

HEFELE. 

There must be added to the reasons of the connexion of this canon with the preceding, the course of events, 
etc.: 

1 . That it certainly would be very curious if in the third canon mention was made of the appeal to Rome as 
following the judgment of the court of first instance; in the fourth, after that of the court of second instance; and 
again in the fifth, after the judgment of the court of first instance. 

2. That if the Synod had really intended to institute a court of third instance, it would have done so in clearer 
and more express terms, and not only have, as it were, smuggled in the whole point with the secondary 
question, as to "what was to be done with the bishop's see." 

3. Farther, that it is quite devoid of proof that the expression "neighbouring bishops" is identical with 
"Bishops in the neighbourhood of the said Province," that, indeed this identification is throughout 
unwarrantable and wrong, and it is far more natural to understand by the neighbouring bishops, the 
comprovincials, therefore the court of first instance. 

4. That by this interpretation we obtain clearness, consistency, and harmony in all three canons. 

5. That the word <greek>palin</greek> in the fourth canon presents no difficulty; for even one who has only 
been heard in the court of first instance may say he desires again to defend himself, because he has 
already made his first defence in the court of first instance. 

CANON V. 

(Greek.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: Decreed, that if any bishop is accused, and the bishops of the same region 
assemble and depose him from his office, and he appealing, so to speak, takes refuge with the most 
blessed bishop of the Roman church, and he be willing to give him a hearing, and think it right to renew the 
examination of his case, let him be pleased to write to those fellow-bishops who are nearest the province 
that they may examine the particulars with care and accuracy and give their votes on the matter in 
accordance with the word of truth. And if any one require that his case be heard yet again, and at his request 
it seem good to move the bishop of Rome to send presbyters a latere, let it be in the power of that bishop, 
according as he judges it to be good and decides it to be right-that some be sent to be judges with the 
bishops and invested with his authority by whom they were sent. And be this also ordained. But if he think 
that the bishops are sufficient for the examination and decision of the matter let him do what shall seem 
good in his most prudent judgment. 
The bishops answered: What has been said is approved. 

(Latin.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: Further decreed, that if a bishop is accused, and the bishops of that region 
assemble and depose him from his office, if he who has been deposed shall appeal and take refuge with 

the bishop of the Roman church and wishes to be given a hearing, if he think it right that the trial or 
examination of his case be renewed, let him be pleased to write to those bishops who are in an adjacent 
and neighbouring province, that they may diligently inquire into all the particulars and decide according to 
the word of truth. But if he who asks to have his case reheard, shall by his entreaty move the Bishop of 
Rome to send a presbyter a latere it shall be in the power of that bishop to do what he shall resolve and 
determine upon; and if he shall decide that some be sent, who shall be present and be judges with the 
bishops invested with his authority by whom they were appointed, it shall be as he shall choose. But if he 
believe that the bishops suffice to give a final decision, he shall do what he shall termine upon in his most 
wise judgment. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON V. 

[Lacking.] 

This Canon is vii. of Isidore's collection. 

VAN ESPEN. 

Mere there is properly speaking no provision for "appeal," which entirely suspends [i.e. by the canon law] 
the execution and effect of the first sentence; but rather for a revision of judgment ... .; those who were sent by 
the Roman bishop from his side (a latere) or the bishops wire were appointed, ought, together with the 
bishops of the province who had given the former sentence, to give a fresh judgment and declare their 
sentence. And this Hinemar of Rheinus was the first to notice in his letters in the name of Charles the Bald 
sent to John VIII. 

This view is supported with his accustomed learning and acumen by Du Pin, De Antiqua Eccl. Disciplina, 
Diss. II., Cap. I., Sec. 3. 

CANON VI. 

(Greek.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: If it happen that in a province in which there are very many bishops one bishop 

should stay away and by some negligence should not come to the council and assent to the appointment 

made by the bishops, but the people assemble and pray that the ordination of the bishop desired by them 

take place-it is necessary that the bishop who stayed away should first be reminded by letters from the 

exarch of the province (I mean, of course, the bishop of the metropolis), that the people demand a pastor to 

be given them. I think that it is well to await his [the absent bishop's] arrival also. But if after summons by 

letter he does not come, nor even write in reply, the wish of the people ought to be complied with. 

The bishops from the neighbouring provinces also should be invited to the ordination of the bishop of the 

metropolis. 

It is positively not permitted to ordain a bishop in a village or petty town, for which even one single presbyter 

is sufficient (for there is no necessity to ordain a bishop there) lest the name and authority of bishop should 

be made of small account, but the bishops of the province ought, as before said, to ordain bishops in those 

cities in which there were bishops previously; and if a city should be found with a population so large as to 

be thought worthy of an episcopal see, let it receive one. 

Is this the pleasure of all? All answered: It is our pleasure. 

(Latin.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: If it shall have happened, that in a province in which there have been very many 
bishops, one [i.e., but one] bishop remains, but that he by negligence has not chosen [to ordain] a bishop, 
and the people have made application, the bishops of the neighbouring province ought first to address [by 
letter] the bishop who resides in that province, and show that the people seek a ruler [i.e., pastor] for 
themselves and that this is right, so that they also may come and with him ordain a bishop. But if he refuses 
to acknowledge their written communication, and leaves it unnoticed, and writes no reply, the people's 
request should be satisfied, so that bishops should come from the neighbouring province and ordain a 
bishop. 

But permission is not to be given to ordain a bishop either in any village, or in an unimportant city, for which 
one presbyter suffices, lest the name and authority of bishop grow cheap. Those [bishops] who are invited 
from another province ought not to ordain a bishop unless in the cities which have [previously] had bishops, 
or in a city which is so important or so populous as to be entitled to have a bishop. 
Is this the pleasure of all? The synod replied: It is our pleasure. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON VI. 

If the bishops were present when the people were seeking for a bishop, and one was away, let that one be 

called. Butt if he is willing to answer the call neither by letter nor in person, let him be ordained whom they 

desire. 

When a Metropolitan is appointed the neighbouring bishops are to be sent for. 

In a little city and town, for which one presbyter suffices, a bishop is not to be appointed. But if the city be 

very populous, it is not unfitting to do so. 

The second portion of this canon is entirely lacking in the Latin. The Greek scholiasts, Zonaras, Balsamon, 
and Aristenus, understand this to mean "that 'at the appointment of a metropolitan the bishops of the 
neighbouring provinces shall also be invited,' probably to give greater solemnity to the act," so says 
Hefele. And to this agree Van Espen, Tillemont, and Herbst. 

The first part in the Greek and Latin have different meanings; the Greek text contemplating the case of one 
bishop stopping away from a meeting of bishops for an election to fill a vacancy; the Latin text the case of 
there being only one bishop left in a province (after war, pestilence, or the like). This second meaning is 
accepted by Van Espen, Christian Lupus and others. Moreover, it would seem from Flodoard's History of 
the Church of Rheims (Geschichte der Rheimser Kirche, Lib. III., c. 20 [a book I have never seen]) that the 
Gallican Church acted upon this understanding of this canon. It is that also of Gratian. 
Between the Latin and the Greek text stands the interpretation of Zonaras, which is that if a province once 
having many bishops has by any contingency only one left besides the Metropolitan, and he neglects to be 
present at the consecration of the new bishops, he is to be summoned by letter of the Metropolitan, and if he 
does not then come, the consecrations are to go on without him. With this explanation Harmenopulus also 
agrees, adding further that the Metropolitan might alone consecrate the bishops, resting his argument on the 
words <greek>to</greek> <greek>ikaun</greek> <greek>k</greek>.<greek>t</greek>.<greek>l</greek>. 
Some scholars have supposed that neither the present Greek nor the present Latin text represent the 
original, but that the Greek text is nearest to it, but must be corrected by an ancient Latin version found by 
Maffei in a codex at Verona. The Ballerini have devoted careful attention to this point in their notes to the 
Works of St. Leo the Great (Tom. Hi., p. xxxij. 4). It would seem that this might be the canon quoted by the 
fathers of Constantinople in 382, and if so, it would seem that they had a Greek text like that from which the 
Verona version was made. 

VAN ESPEN. 

The fathers of Sardica [in the second part of this canon, which is Canon VII. by the Latin computation] 
decreed two things: first, that where the people justly asked for a Pastor to be ordained for them, their 
demand should be complied with; but where the people insisted upon having a bishop ordained for a 
village or little city, for which one presbyter was all that was needed, no attention should be paid to their 
demands, lest the name and authority of a bishop should become despicable. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, P. I., Distinc. Ixv., c. ix. 

CANON VII. 

(Greek.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: Our importunity and great pertinacity and unjust petitions have brought it about that 
we do not have as much favour and confidence as we ought to enjoy. For many of the bishops do not 
intermit resorting to the imperial Court, especially the Africans, who, as we have learned from our beloved 
brother and fellow-bishop, Gratus, do not accept salutary counsels, but so despise them that one man 
carries to the Court petitions many and diverse and of no possible benefit to the Church, and does not (as 
ought to be done and as is fitting) assist and help the poor and the laity or the widows, but is intriguing to 
obtain worldly dignities and offices for certain persons. This evil then causes enfeeblement [better, 

murmuring (read <greek>tonqrusmon</greek> or <greek>tonqrusmon</greek>)], not without some scandal 
and blame to us. But I account it quite proper for a bishop to give assistance to one oppressed by some 
one, or to a widow suffering injustice, or, again, an orphan robbed of his estate, always provided that these 
persons have a just cause of petition. 

If, then, beloved brethren, this seems good to all, do ye decree that no bishop shall go to the imperial Court 
except those whom our most pious emperor may summon by his own letters. Yet since it often happens that 
persons condemned for their offences to deportation or banishment to an island, or who have received 
some sentence or other, beg for mercy and seek refuge with the Church [i.e., take sanctuary], such persons 
are not to be refused assistance, but pardon should be asked for them without delay and without hesitation. 
If this, then, is also your pleasure, do ye all vote assent. 
All gave answer: Be this also decreed. 

(Latin.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: Importunities and excessive pertinacity and unjust petitions have caused us to have 
too little favour or confidence, while certain bishops cease not to go to the Court, especially the Africans, 
who (as we have learned) spurn and contemn the salutary counsels of our most holy brother and 
fellow-bishop, Gratus, so that they not only bring to the Court many and diverse petitions (not for the good of 
the Church nor, as is usual and right, to succour the poor or widows or orphans), but even seek to obtain 
worldly dignities and offices for certain persons. This evil therefore stirs up at times not only murmurings, but 
even scandals. But it is proper that bishops should intercede for persons suffering from violence and 
oppression, afflicted widows and defrauded orphans, provided, nevertheless, that these persons have a 
just cause or petition. 

If, then, brethren dearly beloved, such be your pleasure, do we decree that no bishops go to the Court 
except those who may have been invited or summoned by letters of the God-fearing emperor. But since it 
often happens that those who are suffering from injustice or who are condemned for their offences to 
deportation or banishment to an island, or, in short, have received some sentence or other, seek refuge with 
the mercy of the Church, such persons should be succoured and pardon be begged for them without 
hesitation. Decree this, therefore, if it be your pleasure. 
All said: It is our pleasure and be it decreed. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON VII. 

When an orphan, widow, and other desolate persons are oppressed by force let the bishop give them 
succour and approach the Emperor; but through a pretext of this kind let him not be a hanger on of the camp, 
but rather let him send a deacon. 

VAN ESPEN. 

The "salutary counsels" (salutaria consilia) here seem to be synodical admonitions, as Zonaras notes; and 
these might well be ascribed to Gratus, the bishop of Carthage, because many of the African synods were 
held under his presidency and direction. 

******* 

Nothing is more noteworthy than how from the first princes summoned bishops in counsel with regard to 

affairs touching either the estate of the Church or of the Realm; and called them to their presence in urgent 

and momentous cases, and kept them with them. 

Justinian, the emperor, in his Novels (Chapter II.) defines that no one of the God-beloved bishops shall dare 

to be absent any more from his diocese for a whole year, and adds this exception, "unless he does so on 

account of an imperial jussio; in this case alone he shall be held to be without blame." 

On this whole matter of bishops interceding for culprits, and especially for those condemned to death, see 

St. Augustine (Epist. 153 ad Macedonium). 

With this canon may be compared Canon VII. of the Council of Rheims in A.D. 630. 

This canon is found in part in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decreturn, P. II., Causa xxiij., Quaest. viij., 
c. xxviij. 

CANON VIM. 

(Greek.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: This also let your sagacity determine, that(1)-inasmuch as this was decreed in 
order that a bishop might not fall under censure by going to the Court-that if any have such petitions as we 
mentioned above, they should send these by one of their deacons. For the person of a subordinate does 
not excite jealousy, and what shall be granted [by the Emperor] can thus be reported more quickly. 
All answered: Be this also decreed. 

(Latin.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: This also your forethought should provide for-inasmuch as ye have made this 
decree in order that the audacity of bishops might not labour [or, be observed] to go to Court. Whosoever 
therefore shall have or receive petitions such as we have mentioned above, let them send these [each] by 
a deacon of his, because the person of a minister is not an object of jealousy, and he will be able to report 
more quickly what he has obtained. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON VIM. 

[Lacking.] 

VAN ESPEN. 

This decree is threefold. First, that the bishop in going to Court should not fall under suspicion either at Court 
or of his own people that he was approaching the Prince to obtain some cause of his own. Second, 
according to the interpretation of Zonaras, "that no one should be angry with the Minister or Deacon who 
tarried in camp, as the bishop had departed thence." And third, that the Minister could carry away what he 
had asked for, that is (according to Zonaras), the letters of the Emperor pardoning the fault, or such like other 
matters. 

CANON IX. 

(Greek.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: This also, I think, follows, that,(2) if in any province whatever, bishops send petitions 
to one of their brothers and fellow-bishops, he that is in the largest city, that is, the metropolis, should himself 
send his deacon and the petitions, providing him also with letters commendatory, writing also of course in 
succession to our brethren and fellow-bishops, if any of them should be staying at that time in the places or 
cities in which the most pious Emperor is administering public affairs. 

But if any of the bishops should have friends at the Court and should wish to make requests of them as to 
some proper object, let him not be forbidden to make such requests through his deacon and move these 
[friends] to give their kind assistance as his desire. 

But those who come to Rome ought, as I said before, to deliver to our beloved brother and fellow-bishop, 
Julius, the petitions which they have to give, in order that he may first examine them, lest some of them 
should be improper, and so, giving them his own advocacy and care, shall send them to the Court. 
All the Bishops made answer that such was their pleasure and that the regulation was most proper. 

(Latin.) 

THIS also seems to follow, that from whatever province bishops shall send petitions to that brother and 
fellow-bishop of ours who has his see in the metropolis, he [the metropolitan] should dispatch his deacon 
with the petitions, providing him with commendatory letters of like tenour to our brethren and fellow-bishops 
at that time resident in those regions and cities in which the fortunate and blessed Emperor is ruling the 
State. 

If however a bishop who seeks to obtain some petition (a worthy one, that is) has friends in the palace, he is 
not forbidden to make his request through his deacon and to advise those who, he knows, can kindly 
intercede for him in his absence. 

X. But let those who come to Rome, deliver, as before said, to our most holy brother and follow-bishop, the 
bishop of the Roman church, the petitions which they bear, that he also may examine whether they are 
worthy and just, and let him give diligence and care that they be forwarded to the Court. 
All said that such was their pleasure and that the regulation was proper. 

Bishop Alypius said: If they have incurred the discomforts of travel for the sake of orphans and widows or 
any in distress and having cases that are not unjust, they will have some good reason [for their journey]; but 
now since they chiefly make requests which cannot be granted without envy and reproach, it is not 
necessary for them to go to Court. 

NOTE. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON IX 

If one brother sends to another, let the Metropolitan fortify the nuncio with letters; and let him write to the 
bishops, who have the matter in hand, to protect the nuncio. 

Here the Latin is not only a translation but an interpretation of the Greek text, for it distinctly says that every 
bishop shall send the petition he intends to present at court first to his Metropolitan, who shah send it in. This 
is not clearly in the Greek, and yet the Greek Commentators find it there. 

CHRISTIAN LUPUS. 

The authority of the bishop alone is not sufficient to send a deacon to Court, there must be added the 
judgment of the Metropolitan who shah examine the petition, prove, sign, and commend it, not only to the 
Prince, but also to the bishop in whose diocese he may happen to be. 

HEFELE. 

Zonaras, Balsamon, and Aristenus explained this canon somewhat differently, thus: "If a bishop desires to 
send his petitions addressed to the Emperor to the bishop of the town where the Emperor is staying, he 
shall first send them to the Metropolitan of that province (according to Aristenus, his own Metropolitan) and 
the latter shall send his own deacon with letters of recommendation to the bishop or bishops who may be at 
court." This difference rests upon the various meanings of "to the brother and fellow-bishop" in the beginning 
of the canon. We understand by this his own Metropolitan, and treat the words: <greek>o</greek> 
<greek>en</greek> <greek>th</greek> <greek>meizoni</greek> <greek>k</greek>. <greek>t</greek>. 
<greek>l</greek>., as a more exact definition of "fellow-bishop," and the participle 
<greek>tugkanwn</greek> as equivalent to <greek>tugkanei</greek>, and make the principal clause 
begin at <greek>autos</greek> <greek>kai</greek> <greek>ton</greek> <greek>diakonon</greek>. 
Beveridge translated the canon in the same way. Zonaras and others, on the contrary, understood by 
"fellow-bishop," the bishop of the Emperor's residence for the time being, and regarded the words 
<greek>o</greek> <greek>en</greek> <greek>th</greek> <greek>meizoh</greek> <greek>k</greek>. 
<greek>t</greek>. <greek>l</greek>. not as a clearer definition of what had gone before, but as the 
principal clause, in the sense of "then the Metropolitan shall," etc. According to this interpretation, the words 
conveying the idea that the bishop must have recourse to the Metropolitan are entirely wanting in the canon. 
The first part of this Canon is the last part of Canon IX. of the Latin. The last partis Canon X. of the Latin, but 
the personal part about Alypius is omitted from the Greek. 

CANON X. 

(Greeks.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: This also I think necessary. (1) Ye should consider with all thoroughness and care, 
that if some rich man or professional advocate be desired for bishop, he be not ordained until he have 
fulfilled the ministry of reader, deacon, and presbyter, in order that, passing by promotion through the 
several grades, he may advance (if, that is, he be found worthy) to the height of the episcopate. And he shall 
remain in each order assuredly for no brief time, that so Iris faith, his reputable life, his steadfastness of 
character and considerateness of demeanour may be well-known, and that he, being deemed worthy of the 
divine sacerdotal office [sacerdotium, i.e., the episcopate] may enjoy the highest honour. For it is not fitting, 
nor does discipline or good conversation allow to proceed to this act rashly or lightly, so as to ordain a 
bishop or presbyter or deacon hastily; as thus he would rightly be accounted a novice, especially since 
also the most blessed Apostle, he who was the teacher of the Gentiles, is seen to have forbidden hasty 

ordinations; for the test of [even] the longest period will not unreasonably be required to exemplify the 

conversation and character of each [candidate]. 

All said that this was their pleasure and that it must be absolutely irreversible. 

(Latin.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: This also I think it necessary for you to consider most carefully, that if perchance 
some rich man or professional advocate or ex-official be desired for bishop, he be not ordained until he 
have fulfilled the ministry of a reader and the office of deacon and presbyter, and so ascend, if he have 
shown himself worthy, through the several grades to the height of the episcopate. For by these promotions 
which in any case take a considerable length of time can be tested his faith, his discretion, his gravity and 
modesty. And if he be found worthy, let him be honoured with the divine sacerdotal office [i.e. the 
episcopate]. For it is not fitting, nor does order or discipline allow, that one be rashly or lightly ordained 
bishop, presbyter or deacon, who is a novice, especially since also the blessed Apostle, the teacher of the 
Gentiles, is seen to have expressly forbidden it. But those [should be ordained] whose life has been tested 
and their merit approved by length of time. 
All said that this was their pleasure. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON X. 

No lawyer, teacher, or gentleman (<greek>plousios</greek>) shall be made a bishop without passing 
through the holy orders. Nor shall the space of time between the orders be made too brief, that there may be 
a better proof of his faith and good conversation. For otherwise he is a neophyte. 
This is Canon XIII. of Dionysius, Isidore, and the Prisca. 

VAN ESPEN. 

By Scholasticus de foro ["professional advocate"] must be understood an eloquent pleader of difficult 
causes, who being bound up in forensic disputes and strifes, may be presumed to be little fitted for the 
priesthood, and therefore to need a more strict examination. 

The Synodal approbation is lacking in Dionysius as given by Justellus, as well as in that of the Roman 
Code, but is found in Labbe's reprint of Dionysius and Isidore. 

This Canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, P. I., Dist. Ixj., c. x. 

CANON XI. 

(Greek.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: This also we ought to decree, that(1) when a bishop comes from one city to another 
city, or from one province to another province, to indulge boastfulness, ministering to his own praises rather 
than serving religious devotion, and wishes to prolong his stay [in a city], and the bishop of that city is not 
skilled in teaching, let him [the visiting bishop] not do despite to the bishop of the place and attempt by 
frequent discourses to disparage him and lessen his repute (for this device is wont to cause tumults), and 
strive by such arts to solicit and wrest to himself another's throne, not scrupling to abandon the church 
committed to him and to procure translation to another. A definite limit of time should therefore be set in such 
a case, especially since not to receive a bishop is accounted the part of rude and discourteous persons. 
Ye remember that in former times our fathers decreed that if a layman were staying in a city and should not 
come to divine worship for three [successive] Sundays [that is], for three [full] weeks, he should be repelled 
from communion. If then this has been decreed in the case of laymen, it is neither needful, nor fitting, nor yet 
even expedient that a bishop, unless he has some grave necessity or difficult business, should be very 
long absent from his own church and distress the people committed to him. 
All the bishops said: We decide that this decree also is most proper. 

(Latin.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: This also ye ought to determine. If a bishop comes from one city to another city, or 
from his own province to another province, and serving ambition rather than devotion, wishes to remain 

resident for a long time in a strange city, and then (as it perchance happens that the bishop of the place is 
not so practised or so learned as himself) he, the stranger, should begin to do him despite and deliver 
frequent discourses to disparage him and lessen his repute, not hesitating by this device to leave the 
church assigned him and remove to that which is another's-do ye then [in such a case] set a limit of time [for 
his stay in the city], because on the one hand to refuse to receive a bishop is discourteous, and on the other 
his too long stay is mischievous. Provision must be made against this. I remember that in a former council 
our brethren decreed that if any layman did not attend divine service in a city in which he was staying three 
Sundays, that is, for three weeks, he should be deprived of communion. If then this has been decreed in the 
case of laymen, it is far less lawful and fitting that a bishop, if there be no grave necessity detaining him, 
should be absent from his church longer than the time above written. 
All said that such was their pleasure. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XL. 

A bishop when called in by another bishop, if he that called him is unskilled, must not be too assiduous in 
preaching, for this would be indecorous to the unlearned bishop, and an attack upon his bishopric. And both 
improper, Without grave necessity it is undesirable for a bishop to be absent from his church. 
This is Canon XIV. of the Latin. 

VAN ESPEN. 

To understand this canon it must be again remembered that in the first ages of the Church bishops were 
wont to be appointed at the demand of the people; wherefore whoever were going around after the 
episcopate, were accustomed to solicit the hearts of the people, and to make it their study to win their 
affections. 

CANON XII. 

(Greek.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: Since no case should be left unprovided for, let this also be decreed. (1) Some of 
our brethren and fellow-bishops are known to possess very little private property in the cities in which they 
are placed as bishops, but have great possessions in other places, with which they are, moreover, able to 
help the poor. I think then permission should be given them, if they are to visit their estates and attend to the 
gathering of the harvest, to pass three Sundays, that is, to stay for three weeks, on their estates, and to 
assist at divine worship and celebrate the liturgy in the nearest church in which, a presbyter holds service, in 
order that they may not be seen to be absent from worship, and in order that they may not come too 
frequently to the city in which there is a bishop. In this way their private affairs will suffer no loss from their 
absence and they will be seen to be clear from the charge of ambition and arrogance. 
All the bishops said: This decree also is approved by us. 

(Latin.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: Since no case should be left unprovided for [let this also be decreed]. There are 
some of our brother-bishops, who do not reside in the city in which they are appointed bishops, either 
because they have but little property there, while they are known to have considerable estates elsewhere, 
or, it may be, through affection for kith and kin and in complaisance to these. Let this much be permitted 
them, to go to their estates to superintend and dispose of their harvest, and [for this purpose] to remain over 
three Sundays, that is, for three weeks, if it be necessary, on their estates; or else, if there is a neighbouring 
city in which there is a presbyter, in order that they may not be seen to pass Sunday without church, let them 
go thither, so that fin this way] neither will their private affairs suffer loss from their absence, nor will they, by 
frequent going to the city in which a bishop is resident, incur the suspicion of ambition and place-seeking. All 
said that this was approved by them. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XII. 

If a bishop has possessions outside his diocese, and visits them, let him be careful not to remain there more 

than three Lord's days. For thus his own flock will be enriched by him, and he himself will avoid the charge of 

arrogance. 

This is Canon XV. of the Latin. 

VAN ESPEN. 

As Balsamon notes, this canon is an appendix to that which goes before, and the context of the canon 
indicates this clearly enough; for while the last canon decrees that no bishop is to be absent from his 
diocese for more than three Lord's days, without grave necessity, in this canon a certain modification is 
introduced with regard to certain bishops. 

HEFELE. 

According to the Latin text of Dionysius, it is: "Some bishops do not reside in their Cathedral town, etc." 
Isidore and the Prisca, however, are nearer the Greek text, as instead of resident they more rightly read 
possident. 

CANON XIII. 

(Greek.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: Be this also the pleasure of all. 'If any deacon or presbyter or any of the clergy be 
excommunicated and take refuge with another bishop who knows him and who is aware final he has been 
removed from communion by his own bishop, [that other bishop] must not offend against his brother bishop 
by admitting him to communion. (1) And if any dare to do this, let him know that he must present himself 
before an assembly of bishops and give account. 
All the bishops said: This decision will assure peace at all times and preserve the concord of all. 

(Latin.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: Be this also the pleasure of all. If a deacon or presbyter or any of the clergy be 
refused communion by his own bishop and go to another bishop, and he with whom he has taken refuge 
shall know that he has been repelled by his own bishop, then must he not grant him communion. But if he 
shall do so, let him know that he must give account before an assembly of bishops. 
All said: This decision will preserve peace and maintain concord. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XIII. 

Whose knowingly admits to communion one excommunicated by his own bishop is not without blame. 
This is Canon XVI. of the Latin. 

VAN ESPEN. 

The present canon agrees with Canon V. of Nice and with Canon IV. of Antioch, on which canons see the 
notes. The Synod's approbation of this canon is found in Dionysius, Isidore, and in the Roman Codex apud 
Hervetus; but it is lacking from Balsamon and Zonaras. 

CANON XIV. 

(Greek.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: I must not fail to speak of a matter which constantly urgeth me.(1) If a bishop be 
found quick to anger (which ought not to sway such a man), and he, suddenly moved against a presbyter or 
deacon, be minded to cast him out of the Church, provision must be made that such a one be not 
condemned too hastily [or read <greek>aqwon</greek>, if innocent] and deprived of communion. 
All said: Let him that is cast out be authorized to take refuge with the bishop of the metropolis of the same 
province. And if the bishop of the metropolis is absent, let him hasten to the bishop that is nearest, and ask 

to have his case carefully examined. For a hearing ought not to be denied those who ask it. 
And that bishop who cast out such a one, justly or unjustly, ought not to take it ill that examination of the case 
be made, and his decision confirmed or revised. But, until all the particulars have been examined with care 
and fidelity, he who is excluded from communion ought not to demand communion in advance of the 
decision of his case. And if any of the clergy who have met [to hear the case] clearly discern arrogance and 
pretentiousness in him, inasmuch as it is not fitting to suffer insolence or unjust censure, they ought to correct 
such an one with somewhat harsh and grievous language, that men may submit to and obey commands 
that are proper and right. For as the bishop ought to manifest sincere love and regard to his subordinates, 
so those who are subject to him ought in like manner to perform the duties of their ministry in sincerity 
towards their bishops. 

(Latin.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: I must not fail to speak of a matter which further moveth me. If some bishop is 
perchance quick to anger (which ought not to be the case) and, moved hastily and violently against one of 
his presbyters or deacons, be minded to cast him out of the Church, provision must be made that an 
innocent man be not condemned or deprived of communion. 

Therefore let him that is cast out be authorized to appeal to the neighbouring bishops and let his case be 
heard and examined into more diligently. For a hearing ought not to be denied one who asks it. 
And let that bishop who cast him out, justly or unjustly, take it patiently that the matter is discussed, so that his 
sentence may either be approved by a number judges] or else revised. Nevertheless, until all the 
particulars shall be examined with care and fidelity, no one else ought to presume to admit to communion 
him who was excluded therefrom in advance of the decision of his case. If, however, those who meet to hear 
it observe arrogance and pride in [such] clergy, inasmuch as it surely is not fitting for a bishop to suffer 
wrong or insult, let them correct them with some severity of language, that they may obey a bishop whose 
commands are proper and right. For as he [the bishop] ought to manifest sincere love and charity to his 
clergy, so his ministers ought for their part to render unfeigned obedience to their bishop. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XIV. 

One condemned out of anger, if he asks for assistance, should be heard. But until [he shall have asked 
for(1)] the assistance let him remain excommunicated. 

This is Canon XVII. of the Latin version. 

VAN ESPEN 

This canon is intended especially to aid presbyters, deacons, and other clerics, who have been 
excommunicated precipitately and without just cause, or suspended by their own bishop in his anger and 
fury. ... The canon, moreover, admonishes that the bishop with regard to whose sentence the dispute has 
arisen shah patiently consent to the discussion of the matter de novo, whether his decision be sustained by 
the majority or emended. 

And let bishops and other prelates who have spiritual jurisdiction over the clergy note this, who cannot bear 
with equanimity that a word should be said against their decisions, but exact a kind of blind obedience, 
even frequently with great conscientious suffering to their very best ecclesiastics; and in such cases as do 
not promptly and blindly obey them, the clergy are traduced as rebels and even a patient hearing is refused 
to them. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, P. II., Causa XL, Q. iij., c. iv. 

[AFTER CANON XIV.] 

CANON XVIII. (Of the Latin.) 

BISHOP JANUARIUS said: Let your holiness also decree this, that no bishop be allowed to try to gain for 
himself a minister in the church of a bishop of another city and ordain him to one of his own parishes. 
All said: Such is our pleasure, inasmuch as discord is apt to spring from contentions in this matter, and 
therefore the sentence of us all forbids anyone to presume to do. 

NOTE. 

VAN ESPEN. 

It is manifest that these two canons [xviii. of the Latin and xv. of the Greek], contain the resolution of the same 
case, and therefore it is that the Greeks keep only the former which contains the decree of the synod, made 
on Hosius's motion, the suggestion having been made by Januarius the bishop: which suggestion makes 
the first of these canons. [I.e. Latin canon xviij.] 

CANON XV. 

(Greek.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: And let us all decree this also, that(2) if any bishop should ordain to any order the 
minister of another from another diocese without the consent of his own bishop, such an ordination should 
be accounted invalid and not confirmed. And if any take upon themselves to do this they ought to be 
admonished and corrected by our brethren and fellow-bishops. 
All said: Let this decree also stand unalterable. 

(Latin.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: This also we all decree, that if any [bishop] should ordain the minister of another 
from another diocese without the consent and will of his own bishop, his ordination be not ratified. And 
whoever shall have taken upon himself to do this ought to be admonished and corrected by our brethren 
and fellow-bishops. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XV. 

If one places a foreign minister without the knowledge of his own bishop in any grade 
<greek>embaqmon</greek>, in aliquo gradu), he has indeed made the appointment, but it is without force. 
This is Canon XIX. in the Latin. 

HEFELE. 

Fuchs, in his Bibliothek der Kirchenversammlungen (Pt. II., p. 123, note 125), thinks he has discovered a 
difference between this canon and the exclusively Latin one preceding it, in that the latter supposes the 
case of a bishop ordaining a foreign cleric, over whom he has no jurisdiction, to a higher grade, with the 
view of retaining him for his own diocese; while the other-fifteenth or nineteenth canon-treats of a case 
where such an ordination takes place without the ordaining bishop intending to keep the person ordained 
for his own diocese. Van Espen is of another opinion, and maintains that both canons obviously refer to one 
and the same case, for which reason the Greek text has only inserted one of them. It is certain that the text of 
both canons, as we have it, does not clearly indicate the difference conjectured by Fuchs, but that it may 
easily be found there. 

VAN ESPEN. 

If the reading of all the Latins and Greeks is decisive, this canon only treats of the ordination of those 
already ministers or clerics, and so the Greek commentators Balsamon, Zonaras, and Aristenus 
understood it, as is evident from their annotations. But Gratus, Bishop of Carthage, and Primate of Africa, in 
the First Synod of Carthage testified that in this canon it was decreed, that without the licence of his own 
bishop, a layman of another diocese was not to be ordained, and this interpretation or rather extension of 
the Canon, was received everywhere, as is demonstrated by the fifty-sixth of the African Code. 
This together with Canon XIX. of the Latin text are found as one in the Corpus Juris Canonici (Gratian's 
Decretum, P. I., Dist. Ixxj.), c. j. 

CANON XVI. 

(Greek.) 

BISHOP AETIUS said: Ye are not ignorant how important and how large is the metropolitan city of 
Thessalonica. Accordingly presbyters and deacons often come to it from other provinces and, not content 
with staying a short time, remain and make it their permanent place of residence, or are compelled with 
difficulty and after a very long delay to return to their own churches. A decree should be made bearing on 
this matter. 

Bishop HOSIUS said: Let those decrees which have been made in the case of bishops, be observed as to 
these persons also. 

(Latin.) 

BISHOP AETIUS said: Ye are not ignorant how large and important is the city of Thessalonica. Presbyters 
and deacons often come to it from other regions, and are not content to remain a short time, but either make 
their residence there or at least are with difficulty compelled to return after a long interval to their own place. 
All said: Those limits of time which have been decreed in the case of bishops ought to be observed as to 
these persons also. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XVI. 

What things have been decreed for bishops with regard to the length of their absence, applies also to 
presbyters and deacons. 

VAN ESPEN. 

This canon needs no explanation. 

CANON XVII. 

(Greek.) 

AT the suggestion moreover of our brother Olympius,(1) we are pleased to decree this also: That if a 
bishop suffer violence and is unjustly cast out either on account of his discipline or for his confession of [the 
faith of] the Catholic Church or for his defence of the truth, and, fleeing from danger, although innocent and 
devout [or, innocent and being under charge of high treason], comes to another city, let him not be forbidden 
to stay there until he is restored or until deliverance can be found from the violence and injustice that have 
been done him. For it would be harsh indeed and most oppressive that one who has suffered unjust 
expulsion should not be harboured by us; as such a man ought to be received with the greatest 
consideration and cordiality.* 
All said: This also is our pleasure. 

(Latin.) 

AT the suggestion of our brother Olympius, we are pleased to decree this also: That if any suffer violence 

and is unjustly cast out on account of his discipline and his Catholic confession or for his defence of the truth, 

and, fleeing from dangers, although innocent and devout, comes to another city, let him not be forbidden to 

stay there until he can return or his wrong has been redressed. For it is harsh and unfeeling that he who is 

suffering persecution should not be received; indeed, great cordiality and abundant consideration should 

be shown him. 

All the synod said: All that has been decreed the Catholic Church spread abroad throughout all the world will 

preserve and maintain. 

And all the bishops of the various provinces who had assembled subscribed thus: I, N., bishop of the city of 

N. and the province of N., so believe as above is written. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XVII. 

If a bishop goes into another province after he has been unjustly expelled from his own, he should be 
received, until he has been delivered from his injury. 
This is Canon XXI. of the Latin and the last. 

VAN ESPEN. 

St. Gregory seems to have had this canon in mind when he wrote to the bishops of lllyria (Lib. III., Epist. xliij.), 
who had been cast out by the hostility of the barbarians. 

CANON XVIII. 

(Greek.) 

BISHOP GAUDENTIUS said: Thou knowest, brother Aetius, that since thou wast made bishop, peace hath 
continued to rule [in thy diocese]. In order that no remnants of discord concerning ecclesiastics remain, it 
seems good that those who were ordained by Musaeus and by Eutychianus, provided no fault be found in 
them, should all be received. 
(This canon is wanting in the Latin.) 

CANON XIX. 

(Greek.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: This is the sentence of my mediocrity [i.e., unworthiness]-that, since we ought to be 
gentle and patient and to be constant in compassion towards all, those who were once advanced to clerical 
office in the Church by certain of our brethren, if they are not willing to return to the churches to which they 
were nominated [or, espoused], should for the future not be received, and that neither Eutychianus should 
continue to vindicate to himself the name of bishop, nor yet that Musaeus be accounted a bishop; but that if 
they should seek for lay communion, it should not be denied them. 
All said: Such is our pleasure. 
(This canon is wanting in the Latin.) 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANONS XVIII. AND XIX. 

A clergyman who does not live in the Church among whose clergy he is enrolled should not be received. 
Eutychian and Musoeus shall not have the name of bishops. But let them be admitted to communion with the 
laity, if they wish. 
Both of these canons are lacking in the Latin. 

HEFELE. 

It is clear that the reason why these two canons do not exist in the Latin text is that they did not apply to the 
Latin Church and only contained a special rule forThessalonica. 

CANON XX. 

(Greek.) 

BISHOP GAUDENTIUS said: These things wholesomely, duly, and filly decreed, in the estimation of us the 
bishops [<greek>twn</greek> <greek>ierewn</greek>] such as are pleasing both to God and to man will 
not be able to obtain due force and validity, unless fear [of a penalty] be added to the decrees proclaimed. 
For we ourselves know that through the shamelessness of a few, the divine and right reverend title of bishop 
[of the <greek>ths</greek> <greek>ierwsunhs</greek>] hath often come into condemnation. If therefore any 
one, moved by arrogance and ambition rather than seeking to please God, should have the hardihood to 
pursue a different course of action, contrary to the decree of all, let him know beforehand that he must give 
account and defend himself on this charge, and lose the honour and dignity of the episcopate. 
All answered: This sentence is proper and right, and such is our pleasure. (1) 
And this decree will be most widely known and best carried into effect, if each of those bishops among us 

who have sees on the thoroughfares or highway, on seeing a bishop [pass by] shall inquire into the cause 
of his passage and his place of destination. And if at his departure he shall find that he is going to the Court, 
he will direct his inquiries with reference to the objects [of a resort to the Court] above mentioned. And if he 
come by invitation let no obstacle be put in the way of his departure. But if he is trying to go to the Court out of 
ostentation, as hath afore been said by your charity, or to urge the petitions of certain persons, let neither his 
letters be signed nor let such an one be received to communion. 
All said: Be this also decreed 

(Latin.) 

BISHOP GAUDENTIUS said: These things which you have wholesomely and suitably provided [in your 
decrees] pleasing in [or, to] the estimation of all both [or, and] to God and to men, can obtain force and 
validity only in case fear [of a penalty] be added to this your action. For we ourselves know that through the 
shamelessness of a few the sacred and venerable sacerdotal [-episcopal] name hath been many times 
and oft brought to blame. If therefore anyone attempts to oppose the judgment of all and seeks to serve 
ambition rather than please God, he must be given to know that he will have to render an account and lose 
office and rank. 

This can be carried into effect only provided each of us whose see is on the highway shall, if he sees a 
bishop pass, inquire into the cause of his journey, ascertain his destination, and if he finds that he is on his 
way to the Court, satisfy himself as to what is contained above [i.e., as to his objects at Court], lest perhaps 
he has come by invitation, that permission may be given him to proceed. If, however, as your holiness 
mentioned above, he is going to Court to urge petitions and applications for office, let neither his letters be 
signed nor let him be received to communion. 
All said that this was proper and right and that this regulation was approved by them. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XX. 

[the last part of which in Beveridge, Synod., is numbered xxj.] 

If any bishop tries out of pride to do away with what has been decreed admirably, and in a manner pleasing 

to God, he shall lose his episcopate. A bishop who shall see a bishop on his way to the camp, if he shall 

know that he goes therefor any of the before-mentioned causes, let him not trouble him, but if otherwise let 

him pronounce excommunication against him. 

This is Canon XI. of the Latin. 

VAN ESPEN. 

After the words ["honour and dignity"] according to Balsamon and Zonaras, as also Gentian Hervetus, there 

follows the approbation of the synod in these words: "All answered, This opinion is becoming and 

well-pleasing to us," which indicate this to be the end of the canon; and therefore the Greeks make of this 

two distinct canons. 

Dionysius and Isidore make but one canon, ... and this appears to be more congruous on account of the 

subject-matter of the first part, and will be manifest by connecting the two parts together. 

Van Espen follows Zonaras and Balsamon in understanding "Bishops in Canali," as such as were set on 

the public roads and public highways, or rather "in cities which are on the public highways, or 'Canals,' by 

which they that pass go without labour, as in a canal or aqueduct the water flows, for aqueduct and canal are 

the same thing in the Roman tongue." 

[AFTER CANON XX.] 

CANON XII. (Of the Latin Texts.) 

BISHOP HOSIUS said: But some discretion is here requisite, brethren dearly beloved, in case some should 
come to those cities which are on the highway still ignorant of what has been decreed in the council. The 
bishop of such a city ought therefore to admonish him [a bishop so arriving], and instruct him to send his 
deacon from that place. Upon this admonition he must, however, himself return to his diocese. 

NOTES. 

VAN ESPEN. 

This proposition of Hosius in the Roman Codex is joined as an appendix to the preceding canon. The 
Greeks omit it altogether, very likely either because it seemed to be a proposition of Hosius's rather than a 
synodal canon, for no adoption by the synod is recorded: or else because, even if it were a decree, it was 
only of temporary character, that is to say, until the canons had been sufficiently promulgated, and therefore 
some on the ground of ignorance might be exempt from the threatened penalties. 

EXCURSUS ON THE OTHER ACTS OF THE COUNCIL. 

As only the Canons have any real connexion with the Ecumenical Synods, they alone have properly a 
place in this volume, and yet it may not be amiss to give a brief account of the other acts of the council, so 
far as we know them. 

(a) The Rule for Keeping Easter.-The Anglican Scholar, the Rev. William Cureton, of the British Museum, 
first edited the then recently discovered Preface to the Paschal Letters of St. Athanasius, together with the 
Letters themselves. The MS. which he then published was in Syriac and was discovered in Egypt. In the 
preface just referred to, it is expressly stated that "a plan was agreed upon at Sardica with regard to the 
feast of Easter." But this new plan, which was only expected to hold good for fifty years, failed, and although 
in A.D. 346 Easter should have fallen on March 23d, yet the Council (so says St. Athanasius) agreed to 
observe it on March 30th. Another divergence fell in A.D. 349. Easter, by the Alexandrian calculation, would 
have been April 23d. But by Roman count, the origin of which was attributed to St. Peter, Easter was never to 
be later than April 21st, and for the sake of peace the Alexandrians yielded to the Romans and kept Easter 
on March 26th; but in 350, 360, and 368 the Alexandrian and Roman methods again disagreed, and even the 
fifty years which Sardica had thought to ensure uniformity were marked by diverse usages. 

(b) The Encyclical Letter.-The Council addressed a long Encyclical letter to all the bishops of the world; it is 
found in St. Athanasius(l) in Greek, in St. Hilary of Poictiers(2) in Latin, and in Theodoret's Ecclesiastical 
History. (3) In this last there occurs at the end the so-called "Creed of Sardica," which is now considered by 
scholars to be undoubtedly spurious. 

(c) A Letter to the Diocese of Alexandria.-St. Athanasius(4) gives us the Greek text of a letter sent by the 
council to the diocese of Alexandria to the bishops of Egypt and Libya. 

(d) A Letter to Pope Julius.-Among the Fragments of St. Hilary(5) is found a letter from the synod to Pope 
Julius. Hefele says that the text is "considerably injured." One clause of this letter above all others has given 
occasion to much controversy. The passage runs as follows: "It was best and fittest that the priests [i.e., 
bishops] from all the provinces should make their reports to the head, that is, the chair of St. Peter." Blondell 
declares the passage to be an interpolation, resting his opinion upon the barbarous Latin of the expression 
valde congruentissimum. And even Remi Ceillier, while explaining this by the supposition, which is wholly 
gratuitous, that the original was Greek, yet is forced to confess that the sentence interrupts the flow of thought 
and looks like an insertion. Bower,(6) in his History of the Popes, and Fuchs(7) have urged still more 
strongly the spurious character of the phrase, the latter using the convenient "marginal comment" 
explanation. 

Besides these there are three documents which Scipio Maffei discovered in MS. at Verona, which by some 
are supposed to belong to the Council of Sardica. 

(a) A Letter to the Christians of Mareotis. 

(b) A Letter of St. Athanasius to the same Mareotic Churches. This letter is signed not only by Athanasius, 
but also by a great number of the bishops composing the synod. 

(c) A Letter from St. Athanasius to the Church of Alexandria. 

On the authority to be attributed to these three documents I can do no better than quote the closing words of 
Hefele, (8) whom I have followed in this whole excursus. 

"These extracts shew, I think, quite sufficiently the spuriousness of these documents. Is it possible that the 
Eusebians would have said of themselves: 'We are enemies of Christ?' But apart from this, the whole 
contents of these three letters are lame and feeble. The constant repetition of the same words is intolerable, 
and the whole style pointless and trivial. To this it must be added that the whole of Christian antiquity knew 
nothing of these three documents, which only exist in the codex at Verona, so that we cannot acknowledge 
them as genuine." 

EXCURSUS AS TO WHETHER THE SARDICAN COUNCIL WAS ECUMENICAL. 

Some theologians and canonists have been of opinion that the Council of Sardica was Ecumenical and 
would reckon it as the Second. But besides the fact that such a numbering is absolutely in contrariety to all 
history it also labours under the difficulty, as we shall see presently, that the Westerns by insisting that St. 

Athanasius should have a seat caused a division of the synod at the very outset, so that the Easterns met at 
Philippopolis and confirmed the deposition of the Saint. It is also interesting to remember that when 
Alexander Natalis in his history expressly called this synod ecumenical, the passage was marked with 
disapproval by the Roman censors. 

(Hefele. Hist. Councils. Vol. II., pp. 172 etseqq.) 

The ecumenical character of this Synod certainly cannot be proved. (1) It is indeed true that it was the design 
of Pope Julius, as well as of the two Emperors, Constantius and Constans, to summon a General Council at 
Sardica; but we do not find that any such actually took place: and the history of the Church points to many 
like cases, where a synod was probably intended to be ecumenical, and yet did not attain that character. In 
the present case, the Eastern and Western bishops were indeed summoned, but by far the greater number 
of the Eastern bishops were Eusebians, and therefore Semi-Arians, and instead of acting in a better mind in 
union with the orthodox, they separated themselves and formed a cabal of their own at Philippopolis. 
We cannot indeed agree with those who maintain that the departure of the Eusebians in itself rendered it 
impossible for the synod to be ecumenical, or it would be in the power of heretics to make an Ecumenical 
Council possible or not. We cannot, however, overlook the fact that, in consequence of this withdrawal, the 
great Eastern Church was far more poorly represented at Sardica, and that the entire number of bishops 
present did not even amount to a hundred! So small a number of bishops can only form a General Council if 
the great body of their absent colleagues subsequently give their express consent to what has been 
decided. This was not, however, the case at the Synod of Sardica. The decrees were no doubt at once sent 
for acceptance and signature to the whole of Christendom, but not more than about two hundred of those 
bishops who had been absent signed, and of these, ninety-four, or nearly half, were Egyptians. Out of the 
whole of Asia only a few bishops from the provinces of Cyprus and Palestine signed, not one from the other 
Eastern provinces; and even from the Latin Church in Africa, which at that time numbered at least three 
hundred bishops, we meet with very few names. We cannot give much weight to the fact that the Emperor 
Constantius refused to acknowledge the decrees of Sardica: it is of much greater importance that no single 
later authority declared it to be a General Council. Natalis Alexander(2) is indeed of opinion that because 
Pope Zosimus, in the year 41 7 or 41 8, cited the fifth canon of Sardica as Nicene, and a synod held at 
Constantinople in 382 cited the sixth as Nicene, the synod must evidently have been considered as an 
appendix to that of Nicea, and therefore its equal, that is, must have been honoured as ecumenical. But we 
have already shown how Zosimus and the bishops of Constantinople had been led into this confusion from 
the defects of their manuscript collections of the canons. Athanasius, Sulpicius Severus, Socrates, and the 
Emperor Justinian were cited in later times for the ecumenical character of this synod. Athanasius calls it a 
<greek>megalh</greek> <greek>sunodos</greek>; Sulpicius Severus says it was ex toto orbe convocata; 
and Socrates relates that "Athanasius and other bishops had demanded an Ecumenical Synod, and that of 
Sardica had been then summoned. (3) It is clear at the first glance that the two last authorities only prove that 
the Synod had been intended to be a general one, and the expression "Great Synod," used by Athanasius, 
cannot be taken as simply identical with ecumenical. While, however, the Emperor Justinian, in his edict of 
346, on the Three Chapters, calls the Synod of Sardica ecumenical, he yet, in the same edict, as well as in 
other places, does not reckon it among the General Councils, of which he counts four. To this must be 
added, first, that the Emperor is not the authority entitled to decide as to the character of an Ecumenical 
Synod; and secondly, that the expression Universale Concilium was employed in a wider sense in 
speaking of those synods which, without being general, represented a whole patriarchate. 
The Trullan Synod and Pope Nicholas I. are further appealed to. The former in its second canon approved 
of the Sardican canons, and Pope Nicholas said of them: "omnis Ecclesia recepit eos." But this in no way 
contains a declaration that the Synod of Sardica was ecumenical, for the canons of many other councils 
also-for instance, Ancyra, Neocaesarea, and others-were generally received without those synods 
themselves being therefore esteemed ecumenical. Nay, the Trullan Synod itself speaks for us; for had it 
held the Synod of Sardica to be the second General Council, it would have placed its canons immediately 
after those of Nice, whereas they are placed after the four ancient General Councils, and from this we see 
that the Trullan Synod did not reckon the Sardican among those councils, but after them. To this it must be 
added that the highest Church authorities speak most decidedly against the synod being ecumenical. We 
may appeal first to Augustine, who only knew of the Eusebian assembly at Sardica, and nothing at all of an 
orthodox synod in that place; which would have been clearly impossible, if it had at that time been counted 
among the ecumenical synods. Pope Gregory the Great(1) and St. Isidore of Seville(2) speak still more 
plainly. They only know of four ancient General Councils-those of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, and 
Chalcedon. The objection of the Ballerini that Gregory and Isidore did not intend to enumerate the most 
ancient general synods as such, but only those which issued important dogmatic decrees, is plainly quite 
arbitrary, and therefore wittiest force. Under such circumstances it is natural that among the later scholars by 
far the great majority should have answered the question, whether the Synod of Sardica is ecumenical, in 

the negative, as have Cardinal Bellarmin, Peter de Marca, Edmund Richer, Fleury, Orsi, Sacharelli, 
Tillemont, Du Pin, Berti, Ruttenstock, Rohrbacher, Remi Ceillier, Stolberg, Neander, and others. On the other 
hand, Baronius, Natalis Alexander, the brothers Ballerini, Mansi, and Palma(3) have sought to maintain the 
ecumenical character of the synod, but as early as the seventeenth century the Roman censors 
condemned the direct assertions of Natalis Alexander on the subject. 

THE CANONS OF THE CCXVII BLESSED FATHERS 
WHO ASSEMBLED AT CARTHAGE (THE CODE OF 
CANONS OF THE AFRICAN CHURCH) 

THE CANONS OF THE CCXVII BLESSED FATHERS WHO ASSEMBLED AT CARTHAGE. 

COMMONLY CALLED 

THE CODE OF CANONS OF THE AFRICAN CHURCH. 

A.D.419 

Elenchus. 

Introductory Note.The Canons with the Ancient Epitome and Notes. 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE. 

An attempt to write a commentary upon all the canons of the African Code, would have meant nothing less 
than the preparation of one volume or more on the canon law of the West. This is impossible and therefore, 
interesting as the field would be, I have been compelled to restrain my pen, and rather than give a scant and 
insufficient annotation, I have contented myself with providing the reader with as good a translation as I have 
been able to make of the very corrupt Latin (correcting it at times by the Greek), and have added the Ancient 
Epitome and the quaint notes in full of John Johnson from the Second Edition, of 1714, of his "Clergyman's 
Vade-mecum," Pt. II., which occupy little space, but may not be easily reached by the ordinary reader. The 
student will find full scholia on these Canons in Van Espen in the Latin, and in Zonaras and Balsamon in the 
Greek. These latter are in Beveridge's Synodicon. 

Johnson writes an excellent Introduction to his Epitome of these Canons, as follows: 
"Councils were nowhere more frequently called in the Primitive Times than in Africa. In the year 418-19, all 
canons formerly made in sixteen councils held at Carthage, one at Milevis, one at Hippo, that were 
approved of, were read, and received a new sanction from a great number of bishops, then met in synod at 
Carthage. This Collection is the Code of the African Church, which was always in greatest repute in all 
Churches next after the Code of the Universal Church. This code was of very great authority in the old 
English Churches, for many of the Excerptions of Egbert were transcribed from it. And though the Code of the 
Universal Church ends with the canons of Chalcedon,(1) yet these African Canons are inserted into the 
Ancient Code both of the Eastern and Western Churches. These canons though ratified and approved by a 
synod, yet seem to have been divided or numbered by some private and unlearned hand, and have 
probably met with very unskilful transcribers, by which means some of them are much confounded and 
obscured, as to their sense and coherence. They are by Dionysius Exiguus and others entituled The 
Canons of the Synod of Africa. And though all were not originally made at one time, yet they were all 
confirmed by one synod of African bishops, who, after they had recited the Creed and the twenty canons of 
the Council of Nice, proceeded to make new canons, and re-enforce old ones." 

In his "Library of Canon Law" (Bibliotheca Juris Canonici) Justellus gives these canons, and, in my opinion, 
gives them rightly, the title "The Code of Canons of the African Church" (Codex Canonum Ecclesioe 
Africanoe), although Hefele(2) describes them as "the collection of those African Canons put together in 419 
by Dionysius Exiguus." Hefele says that the title Dionysius gave them in his collection was "The Statutes of 
an African Council" (Statuta Concilii Africani) which would certainly be wholly inadequate and misleading; 
but in the edition of Dionysius in Migne's Patrologia Latina (Tom. LXVII., col. 181) in the Codex Canonum 
Ecclesiasticorum no such title occurs, but the perfectly accurate one, "A Synod at Carthage in Africa, which 
adopted one hundred and thirty-eight canons." This is an exact description of what took place and of the 
origin of these most important dogmatic and disciplinary enactments. Hefele must have been thinking of 
Dionysius's Preface where the expression does occur but not as a title. 
(Beveridge. Synodicon, Tom. II., p. 202.) 
Carthage was formerly the head of the whole of Africa, as St. Augustine tells us in his Epistle CLXII. From this 

cause it happened that a great number of councils were held there, gathered from all the provinces of Africa. 
Especially while Aurelius as Archbishop was occupying the throne were these meetings of bishops 
frequently holden; and by these, for the establishing of ecclesiastical discipline in Africa, many canons were 
enacted. At last, after the consulate of Honorius (XII.) and Theodosius (VIII.), Augustuses, on the eighth day 
before the Calends of June, that is to say, on May 25, in the year of our Lord 419, another Council was held in 
the same city at which all the canons previously adopted were considered, and the greater part of them 
were again confirmed by the authority of the synod. These canons, thus confirmed by this council, merited to 
be called from that day to this "The Code of Canons of the African Church." These canons were not at first 
adopted in Greek but in Latin, and they were confirmed in the same language. This Dionysius Exiguus 
distinctly testifies to in his preface to the "Code of Ecclesiastical Canons," in which they are included. It is 
uncertain when the canons of this Carthaginian synod were done into Greek. This only is certain, that they 
had been translated into Greek before the Council in Trullo by which, in its Second Canon, they were 
received into the Greek Nomocanon, and were confirmed by the authority of this synod; so that from that 
time these canons stand in the Eastern Church on an equality with all the rest. 

An extremely interesting point arises as to what was the authority of the collection as a collection, and how 
this collection was made? There seems no doubt that the collection substantially as we know it was the 
code accepted by the Council of Trullo, the canons of which received a quasi-ecumenical authority from the 
subsequent general imprimatur given them by the Seventh Ecumenical Council, the Second of Nice. Van 
Espen has considered this point at great length in Dissertation VIII. of the First Part of his Commentaries, and 
to his pages I must refer the reader for anything like an adequate presentation of the matter. He concludes 
(I.) that the "Code owes its origin to this synod," and argues against De Marca in proof of the proposition that 
the collection was not the private work of Dionysius, but the official work of the council by one of its officials, 
concluding with the remark (II.) that "this was the persuasion both of Greeks and Latins, ... and these canons 
are set forth by Balsamon with the title, 'The Canons of the CCXVII. Blessed Fathers who met together at 
Carthage.'" 

In the notes on each canon I shall give the source, following Hefele in all respects (Hist, of the Councils, vol. 
il., pp. 468 et seqq.), and content myself here with setting down a list of the various councils which made the 
enactments, with their dates. 

A.D. 

Carthage (under Gratus) 345-348 
" (under Genethlius) 387 or 390 
Hippo 393 

I. Carthage 394 

II. "(June 26) 397 

III. "(August 28) 397 
IV. " (April 27) 399 
V." (June 15) 401 

VI. "(September 13) 401 

VII. Milevis (August 27) 402 

VIII. Carthage (August 25) 403 
IX. " (June) 404 

X." (August 25) 405 

XI. "(June 13) 407 

XII. and XIII. Carthage (June 16 and October 13) 408 

XIV. Carthage (June 15) 409 

XV. "(June 14) 410 
XVI. " (May 1) 418 

XVII. " (May 25) which adopted the African Code 419 

The numbering of the African councils differs very widely between the different writers, and Cave reckons 
nine between 401 and 608, and thirty-five Carthaginian between 215 and 533.(1) Very useful tables, shewing 
the conclusions of Fuchs, are found at the end of Bruns, Canones Apostolorum et Conciliorum Veterum 
Selecti. 

I need only add that I have frequently used Dr. Bruns's text, but have not confined myself to it exclusively. 
Evidently in the Latin, as we now have it, there are many corrupt passages. In strange contradistinction to 
this, the Greek is apparently pure and is clear throughout. Possibly the Greek translation was made from a 
purer Latin text than we now possess. 

AN ANCIENT INTRODUCTION. 

(Found in Dionysius Exiguus, Codex Can. Migne, Pat. Lat., Tom. Ixvii., col. 182.) 

After the consulate of the most glorious emperors, Honorus for the twelfth time and Theodosius for the eighth 
time, Augustuses, on the VIM. before the Calends of June at Carthage, in the Secretarium of the basilica of 
Faustus, when Pope Aurelius had sat down, together with Valentine of the primatial see of the province of 
Numidia, and Faustinus of the Potentine Church, of the Italian province Picenum, a legate of the Roman 
Church, and also with legates of the different African provinces, that is to say, of the two Numidias, of 
Byzacena, of Mauritania Caesariensis, as well as of Tripoli, and with Vincent Colositanus, Fortunatian, and 
other bishops of the proconsular province, in all two hundred and seventeen, also with Philip and Asellus, 
presbyters and legates of the Roman Church, and while the deacons were standing by, Aurelius the bishop 
said, etc., ut infra. 

THE CANONS OF THE 217 BLESSED FATHERS WHO ASSEMBLED AT CARTHAGE. 

(Labbe and Cossart: Concilia, Tom. II. Col. 1041; Dionysius Ex. Codex Can. Eccles. [Migne, Pat. Lat., Tom. 
LXVII.]; Beveridge, Synodicon in lot.) 

AURELIUS THE BISHOP said:(1) You, most blessed brethren, remember that after the day fixed for the 
synod we discussed many things while we were waiting for our brethren who now have been sent as 
delegates and have arrived at the present synod, which must be placed in the acts. Wherefore let us render 
thanks to our Lord for the gathering together of so great an assembly. It remains that the acts of the Nicene 
Synod which we now have, and have been determined by the fathers, as well as those things enacted by 
our predecessors here, who confirmed that same Synod, or which according to the same form have been 
usefully enacted by all grades of the clergy, from the highest even to the lowest, should be brought forward. 
The whole Council said: Let them be brought forward. 

Daniel the Notary read: The profession of faith or statutes of the Nicene Synod are as follows. 
And while he was speaking, Faustinus, a bishop of the people of Potentia, of the Italian province of 
Picenum, a legate of the Roman Church said: There have been entrusted to us by the Apostolic See certain 
things in writings, and certain other things as in ordinances to be treated of with your blessedness as we 
have called to memory in the acts above, that is to say, concerning the canons made at Nice, that their 
decrees and customs be observed; for some things are observed out of decree and canon, but some from 
custom. Concerning these things therefore in the first place let us make enquiry, if it please your 
blessedness; and afterwards let the other ordinances which have been adopted or proposed be confirmed; 
so that you may be able to show by your rescripts to the Apostolic See, and that you may declare to the 
same venerable Pope, that we have diligently remembered these things; although the headings of action 
taken had been already inserted in the acts. (2) In this matter we should act, as I have said above, as shall 
please your beloved blessedness. Let, therefore the commonitorium come into the midst, that ye may be 
able to recognize what is contained in it, so that an answer can be given to each point. 
Aurelius said: Let the commonitorium be brought forward, which our brethren and fellow-ministers lately 
placed in the acts, and let the rest of the things done or to be done, follow in order. 

Daniel the Notary read the Commonitorium. To our brother Faustinus and to our sons, the presbyters Philip 
and Asellus, Zosimus, the bishop. You well remember that we committed to you certain businesses, and 
now [we bid you] carry out all things as if we ourselves were there (for), indeed, our presence is there with 
you; especially since ye have this our commandment, and the words of the canons which for greater 
certainty we have inserted in this our commonitory. For thus said our brethren in the Council of Nice when 
they made these decrees concerning the appeals of bishops: 
"But it seemed good that if a bishop had been accused, etc." [Here follows verbatim Canon v. of Sardica.] 

ANCIENT EPITOME. 

If bishops shall have deposed a bishop, and if he appeal to the Roman bishop, he should be benignantly 
heard, the Roman bishop writing or ordering. 

And when this had been read, Alypius, bishop of the Tagastine Church, and legate of the province of 
Numidia, said: On this matter there has been some legislation in former sessions of our council, and we 
profess that we shall ever observe what was decreed by the Nicene Council; yet I remember that when we 
examined the Greek copies of this Nicene Synod, we did not find these the words quoted-Why this was the 
case, I am sure I do not know. For this reason we beg your reverence, holy Pope Aurelius, that, as the 
authentic record of the decrees of the Council of Nice are said to be preserved in the city of Constantinople, 
you would deign to send messengers with letters from your Holiness, and not only to our most holy brother 
the bishop of Constantinople, but also to the venerable bishops of Alexandria and Antioch, who shall send 
to us the decrees of that council with the authentification of their signatures, so that hereafter all ambiguity 

should be taken away, for we failed to find the words cited by our brother Faustinus; notwithstanding this 
however we promise to be ruled by them for a short time, as I have already said, until reliable copies come 
to hand. Moreover the venerable bishop of the Roman Church, Boniface, should be asked likewise to be 
good enough to send messengers to the aforementioned churches, who should have the same copies 
according to his rescript, but the copies of the aforementioned Nicene Council which we have, we place in 
these Acts. 

Faustinus the bishop, legate of the Roman Church, said: Let not your holiness do dishonour to the Roman 
Church, either in this matter or in any other, by saying the canons are doubtful, as our brother and 
fellow-bishop Alypius has vouchsafed to say: but do you deign to write these things to our holy and most 
blessed pope, so that he seeking out the genuine canons, can treat with your holiness on all matters 
decreed. But it suffices that the most blessed bishop of the city of Rome should make enquiry just as your 
holiness proposes doing on your part, that there may not seem to have arisen any contention between the 
Churches, but that ye may the rather be enabled to deliberate with fraternal charity, when he has been heard 
from, what is best should be observed. 

Aurelius the bishop said: In addition to what is set down in the acts, we, by the letters from our insignificance, 
must more fully inform our holy brother and fellow-bishop Boniface of everything which we have considered. 
Therefore if our plan pleases all, let us be informed of this by the mouth of all. And the whole council said: It 
seems good to us. 

Novatus the bishop, legate of Mauritania Sitifensis, said: We now call to mind that there is contained in this 
commonitory something about presbyters and deacons, how they should be tried by their own bishops or 
by those adjoining, a provision which we find nothing of in the Nicene Council. For this cause let your 
holiness order this part to be read. 

Aurelius the bishop said: Let the place asked for be read. Daniel the notary read as follows: Concerning the 
appeals of clergymen, that is of those of inferior rank, there is a sure answer of this very synod, concerning 
which thing what ye should do, we think should be inserted, as follows: 

"Hosius the bishop said: I should not conceal what has come into my mind up to this time. If any bishop 
perchance has been quickly angered (a thing what should not happen) and has acted quickly or sharply 
against a presbyter or a deacon of his, and has wished to drive him out of the Church, provision should be 
made that the innocent be not condemned, or be deprived of communion: he that has been ejected should 
have the right of appeal to the bishops of the bordering dioceses, that his case should be heard, and it 
should be carried on all the more diligently because to him who asks a hearing it should not be denied. And 
the bishop who either justly or unjustly rejected him, should patiently allow the affair to be, discussed, so that 
Iris sentence be either approved or else emended, etc." 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME. 

A presbyter or deacon who has been cut off, has the privilege of appealing to the neighbouring bishops. 
Moreover, he who cut him off should bear with equanimity the conclusion arrived at. 

This is the first part of Canon xiv. of Sardica, as the canon previously quoted is Canon v. of the same synod. 
And when this had been read, Augustine, the bishop of the Church of Hippo of the province of Numidia, said: 
We promise that this shall be observed by us, provided that upon more careful examination it be found to 
be of the Council of Nice. Aurelius the bishop said. If this also is pleasing to the charity of you all, give it the 
confirmation of your vote. The whole Council said: Everything that has been ordained by the Nicene Council 
pleases us all. Jocundus, the bishop of the Church of Suffitula, legate of the province of Byzacena, said: 
What was decreed by the Nicene Council cannot in any particular be violated. 

Faustinus the bishop, legate of the Roman Church, said: So far as has developed by the confession of your 
holiness as well as of the holy Alypius, and of our brother Jocundus, I believe that some of the points have 
been made weak and others confirmed, which should not be the case, since even the very canons 
themselves have been brought into question. Therefore, that there may be harmony between us and your 
blessedness, let your holiness deign to refer the matter to the holy and venerable bishop of the Roman 
Church, that he may be able to consider whether what St. Augustine vouchsafed to enact, should be 
conceded or not, I mean in the matter of appeals of the inferior grade. If therefore there still is doubt, on this 
head it is right that the bishop of the most blessed see be informed, if this can be found in the canons which 
have been approved. 

ANCIENT EPITOME. 

Since the written decrees of the Nicene Council have not been found, let the Roman bishop deign to write to 

the bishop of Constantinople and to him of Alexandria, and let us know what he receives from them. 
Aurelius the bishop said: As we have suggested to your charity, pray allow the copies of the statutes of the 
Nicene Council to be read and inserted in the acts, as well as those things what have been most healthfully 
defined in this city by our predecessors, according to the rule of that council, and those which now have 
been ordained by us. And the whole council said: The copies of the Creed, and the statutes of the Nicene 
Synod which formerly were brought to our council through Caecilean of blessed memory, the predecessor 
of your holiness (who was present at it), as well as the copies of the decrees made by the Fathers in this city 
following them, or which now we have decreed by our common consultation, shall remain inserted in these 
ecclesiastical acts, so that (as has been already said) your blessedness may vouchsafe to write to those 
most venerable men of the Church of Antioch, and of that of Alexandria, and also of that of Constantinople, 
that they would send most accurate copies of the decrees of the Council of Nice under the authentification of 
their signatures, by which, the truth of the matter having become evident, those chapters which in the 
commonitory our brother who is present, and fellow-bishop Faustinus, as well as our fellow-presbyters Philip 
and Asellus brought with them, if they be found therein, may be confirmed by us; or if they be not found, we 
will hold a synod and consider the matter further. Daniel the notary read the profession of faith of the Council 
of Nice and its statutes to the African Council. 

The Profession of Faith of the Nicene Council. 

We believe in one God, etc., ... and in the Holy Ghost. But those who say, etc., ... anathematize them. 
The statutes also of the Nicene Council in twenty heads were likewise read, as are found written before. 
Then what things were promulgated in the African Synods, were inserted in the present acts. 

CANON I. 

Thatthe statutes of the Nicene Council are to be scrupulously observed. 

AURELIUS the bishop said: Such are the statutes of the Nicene Council, which our fathers at that time 
brought back with them: and preserving this form, let these things which follow, adopted and confirmed by 
us, be kept firm. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON I. 

Let the copies of the decrees of the Nicene Council which our fathers brought back with them from that 
synod, be observed. 

JOHNSON. 

It is certain that Caecilian, then Bishop of Carthage, was present at the Council of Nice; that any other African 
bishop was there does not appear; but probably he was attended with several clergyman, who were 
afterwards ordained bishops. 

CANON II. 

Of Preaching the Trinity. 

THE whole Council said: By the favour of God, by a unanimous confession the Church's faith which through 
us is handed down should be confessed in this glorious assembly before anything else; then the 
ecclesiastical order of each is to be built up and strengthened by the consent of all. That the minds of our 
brethren and fellow bishops lately elevated may be strengthened, those things should be propounded 
which we have certainly received from our fathers, as the unity of the Trinity, which we retain consecrated in 
our senses, of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, which has no difference, as we say, (2) so 
we shall instruct the people of God. Moreover by all the bishops lately promoted it was said: So we openly 
confess, so we hold, so we teach, following the Evangelic faith and your teaching. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON II. 

No difference is recognised or taught by the decrees of the Council of Nice between the Persons of the Holy 

Trinity. 

This canon, or rather introduction, is taken from Canon j., of the Council of Carthage held under Genethlius, 

A.D. 387 or 390.(1) 

CANON III. 

Of Continence. 

AURELIUS the bishop said: When at the past council the matter on continency and chastity was 
considered, those three grades, which by a sort of bond are joined to chastity by their consecration, to wit 
bishops, presbyters, and deacons, so it seemed that it was becoming that the sacred rulers and priests of 
God as well as the Levites, or those who served at the divine sacraments, should be continent altogether, 
by which they would be able with singleness of heart to ask what they sought from the Lord: so that what the 
apostles taught and antiquity kept, that we might also keep. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON III. 

Let a bishop, a presbyter, and a deacon be chaste and continent. 
This canon is taken from Canon ij., of Carthage 387 or 390. 

CANON IV. 

Of the different orders that should abstain from their wives. 

FAUSTINUS, the bishop of the Potentine Church, in the province of Picenum, a legate of the Roman Church, 
said: It seems good that a bishop, a presbyter, and a deacon, or whoever perform the sacraments, should 
be keepers of modesty and should abstain from their wives. 
By all the bishops it was said: It is right that all who serve the altar should keep pudicity from all women. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON IV. 

Let those who pray abstain from their wives that they may obtain their petitions. 
This canon is taken from Canon ij., of Carthage 387 or 390, last mentioned. 

JOHNSON. 

See Canon XXV. "Abstain from their wives," i.e. Some time before and after the Eucharist, as the old 
Scholiasts understand it. [i.e. the Greek scholiasts, but see notes to Canon xii]. of Quinisext.] 

CANON V. 

Of Avarice. 

AURELIUS, the bishop, said: The cupidity of avarice (which, let no one doubt, is the mother of all evil things), 
is to be henceforth prohibited, lest anyone should usurp another's limits, or for gain should pass beyond the 
limits fixed by the fathers, nor shall it be at all lawful for any of the clergy to receive usury of any kind. And 
those new edicts (suggestiones) which are obscure and generally ambiguous, after they have been 
examined by us, will have their value fixed (formam accipiunt); but with regard to those upon which the Divine 
Scripture hath already most plainly given judgment, it is unnecessary that further sentence should be 
pronounced, but what is already laid down is to be carried out. And what is reprehensible in laymen is 
worthy of still more severe censure in the clergy. The whole synod said: No one hath gone contrary to what 
is said in the Prophets and in the Gospels with impunity. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON V. 

As the taking of any kind of usury is condemned in laymen, much more is it condemned in clergymen. 
This canon is made up of Canons x. and xiij. of the Synod of Carthage held under Grains in A.D. 345-348. 
This synod was held to return thanks for the ending of the Donatist schism; and indeed for some time the evil 
did seem to have been removed. Donatist worship was prohibited by the imperial law and it was not until the 
times of Constans and Constantius that it again openly asserted itself. The synod while in session also took 
advantage of the opportunity of passing some useful general canons on discipline. 

JOHNSON. 

See Canon of the Apostles 36 (44); Nio, 17. 

CANON VI. 

Thatthe chrism should not be made by presbyters. 

FORTUNATUS the bishop, said: In former councils we remember that it was decreed that the chrism or the 

reconciliation of penitents, as also the consecration of virgins be not done by presbyters: but should anyone 

be discovered to have done this, what ought we to decree with regard to him? 

Aurelius the bishop said: Your worthiness has heard the suggestion of our brother and fellow-bishop 

Fortunatus; What answer will you give? 

And all the bishops replied: Neither the making of the chrism, nor the consecration of virgins, is to be done 

by presbyters, nor is it permitted to a presbyter to reconcile anyone in the public mass (in publica missa), 

this is the pleasure of all of us. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON VI. 

Let no presbyter make the chrism, nor prepare the unction, nor consecrate virgins, nor publicly reconcile 

anyone to communion. 

This is Canon iij. of the Carthaginian Synod under Genethlius, A.D. 387 or 390. 

JOHNSON. 

Not the chrism used upon persons at their baptism, says the scholion in Bishop Beveridge's Annotation, but 
the Mystical Chrism, viz., that used at Confirmation; though neither was the chrism used at baptism to be 
consecrated by Priests. See Deer, of Gelasius 6. 

Du Pin observes, That this is one of the first monuments where the name of "mass" occurs to signify the 
public prayers, which the church made at offering the Eucharist. And let the reader observe, that there is no 
mention of the "mass" in the copies which the Greeks made use of. And further, he restrains the meaning of 
the word "mass" too much, when he supposes that it denoted the Communion Office only. 

CANON VII. 

Concerning those who are reconciled in peril of death. 

AURELIUS the bishop said: If anyone had fallen into peril of death during the absence of the bishop, and 
had sought to reconcile himself to the divine altars, the presbyter should consult the bishop, and so 
reconcile the sick man at his bidding, which thing we should strengthen with healthy counsel. By all the 
bishops it was said: Whatever your holiness has taught us to be necessary, that is our pleasure. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON VII. 

A priest desiring to reconcile anyone in peril to the sacred altars must consult the bishop and do what 

seems good to him. 

This is Canon iv. of the Synod of 387 or 390. 

JOHNSON. 

See Canon 43. 

CANON VIM. 

Of those who make accusation against an elder; and that no criminal is to be suffered to 
bring a charge against a bishop. 

NUMIDIUS, the bishop of Maxula, said: Moreover, there are very many, not of good life, who think that their 
elders or bishops should be the butt for accusation; ought such to be easily admitted or no? Aurelius the 
bishop said: Is it the pleasure of your charity that he who is ensnared by divers wickednesses should have 
no voice of accusation against these? 
All the bishops said: If he is criminous, Iris accusation is not to be received. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON VIM. 

It has seemed good that they who are themselves defendants for crimes should not bring accusations; nor 

should they be allowed to lay crimes to anyone's charge. 

This is Canon vi. of Genethlius's Synod at Carthage, A.D. 387 or 390. 

JOHNSON. 

See Canons 132 and 133 and Constantinople Canon 6. 

[The "elders" mentioned in this canon are] probably the same with senes in other canons, viz., 
Metropolitans, as is generally believed. The Latin here calls them Majores natu, the Greek 
<greek>pateras</greek>. Bishop Beveridge supposes that the word denotes bishop, though perhaps 
Majores natu may signify presbyters. Justellus on the canon produces some seeming authorities for this. 

CANON IX. 

Of those who on account of their deeds are justly cast forth from the congregation of the 
Church. 

AUGUSTINE the bishop, the legate of the Numidian province, said: Deign to enact that if any perchance 
have been rightly on account of their crimes cast forth from the Church, and shall have been received into 
communion by some bishop or presbyter, such shall be considered as guilty of an equal crime with them 
who flee away from the judgment of their own bishop. And sit the bishops said: This is the pleasure of all of 
us. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON IX. 

Let him be excommunicated who communicates with one excommunicated. 
This is Canon vii. of the same synod of 387 or 390. 

CANON X. 

Of presbyters who are corrected by their own bishops. 

ALYPIUS the bishop, a legate of the province of Numidia, said: Nor should tiffs be passed over; if by 
chance any presbyter when corrected by his bishop, inflamed by self-conceit or pride, has thought fit to offer 
sacrifices to God separately [from the authority of the bishop] or has believed it right to erect another altar, 
contrary to ecclesiastical faith and discipline, such should not get off with impunity. Valentine, of the primatial 
see of the province of Numidia, said: The propositions made by our brother Alypius are of necessity 
congruous to ecclesiastical discipline and faith; therefore enact what seems good to your belovedness. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON X. 

If one condemned by his bishop shall separate himself and set up an altar or make the offering he should 
be punished. 

ARISTENUS. 

Whoever has been cut off by his own bishop and does not go to the synod to which his bishop is subject, 
that an examination may be made of the grounds of his cutting off, and that whatever is contrary to justice 
may be corrected; but, puffed up with pride and conceit, shall despise the synod and separate himself from 
the Church, and shall set up another altar, and shall offer to God the holy gifts; such an one shall not be 
allowed to go on with impunity, since he is acting contrary to the faith and constitution of the Church; but he is 
to be stricken with anathema. 
This and the following canon are Canon viii. of the so often mentioned synod of 387 or 390. 

JOHNSON. 

See Canon of the Apostles 24 (or 32) and that of Gangra 6. 

CANON XI. 

If any presbyter, inflated against his bishop, makes a schism, let him be anathema. 

ALL the bishops said: If any presbyter shall have been corrected by his superior, he should ask the 
neighbouring bishops that his cause be heard by them and that through them he may be reconciled to his 
bishop: but if he shall not have done this, but, puffed up with pride, (which may God forbid!) he shall have 
thought it proper to separate himself from the communion of his bishop, and separately shall have offered 
the sacrifice to God, and made a schism with certain accomplices, let him be anathema, and let him lose his 
place; and if the complaint which he brought against his bishop shall [not] have been found to be well 
founded, an enquiry should be instituted. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XI. 

A Presbyter condemned by his bishop, is allowed to appeal to the neighbouring bishops: but if he shall not 
make any appeal, but shall make a schism, and be elated with conceit and shall offer the Holy Gifts to God, 
let him be anathema. 

See note to last canon. The last clause is certainly corrupt; in the council of Carthage at which it was first 
adopted there is no "non," making the meaning clear. 

CANON XII. 

If any bishop out of Synod time shall have fallen under accusation, let his cause be heard 
by 12 bishops. 

FELIX the bishop, said: I suggest, according to the statutes of the ancient councils, that if any bishop (which 
may God forbid!) shall have fallen under any accusation, and there shall have been too great necessity to 
wait for the summoning of a majority of the bishops, that he may not rest under accusation, let his cause be 
heard by 12 bishops; and let a presbyter be heard by six bishops with his own bishop, and a deacon shall 
be heard by three. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XII. 

When a bishop is to be tried, if the whole synod does not sit, let at least twelve bishops take up the matter; 

and for the case of a presbyter, six and his own diocesan; and for the ease of a deacon, three. 
This is Canon x. of the Synod of Genethlius. 

JOHNSON. 

Hereby must be meant African canons; that under Gratus [A.D. 348] had decreed the same thing. 
Who was the bishop's judge at the first instance does not appear by this canon; but it is natural to suppose it 
was the Primate. It is probable that this canon is to be understood of hearing upon an appeal, because it is 
certain that a priest's cause, at the first instance, was to be tried before the bishop (see Can. 10, 1 1). And 
therefore the latter part of the canon can be understood of no hearing but by way of appeal, nor by 
consequence the former. And this seems more clear by Can. Afr. 29. 

CANON XIII. 

That a bishop should not be ordained except by many bishops, but if there should be 
necessity he may be ordained by three. 

BISHOP AURELIUS said: What says your holiness on this matter? By all the bishops it was answered: The 
decrees of the ancients must be observed by us, to wit, that without the consent of the Primate of any 
province even many bishops assembled together should not lightly presume to ordain a bishop. But should 
there be a necessity, at his bidding, three bishops should ordain him in any place they happen to be, and if 
anyone contrary to his profession and subscription shall come into any place he shall thereby deprive 
himself of his honour. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF XIII 

At the bidding of the Primate even three bishops can make a bishop. But whoever goes counter to his 
profession, and subscription, is deprived of his honour by his own judgment. 
This is Canon xij. of the before mentioned Synod of 387 or 390. 

JOHNSON. 

See Can. Ap. 1, Nic. 1. 

He that was called a Metropolitan in other Churches was a Primate in Africa. 

CANON XIV. 

That one of the bishops of Tripoli should come as legate, and that a presbyter might be 
heard there by five bishops. 

IT also seemed good that one bishop from Tripoli, on account of the poverty of the province, should come 
as a legation, and that there a presbyter might be heard by five bishops, and a deacon by three, as has 
been noted above, his own bishop presiding. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XIV. 

On account of the scarcity of bishops in Tripoli, one bishop shall suffice for a legation. 

This canon is made up of two parts. The first part is Canon v. of the synod of Hippo, A. D. 393, and was 

repeated at the Carthaginian synod of 397. The second half is from Canon viij. of the same council. 

JOHNSON 

(See Canon 12). 

"Legate," i.e., to a Synod, there being few bishops in that province. 

CANON XV. 

Of the divers orders who serve the Church, that if any one fall into a criminal business and 
refused to be tried by the ecclesiastical court, he ought to be in danger the re for; and thatthe 
sons of bishops (sa ce rdotum) a re not to atte nd worldly shows. 

MOREOVER it seemed good that if any bishop, presbyter, or deacon, who had a criminal charge brought 
against him or who had a civil cause, refused to be tried by the ecclesiastical tribunal, but wished to be 
judged by the secular courts, even if he won his suit, nevertheless he should lose his office. 
This is the law in a criminal suit; but in a civil suit he shall lose that for the recovery of which he instituted the 
proceedings, if he wishes to retain his office. 

This also seemed good, that if from some ecclesiastical judges an appeal was taken to other 
ecclesiastical judges who had a superior jurisdiction, this should in no way injure the reputation of those 
from whom the appeal was taken, unless it could be shown that they had given sentence moved by hatred 
or some other mental bias, or that they had been in some way corrupted. But if by the consent of both parties 
judges had been chosen, even if they were fewer in number than is specified, no appeal can be taken. 
And [it seemed good] that the sons of bishops should not take part in nor witness secular spectacles. For 
this has always been forbidden to all Christians, so let them abstain from them, that they may not go where 
cursing and blasphemy are to be found. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XV. 

A bishop or cleric who has a criminal suit brought against him, if he leaves the Church and betakes himself 
to secular judges even if he had been unjustly used, shall lose his rank. And if he was successful in his 
political affairs, if he follows this, he shall lose his own grade. No appeal can be taken from the 
ecclesiastical judges, except they be proved to have given their decision beforehand moved thereto by a 
bribe or by hatred. No appeal can be taken from the decision of judges chosen by each side. 
This canon is made up of Canons ix., x., and xj. of the Council of Hippo, A.D. 393. 

JOHNSON. 

In this canon the African bishops made bold with the Civil Courts. To lay such restraints on bishops and 
clergymen is, I am sure, very proper, to say no more. 

CANON XVI. 

That no bishop, presbyter or deacon should be a "conductor;" and that Readers should take 
wives; and thatthe clergy should abstain from usury; and at what age they or virgins should 
be consecrated. 

LIKEWISE it seemed good that bishops, presbyters, and deacons should not be "conductors" or 

"procurators;" nor seek their food by any base and vile business, for they should remember how it is written, 

"No man fighting for God cumbereth himself with worldly affairs." 

Also it seemed good that Readers when they come to years of puberty, should be compelled either to take 

wives or else to profess continence. 

Likewise it seemed good that if a clergyman had lent money he should get it back again, but if kind 

(speciem) he should receive back the same kind as he gave. 

And that younger than twenty-five years deacons should not be ordained, nor virgins consecrated. 

And that readers should not salute the people. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF XVI. 

A bishop, presbyter, and deacon may not be a "conductor" or a "procurator." A reader when he comes to 

puberty must contract marriage or profess continence. 

A cleric who has lent to someone, what he gave let him receive, or as much. 

Let not him be a deacons, who is made a deacon being under twenty-five. 

And let not readers salute the people. 

This canon is made up of Canons xv., xviij., and xxj., and added to these Canon j. of the same Second 
Series of the synod of Hippo, A.D. 393. 

JOHNSON. 

Zonaras says this was never observed anywhere but in Africa. See Can. Afr. 19 (27). 
Du Pin turns the Latin, saluto, by "addressing his speech to the people." 

CANON XVII. 

That any province on account of its distance, may have its own Primate. 

IT seemed good that Mauretania Sitiphensis, as it asked, should have a Primate of its own, with the consent 
of the Primate of Numidia from whose synod it had been separated. (1) And with the consent of all the 
primates of the African Provinces and of all the bishops permission was given, by reason of the great 
distance between them. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XVII. 

Mauretania Sitiphensis, on account of the great distance, is permitted to have its own Primate. 
This canon is Canon iij. of the first series of canons enacted at Hippo in 393. 

JOHNSON. 

N.B. From this place forward the Latin and Greek numeration varies; but Justellus's Edition in Greek and 
Latin follows the Latin division. 

CANON XVIII. (Gk. xviii. The Latin caption is the canon of the Greek.) 

If any cleric is ordained he ought to be admonished to observe the constitutions. 

And that neither the Eucharist nor Baptism: should be given to the bodies of the dead. 
And that every year in every province the Metropolitans come together in synod. 

(Gk. Canon xix.) 

It seemed good that before bishops, or clerics were ordained, the provisions of the canons should be 
brought to their notice, lest, they might afterwards repent of having through ignorance acted contrary to law. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF GREEK CANON XIX. 

The things which have been adopted by the synods should be made known to him who is to be ordained. 

(Gk. Canon xx.) 

It also seemed good that the Eucharist should not be given to the bodies of the dead. For it is written: "Take, 
Eat," but the bodies of the dead can neither "take" nor "eat." Nor let the ignorance of the presbyters baptize 
those who are dead. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF GREEK CANON 

The Eucharist is not to be given to the body of one dead for it neither eats nor drinks. 
The ignorance of a presbyter shall not baptize a dead man. 

(Gk. Canon xxi.) 

And therefore in this holy synod should be, confirmed in accordance with the Nicene decrees, on account of 
Ecclesiastical causes, which often are delayed to the injury of the people, that every year there should be a 
synod, to which all, who are primates of the provinces, should send bishops as legates, from their own 
synods, two or as many as they choose; so that when the synod meets it may have full power to act. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF GREEK CANON XXI. 

According to the decrees of the Nicene Fathers a yearly synod shall be assembled, and two legates or as 

many as they shall choose, shall be sent by the primates of every province. 

This is composed of Canons II., IV., and V. of the second series of enactments of Hippo, A.D. 393. 

JOHNSON. 

The 1 8th canon in the Edition of Tilius and Bishop Beveridge runs thus; viz. [If any clergyman be ordained 
he ought to be reminded to keep the canons; and that the Eucharist or Baptism be not given to dead 
corpses; and that the Metropolitans in every province meet in synod yearly.] They speak their own 
language, and call him a Metropolitan, whom the Africans called a Primate; but then they have also the 
entire 18th canon, as it here stands according to the Latin, which they divide into three, and number them 19, 
20,21. 

See Can. Nic. 5. It seems very odd that they should allege the authority of the Nicene Synod upon this 
occasion; for that orders a synod twice a year, this but once; that intends a provincial synod, this a diocesan 
or national one. 

CANON XIX. (Greek xxii.)(1) 

That if any bishop is accused the cause should be brought before the primate of his own province. 
AURELIUS, the bishop, said: Whatever bishop is accused the accuser shall bring the case before the 
primates of the province to which the accused belongs, and he shall not be suspended from communion by 
reason of the crime laid to Iris charge unless he fails to put in an appearance on the appointed day for 
arguing his cause before the chosen judges, having been duly summoned by the letters; that is, within the 
space of one month from the day in which he, is found to have received the letters. But should he be able to 
prove any true necessity which manifestly rendered it impossible for him to appear, he shall have the 
opportunity of arguing his case within another full month; but after the second month he shall not 
communicate until he is acquitted. 

But if he is not willing to come to the annual general council, so that his cause may there be terminated, he 
himself shall be judged to have pronounced the sentence of his own condemnation at the time in which he 
does not communicate, nor shall he communicate either in his own church or diocese. 
But his accuser, if he has not missed any of the days for pleading the cause, shall not be shut out from 
communion; but if he has missed some of them, withdrawing himself, then the bishop shall be restored to 
communion and the accuser shall be removed from communion; so, nevertheless, that the possibility of 
going on with the case be not taken from him, if he shall prove that his absence was caused by lack of 
power and not by lack of will. 

And this is enacted, that if the accuser turn out to be himself a criminal when the case against the bishop has 
come to argument, he shall not be allowed to testify unless he asserts that the causes are personal and not 
ecclesiastical. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XIX. 

A bishop accused and baled to judgment shall have the space of two months; if there is any excuse(1) for 
his delay from the other side. But after this he shall be excommunicated if he does not appear. But if when 
the accused is present the accuser flees, then the accuser shall be deprived of communion. But the accuser 
who is infamous shall not be an accuser at all. 

This canon is made up from Canons VI. and VII. of the last mentioned second series of the enactments of 
Hippo, 393. 

JOHNSON. 

See Can. Afr. 28 and Can. Ap. 1 1 (14). 

By this ["Universal Synod"] is meant a National Synod of Africa. 

See Can. Constantinople 6. 

CANON XX. (Greek xxiii.) 

Of accused presbyters or clerks. 

BUT if presbyters or deacons shall have been accused, there shall be joined together from the 
neighbouring places with the bishop of tile diocese, the legitimate number of colleagues, whom the 
accused shall seek from the same; that is together with himself six in the case against a presbyter, in that 
against a deacon three. They shall discuss the causes, and the same form shall be kept with regard to 
days and postponements and removals from communion, and in the discussion of persons between the 
accusers and the accused. 

But the causes of the rest of the clergy, the bishop of the place shall take cognizance of and determine 
alone. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XX. 

When a presbyter is accused, six of the neighbouring bishops together with the bishop of that region shall 

judge the matter. But for a deacon, three. What things concern the other clerics even one bishop shall 

examine. 

This is Canon viii. of Hippo, 393. 

JOHNSON. 

See Canon 12. 

CANON XXI. (Greek xxiv.) 

Thatthe sons of clergymen are not to be joined in marriage with heretics. 

LIKEWISE it seemed good that the sons of clergymen should not be joined in matrimony with gentiles and 
heretics. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXI. 

[The same as the canon.] 
This is Canon xij. of Hippo, 393. 

CANON XXII. (Greek xxv.) 

That bishops or other clergymen shall give nothing to those who are not Catholics. 

AND that to those who are not Catholic Christians, even if they be blood relations, neither bishops nor 
clergymen shall give anything at all by way of donation of their possessions. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXII. 

Bishops and clergymen shall give nothing of their goods to heretics, nor confer aught upon them even if they 

be their relatives. 

This is Canon xiv. of Hippo, 393. 

CANON XXIII. (Greek xxvi.) 

That bishops shall not go across seas. 

ITEM, That bishops shall not go beyond seas without consulting the bishop of the primatial see of his own 

province: so that from him they may be able to receive a formed or commendatory letter. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXIII. 

A bishop is not to cross the seas unless he has received from the Primate of his region a letter dimissory. 
This is Canon xxvij. of Hippo, 393. 

JOHNSON. 

See note on Canons of the Apostles, 10 (13). [viz:] 

[The use of Letters Commendatory was very early in the Church; St. Paul mentions them II. Cor. iij. 1 . And it is 
not easy to be conceived how discipline can be restored but by the reviving of this practice. It is surely 
irregular to admit all chance comers to the Communion, who, for aught we know, may stand 
excommunicated by their own bishop. Of the difference between Commendatory and Pacific and Formal 
Letters, see Can. Chalo, 11; Apost., 25, 26; Ant., 6; Sardio, 13]. 

CANON XXIV. (Greek xxvii.) 

That nothing be read in church besides the Canonical Scripture. 

ITEM, that besides the Canonical Scriptures nothing be read in church under the name of divine Scripture. 

But the Canonical Scriptures are as follows: 

Genesis. 

Exodus. 

Leviticus. 

Numbers. 

Deuteronomy. 

Joshua the Son of Nun. 

The Judges. 

Ruth. 

The Kings, iv. books. 

The Chronicles, ij. books. 

Job. 

The Psalter. 

The Five books of Solomon. 

The Twelve Books of the Prophets. 

Isaiah. 

Jeremiah. 

Ezechiel. 

Daniel. 

Tobit. 

Judith. 

Esther. 

Ezra, ij. books. 

Macchabees, ij. books. 

THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

The Gospels, iv. books. 

The Acts of the Apostles, j. book. 

The Epistles of Paul, xiv. 

The Epistles of Peter, the Apostle, ij. 

The Epistles of John the Apostle, iij. 

The Epistles of James the Apostle, j. 

The Epistle of Jude the Apostle, j. 

The Revelation of John, j. book. 

Let this be sent to our brother and fellow bishop, Boniface, and to the other bishops of those parts, that they 

may confirm this canon, for these are the things which we have received from our fathers to be read in 
church. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXIV. 

Let nothing besides the canonical Scriptures be read in church. 

This is Canon xxxvj. of Hippo., 393. The last phrase allowing the reading of the "passions of the Martyrs" on 

their Anniversaries is omitted from the African code. 

JOHNSON. 

These two books [i.e. the two Maccabees] are mentioned only in Dionysius Exiguus's copy. See Can. Ap. 

ult., Can. Laod. ult. 

"Boniface," i.e., Bishop of Rome. 

CANON XXV. (Greek xxviii.) 

Concerning bishops and the lower orders who wait upon the most holy mysteries. It has 
seemed good thatthese abstain from their wives. 

AURELIUS, the bishop, said: We add, most dear brethren, moreover, since we have heard of the 
incontinency of certain clerics, even of readers, towards their wives, it seemed good that what had been 
enacted in divers councils should be confirmed, to wit, that subdeacons who wait upon the holy mysteries, 
and deacons, and presbyters, as well as bishops according to former statutes, (1) should contain from their 
wives, so that they should be as though they had them not and unless they so act, let them be removed from 
office. But the rest of the clergy are not to be compelled to this, unless they be of mature age. And by the 
whole council it was said: What your holiness has said is just, holy, and pleasing to God, and we confirm it. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXV. 

Those who handle holy things should abstain even from their own wives at the times of their ministration. 
This is rounded upon Canon iv. of the Council of Carthage, which met September 13th, 401, but the 
provisions are more stringent here, subdeacons as well as deacons being constrained to continence. 

JOHNSON. 

"Times of ministration," so it is explained, Can. Trull., 13, where there were several African Bishops present, 
and allowed of that explication; yet Dion. Exig. is not clear, viz., Secundum propria statuta. 
By Can. Laod., 23. Ministers, i.e., sub-deacons, are forbid to touch the Holy Vessels, yet here they are said 
to handle the Mysteries; I suppose they might handle the Holy Vessels, etc. before and after the celebration, 
but not during the solemnity; or else the customs of several ages and countries differed as to this particular. 

CANON XXVI. (Greek xxix.) 

That no one should take from the possessions of the Church. (1) 

Likewise it seemed good that no one should sell anything belonging to the Church: that if there was no 
revenue, and other great necessity urged thereto, this might be brought before the Metropolitan of the 
province that the might deliberate with the appointed number of bishops whether this should be done: that if 
such urgent necessity lay upon any church that it could not take counsel beforehand, at least let it call 
together the neighbouring bishops as witnesses, taking care to refer all the necessities of his church to the 
council: and that if he shall not do this, he shall be held as responsible toward God, and as a seller in the 
eye of the council, and he shall have lost thereby his honour. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXVI. 

Church goods must not be sold. If they bring in no revenue they may be sold at the will of the bishops. If the 
necessity does not allow that consultation should take place, he who sells shall call together the 
neighbouring bishops. If he does not do so he shall be held responsible to God and to the Synod. 
This is Canon v. of the Synod of Carthage, Sept. 13th, 401. 

JOHNSON. 

"Appointed number," i.e., Twelve, see Canon 12. 

CANON XXVII. (Greek xxx.) 

Presbyters and deacons convicted of the graver crimes shall not receive laying on of 
hands, like layman. (2) 

IT also was confirmed that if presbyters or deacons were convicted of any of the greater crimes on account 
of which it was necessary that they should be removed from the ministry, that hands should not be laid upon 
them as upon penitents, or as upon faithful layman, nor should it be permitted that they be baptized over 
again and then advanced to the clerical grade. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXVII. 

A presbyter convicted and repenting, is not to be rebaptized as one to be advanced, neither as a layman is 

he to be reordained. 

This is Canon xij. of the before-mentioned Council of Carthage. Sept. 13th, 401 . 

JOHNSON. 

This canon seems to have been designed to preclude deposed clergymen from all possibility of being 
restored, directly or indirectly. 

CANON XXVIII. (Greek xxxi.) 

Presbyters, deacons, or clerics, who shall think good to carry appeals in their causes 
across the water shall not at all be admitted to communion. (1) 

IT also seemed good that presbyters, deacons, and others of the inferior clergy in the causes which they 
had, if they were dissatisfied with the judgments of their bishops, let the neighbouring bishops with the 
consent of their own bishop hear them, and let the bishops who have been called in judge between them: 
but if they think they have cause of appeal from these, they shall not betake themselves to judgments from 
beyond seas, but to the primates of their own provinces, or else to an universal council, as has also been 
decreed concerning bishops. But whoso shall think good to carry an appeal across the water shall be 
received to communion by no one within the boundaries of Africa. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXVIII. 

Clerics who have been condemned, if they take exception to the judgment, shall not appeal beyond seas, 
but to the neighbouring bishops, and to their own; if they do otherwise let them be excommunicated in Africa. 
This canon is the same as Canon xvij. of the Synod of Carthage of 418, but it has some words with regard to 
appeals which that canon does not contain, viz.: "Aut ad universale conciliam, sicut et de episcopis soepe 
constitutum est." This clause, affirming that bishops have often been forbidden to appeal across the water 
from the decisions of the African bishops, has caused great perplexity as no such decrees are extant. The 
Ballerini, to avoid this difficulty, and possibly for other reasons, suggest an entirely different meaning to the 
passage, and suppose that it means that "bishops have often been allowed to appeal to the Universal 
Council and now this privilege is extended to priests." (2) But this would seem to be a rather unnatural 

interpretation and Van Espen in his Commentary shews good reason for adopting the more evident view. 

JOHNSON. 

See Can. Afr., 19. 

Clearly the See of Rome is here aimed at, as if Carthage were the place designed by Providence to put a 
stop to the growth of power in Christian Rome, as well as heathen. It is strange, that this canon should be 
received by the Church of Rome in former ages. 

CANON XXIX. (Greek xxxii.) 

If anyone who is excommunicated shall receive communion before his cause is heard he brings damnation 
on himself.(8) 

LIKEWISE it pleased the whole Council that he who shah have been excommunicated for any neglect, 
whether he be bishop, or any other cleric, and shall have presumed while still under sentence, and his 
cause not yet heard, to receive communion, he shall be considered by so doing to have given sentence 
against himself. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXIX. 

One excommunicate who shall communicate before absolution sentences himself. 
This canon seems to be founded upon Canon iv. of Antioch. 

JOHNSON. 

See Can. Ap., 21 (29), Antioch, 4. 

By this canon the criminous bishop is supposed to be excommunicated before he comes to have his cause 
heard by a Synod, or by 12 neighbouring bishops: and it is therefore most rational to believe that he was 
thus censured by his Primate. See Can. Afr., 12. 

CANON XXX. (Greek xxxiii.) 

Concerning the accused or accuser. (1) 

LIKEWISE it seemed good that the accused, or the accusor, if (living in the same place as the accused) he 
fears some evil may be done him by the tumultuous multitude, may choose for himself a place near by, 
where the cause may be determined, and where there will be no difficulty in producing the witnesses. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXX. 

Accuser or accused may select for himself a safe place if he fears violence. 

CANON XXXI. (Greek xxxiv.) 

If certain clerics advanced by their own bishops are supercilious, letthem not remain 
whence they are unwilling to come forth. 

IT also seemed good that whoever of the clergy or of the deacons would not help the bishop in the 
necessities of the churches, when he wished to lift them to a higher position in his diocese, should no longer 
be allowed to exercise the functions of that grade from which they were not willing to be removed. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXXI. 

Who despises a greater honour shall lose what he hath. 
JOHNSON. 

It is most probable that this canon is to be understood of deacons designed by the bishop to be ordained 
priests, for the deacons, at least in some Churches, were provided of a better maintenance than priests; or it 
may be understood of inferior clergymen, who were permitted to marry in the degree they were now in, but 
would not willingly take the order of priest or deacon, because then they were prohibited marriage. 

CANON XXXII. (Greek xxxv.) 

If any poor cleric, no matter what his rank may be, shall acquire any property, it shall be 
subject to the power of the bishop. (2) 

IT also seemed good that bishops, presbyters, deacons and any other of the clergy, who when they were 
ordained had no possessions, and in the time of their episcopate or after they became clerics, shall 
purchase in their own names lands or any other property, shall be held guilty of the crime of intrenching upon 
the Lord's goods, unless, when they are admonished to do so, they place the same at the disposal of the 
Church. But should anything come to them personally by the liberality of anyone, or by succession from 
some relative, let them do what they will with it; if, however, they demand it back again, contrary to what they 
proposed, they shall be judged unworthy of ecclesiastical honour as back-sliders. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXXII. 

Whoso after his ordination although he has nothing yet buys a field, shall give it to the Church, unless he got 
it by succession from a relation or by pure liberality. 

In this canon there is difficulty about the meaning of the phrase "quod eorum proposito congruat." Hardouin 
suggests that "propositum" is the same as "profession," or "calling," and the meaning, were this the case, 
would be that he must employ it as befits his clerical calling. Van Espen follows Balsamon and Zonaras in 
understanding it to mean that if he has proposed to employ a part for the Church or for the poor, and 
changes his mind, he is to be deposed; and this meaning I have followed. 

CANON XXXIII. (Greek xxxvi.) 

That presbyters should not sell the goods of the Church in which they are constituted; and 
that no bishop can rightly use anything the title to which vests in the ecclesiastical maternal 
centre (<greek>matrikos</greek>). 

It also seemed good that presbyters should not sell the ecclesiastical property where they are settled 
without their bishop's knowledge; and it is not lawful for bishops to sell the goods of the Church without the 
council or their presbyters being aware of it. Nor should the bishop without necessity usurp the property of 
the maternal (matricis) Church [nor should a presbyter usurp the property of his own cure (tituli)].(1) 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXXIII. 

A presbyter is not to sell ecclesiastical property without the consent of the bishop. A bishop is not to sell 
without the approbation of his synod a country property. 

Fuchs (Biblioth. der Kirchenvers., vol. iij., p. 5) thinks the text is corrupt in the last sentence and should be 
corrected by Canon x. of the Council of Carthage of 421 , so as to read, "that which is left by will to a rural 
church in the diocese must not be applied to the Mother Church through the usurpation of the bishop." 

JOHNSON 

"Or title." So I turn the Lat. Titulus for want of a proper English word. It denotes a lesser church in any city or 

diocese, served by a priest. 

"The Mother Church," i.e., The cathedral, the Church in which the bishop resides. 

Moreover at this Synod we read all the conciliar decrees of all the Province of Africa in the different synods 
held in the time of Bishop Aurelius.(2) 

Concerning the Synod which assembled in Hippo Regio. 

Under the most illustrious consuls, the most glorious Emperor Theodosius Augustus for the third time, mid 
Abundantius, on the viij. Ides of October, at Hippo Regio, in the secretarium of the Church of Peace. And the 
rest of the acts of this Synod have not been written down here because these constitutions are found set 
forth above. 

Of the Council of Carthage at which the proconsular bishops were appointed legates to the Council at 

Adrumetum. 

In the consulate of the most glorious emperors-Arcadius for the third time and Honorius for the second time, 

Augustuses, on the vith(3) day before the Calends of July, at Carthage. In this council the proconsular 

bishops were chosen as legates to the Council of Adrumetum. 

Of a Council of Carthage at which many statutes were made. 

In the consulate of those most illustrious men, Caesarius and Atticus, on the vth day before the Calends of 
September in the secretarium of the restored basilica, when Aurelius the bishop, together with the bishops, 
had taken his seat, the deacons also standing by, and Victor the old man of Puppiana, Tutus of Migirpa and 
Evangel of Assuri. 

The Allocution of Aurelius the bishop of Carthage to the bishops. 

Aurelius, the bishop, said:(4) After the day fixed for the council, as ye remember, most blessed brethren, we 
sat and waited for the legations of all the African provinces to assemble upon the day, as I have said, set by 
our missive; but when the letter of our Byzacene bishops had been read, that was read to your charity, which 
they had discussed with me who had anticipated the time and day of the council; also it was read by our 
brethren Honoratus and Urban, who are to-day present with us in this council, sent as the legation of the 
Sitifensine Province. For our brother Reginus of the Vege[t]selitane(1) Church, (2) the letters sent to my 
littleness by Crescentian and Aurelius, our fellow-bishops, of the first sees of the [two] Numidias, in which 
writings your charity will see with me how they promised that either they themselves would be good enough 
to come or else that they would send legates according to custom to this council; but this it seems they did 
not do at all, the legates of Mauritania Sitifensis, who had come so great a distance gave notice that they 
could stay no longer; and, therefore, brethren, if it seem good to your charity, let the letters of our Byzacene 
brethren, as also the breviary, which they joined to the same letter, be read to this assembly, so that if by 
any chance they are not entirely satisfactory to your charity, such things in the breviary may be changed for 
the better after diligent examination. For this very thing our brother and fellow-bishop of the primatial see, a 
man justly conspicuous for his gravity and prudence, Mizonius, demanded in a letter he addressed to my 
littleness. If therefore it meets with your approval, let there be read the things which have been adopted and 
let each by itself be considered by your charity. 

CANON XXXIV. (Greek xxxvii.) 

That nothing of those things enacted in the Synod of Hippo is to be corrected. 

BISHOP EPIGONIUS said: In this summary (Breviarium) which was adopted at the Synod of Hippo, we think 
nothing should be amended, nor anything added thereto except that the day on which the holy Feast of 
Easter falls should be announced in Synod. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXXIV. 

Nothing is to be corrected in the synod of Hippo, nor anything added thereto, except that the time of 

celebrating Easter should be announced in time of synod. 

The first of these introductions is that of the Synod of Hippo in A.D. 393; the next that of Carthage in A.D. 394, 

and the third that of the same place, held August 28th, A.D. 397. 

This canon (number xxxiv. of the code) is the beginning of Canon v. of the last named Synod. 

JOHNSON. 

See Canons 51 and 73. 

CANON XXXV. (Greek xxxviii.) 

That bishops or clergymen should not easily set free their sons. 

That bishops or clerics should not easily let their children pass out of their power; unless they were secure 
of their morals and age, that their own sins may pertain to them. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXXV. 

Bishops and clergy shall not set their children free until their morals are established. 
This canon is Canon xiij. of the Synod of Hippo A.D. 393. 

CANON XXXVI. (Greek xxxix.) 

That bishops or clergymen are not to be ordained unless they have made all theirfamily 
Christians. 

NONE shall be ordained bishop, presbyters, or deacons before all the inmates of their houses shall have 
become Catholic Christians. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXXVI. 

He shall not be ordained who hath not made all his household orthodox. 
This canon is Canon xvij. of the Synod of Hippo, A.D. 393. 

CANON XXXVII. (Greek xl.) 

It is not lawful to offer anything in the Holy Mysteries except bread and wine mixed with water. 
IN the sacraments of the body and blood of the Lord nothing else shall be offered than that which the Lord 
himself ordained, that is to say, bread and wine mixed with water. But let the first-fruits, whether honey or milk, 
be offered on that one most solemn day, as is wont, in the mystery of the infants. For although they are 
offered on the altar, let them have nevertheless their own benediction, that they may be distinguished from 
the sacraments of the Lord's body and blood; neither let there be offered as first-fruits anything other than 
grapes and corns. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXXVII. 

Let bread and wine mixed with water only be offered. 

The text of the Greek here does not exactly agree with the Latin. The Greek reads as follows: "That in the 

Holy Mysteries nothing else be offered than the body and blood of the Lord, even as the Lord himself 

delivered, that is bread and wine mixed with water." 

Further down with regard to the first-fruits I have followed the Greek text which seems decidedly preferable, 

in fact the Latin is so corrupt that Van Espen notes that for the ordinary "offerantur" some MSS. read "non 

offerantur." 

This canon is Canon xxiij. of the Synod of Hippo, A.D. 393. 

JOHNSON. 

See Can. Ap. 2 (3). 

"The Mystery of Infants" of this Quoere, all that I have met with are in the dark as to this matter. Dionysius 
Exiguus's Latin is Lac, etc. The Greek stands thus, E<greek>ite</greek> <greek>gala</greek> 
<greek>k</greek>. <greek>t</greek>. <greek>l</greek>. 

CANON XXXVIII. (Greek xli.) 

That clerics or those who are continent shall not visit virgins or widows. 

NEITHER clerics nor those who profess continence should enter the houses of widows or virgins without the 
bidding or consent of the bishops or presbyters: and then let them not go alone, but with some other of the 
clergy, or with those assigned by the bishop or presbyter for this purpose; not even bishops and presbyters 
shall go alone to women of this sort, except some of the clergy are present or some other grave Christian 
men. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXXVIII. 

Clerics and those who are continent shall not go to widows or virgins, unless at the bidding of the bishop and 
presbyter: and even then not alone, but with those with whom presbyters and deacons visit them. 
This canon is canon xxiv. of the Synod of Hippo, A.D. 393. 

CANON XXXIX. (Greek xlii.) 

That a bishop should not be called the chief of the priests. (1) 

THAT the bishop of the first see shall not be called Prince of the Priests or High Priest (Summus Sacerdos) 
or any other name of this kind, but only Bishop of the First See. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXXIX.. 

The first bishop shall not be called Prince of the Priests nor High Priest but Bishop of the first see. 
This canon is Canon xxv. of the Synod of Hippo, A.D. 393. 

JOHNSON. 

"The bishop of the Prime See," i.e., The primate. So Xantippus is called bishop of the Prime. So in Numidia, 
Nicetius in Mauritania, in the original Latin between Can. 85, and Can. 86, and see Can. 86. 
N.B. Justellus on this canon shews, that Tertullian, Optatus, and Augustine, did apply these titles to their own 
African bishops; and therefore supposes, that the meaning of the canon was to suppress the flame of vain 
glory, which proceeded from these sparks of lofty titles. 

CANON XL. (Greek xliii.) 

Concerning the non-frequenting of taverns by the clergy, except when travelling. 

THAT the clergy are not to enter taverns for eating or drinking, nor unless compelled to do so by the 
necessity of their journey. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XL. 

A cleric on a journey may enter a tavern, otherwise not. 
This canon is Canon xxvj. of the Synod of Hippo, A.D. 393. 

CANON XLI. (Greek xliv.) 

That by men who are fasting sacrifices are to be offered to God. 

THAT the Sacraments of the Altar are not to be celebrated except by those who are fasting, except on the 
one anniversary of the celebration of the Lord's Supper; for if the commemoration of some of the dead, 
whether bishops or others, is to be made in the afternoon, let it be only with prayers, if those who officiate 
have already breakfasted. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XLI. 

The holy mysteries are not offered except by those who are fasting. 
This canon is Canon xxviij. of the Synod of Hippo, A.D. 393. 

JOHNSON. 

From this canon and the 29th of Trullo, it is evident that by the Lord's Supper, the ancients understood the 
supper going before the Eucharist, and not the Eucharist itself, and that on Maunday-Thursday(2) yearly, 
before the Eucharist, they had such a public entertainment in imitation of our Saviour's last Paschal Supper. I 
refer it to the consideration of the learned reader, whether St. Paul, by the <greek>Deipnon</greek> 
<greek>kuriakon</greek>, 1 Cor. xi. 20, does not mean this entertainment. For the obvious translation of that 
verse is, "It is not your [duty or business] when you meet together [in the church] to eat the Lord's Supper." 
He would not have them to eat this supper in the public assembly: "For" (says he) "have ye not houses to 
eat and drink in, or despise ye the Church of God?" From the 4th age forward, the Eucharist was sometimes 
called the Lord's Supper; but from the beginning it was not so. And even after it did sometimes pass by this 
name, yet at other times this name was strictly used for the previous entertainment, as may be seen by this 
canon, which was made in the 4th century. Further it seems probable, that the Lord's Supper and the 
Love-feast was the same, though it was not usually called the Lord's Supper; but only (perhaps) that 
love-feast, which was made on the day of the institution of the Eucharist, which we now call 
Maundy-Thursday. 

CANON XLII. (Greek xiv.) 

Concerning the not having feasts under any circumstances in churches. 

THAT no bishops or clerics are to hold feasts in churches, unless perchance they are forced thereto by the 
necessity of hospitality as they pass by. The people, too, as far as possible, are to be prohibited from 
attending such feasts. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XLII. 

A cleric is not to feast in a church, unless perchance he is driven thereto by the necessity of hospitality. This 

also is forbidden to the laity. 

This canon is Canon xxix. of the Synod of Hippo, A.D. 393. 

CANON XLIII. (Greek xlvi.) 

Concerning penitents. 

THAT to penitents the times of their penance shall be assigned by the will of the bishop according to the 
difference of their sins; and that a presbyter shall not reconcile a penitent without consulting the bishop, 
unless the absence of the bishop urges him necessarily thereto. But when of any penitent the offence has 
been public and commonly known, so as to have scandalized the whole Church, he shall receive imposition 
of the hand before the altar (Lat. "before the apse"). 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XLIII. 

The bishops shall fix the time of penance for those doing penance according to their sins. A presbyter 
without his knowledge shall not reconcile one doing penance, even when necessity impels him thereto. (1) 
This canon is canon xxx. of the Synod of Hippo, A.D. 393. 

JOHNSON. 

Here [i. e., in translating absidem church-porch] I follow Zonoras; see Can. Nic, 1 1 . Du Pin renders absidem, 
a high place near the bishop's throne. 

CANON XLIV. (Greek xlvii.) 

Concerning Virgins. 

THAT holy virgins when they are separated from their parents by whom they have been wont to be 
guarded, are to be commended by the care of the bishop, or presbyter where the bishop is absent, to 
women of graver age, so that(2) living with them they may take care of them, lest they hurt the reputation of 
the Church by wandering about. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XLIV. 

She who leaves her father for the sake of virginity is to be commended to grave women. 
This canon is Canon xxxj. of the Synod of Hippo, A.D. 393. 

CANON XLV. 

(Greek xlviii.) 

Concerning those who are sick and cannot answer for themselves. 

THAT the sick are to be baptized who cannot answer for themselves if their [servants] shall have spoken at 
their own proper peril a testimony of the good will [of the sick man]. 

(Greek Canon xlix.) 

Concerning players who are doing penance and are converted to the Lord.(1) 

THAT to players and actors and other persons of that kind, as also to apostates when they are 
converted(2) and return to God, grace or reconciliation is not to be denied. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XLV. 

That he who cannot answer for himself on account of illness is to be baptized when he shall have given 

evidence of his desire. 

A repentant actor is to be received to penance. 

This canon is made up of Canons xxxij. and xxxiij. of the Synod of Hippo, A.D. 393. 

JOHNSON. 

"Apostates," i.e., those who elsewhere are called Lapsi; those who had done sacrifice through the violence 
of torment in time of persecution, professing in the meantime that their consciences did not consent to what 
their hands did. 

CANON XLVI.(GreekL) 

Concerning the passions of the martyrs. 

THE passions of the Martyrs may be read when their anniversary days are celebrated. 

NOTE. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XLVI. 

The passions of the martyrs are to be read their commemorations. 

This canon is the last part of Canon xxxvj. of the Synod of Hippo, A.D. 393. 

CANON XLVII. (Greek li.) 

Concerning [the Donatists and(3)] the children baptized by the Donatists. 

CONCERNING the Donatists(4) it seemed good that we should hold counsel with our brethren and fellow 
priests Siricius and Simplician concerning those infants alone who are baptized by Donatists:(5) lest what 
they did not do of their own will, when they should be converted to the Church of God with a salutary 
determination, the error of their parents might prevent their promotion to the ministry of the holy altar. 
But when these things had been begun, Honoratus and Urbanus, bishops of Mauritania Sitifensis, said: 
When some time ago we were sent to your holiness, we laid aside what things had been written on, this 
account, that we might wait for the arrival of our brethren the legates from Numidia. But because not a few 
days have passed in which they have been looked for and as yet they are not arrived, it is not fitting that we 
should delay any longer the commands we received from our brother-bishops; and therefore, brethren, 
receive our story with alacrity of mind. We have heard concerning the faith of the Nicene tractate: True it is 
that sacrifices are to be forbidden after breakfast, so that they may be offered as is right by those who are 
fasting, and this has been confirmed then and now. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XLVII. 

When those in infancy baptized by Donatists are converted, this shall be no impediment to them. And the 
Holy Mysteries, as is right, are to be celebrated only by them fasting. 

This canon is made from Canon xxxvij. of the Synod of Hippo, A.D. 393, and from Canon j. of the Synod of 
Carthage of August 28th, A.D. 397. 

JOHNSON. 

See Can. 41. 

The pretence that the Donatists had for making a schism was, that Caecilian, Bishop of Carthage, had, in the 

time of persecution, been a Traditor, i.e., given up the Bible to the heathen inquisitors; this was denied by the 

Orthodox, who charged them with the same crime in effect, viz. of being too favourable to the Traditors, and 

those that had lapsed. They likewise are charged with Arianism. 

I have omitted what is here mentioned concerning the Council of Nice; because I do not find that any one 

has been able to penetrate into the meaning of the Fathers as to that particular. 

CANON XLVIII. (Greek Mi.) 

Of rebaptisms, reordinations, and translations of bishops. 

BUT we suggest that we decree what was set forth by the wisdom of the plenary synod at Capua, that no 
rebaptisings, nor reordinations should take place, and that bishops should not be translated. For 
Cresconius, bishop of Villa Regis, left his own people and invaded the Church of Tubinia and having been 
admonished down to this very day, to leave, according to the decree, the diocese he had invaded, he 
treated the admonition with disdain. We have heard that the sentence pronounced against him has been 
confirmed; but we seek, according to our decree, that ye deign to grant that being driven thereto by 
necessity, it be free to us to address the rector of the province against him, according to the statutes of the 
most glorious princes, so that whoever is not willing to acquiesce in the mild admonition of your holiness 
and to amend his lawlessness, shall be immediately cast out by judicial authority. Aurelius the bishop said: 
By the observance of the constituted form, let him not be judged to be a member of (be synod, if he has 
been asked by you, dear brethren, to depart and has refused: for out of his own contempt and contumacy 
he has fallen to the power of the secular magistrate. (1) Honoratus and Urban the bishops said: This 
pleases us all, does it not? And all the bishops answered: It is just, it pleases us. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XLVIII. 

Let there be no rebaptisms, nor reordinations nor translations of bishops. Therefore let Cresconius be 
forbidden by judicial authority, for he has left his own people, and has taken possession of the diocese of 
Ceneum, although ecclesiastically admonished that he was not to change. 

This canon is Canon j., of the Synod of Carthage of August 28th. A.D. 397. The acts of this synod were first 
accurately edited by the Ballerini (in their edition of the works of St. Leo) and were printed by Mansi, in an 
amended form, in his Concilia. 

CANON XLIX. (Greek liii.) 

How many bishops there should be to ordain a bishop. 

HONORATUS and Urban, the bishops, said: We have issued this command, that (because lately two of our 
brethren, bishops of Numidia, presumed to ordain a pontiff,) only by the concurrence of twelve bishops the 
ordination of bishops be celebrated. Aurelius, the bishop, said: The ancient form shall be preserved, that 
not less than three suffice who shall have been designated for ordaining the bishop. Moreover, because in 
Tripoli, and in Arzug the barbarians are so near, for it is asserted that in Tripoli there are but five bishops, 
and out of that number two may be occupied by some necessity; but it is difficult that all of the number should 
come together at any place whatever; ought this circumstance to be an impediment to the doing of what is of 
utility to the Church? For in this Church, to which your holiness has deigned to assemble(1) we frequently 
have ordinations and nearly every Lord's day; could I frequently summon twelve, or ten, or about that 
number of bishops? But it is an easy thing for me to join a couple of neighbours to my littleness. Wherefore 
your charity will agree with me that this cannot be observed. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XLIX. 

Fewer than three bishops do not suffice for the ordination of a bishop. 
This is Canon ij., of the Synod of Carthage, August 28th, 397. 

JOHNSON. 

See Can. 13. 

The occasion of this canon was a complaint that two bishops in Numidia had presumed to ordain a third; 
upon which it was proposed that not less than twelve should perform this office: But Aurelius, Bishop of 
Carthage, desires that the old form might be observed, and three bishops be sufficient; especially, because 
in Tripoli, where there were but five bishops in all, it would be hard to get more than three together. And he 
adds, that though it were no hard matter for him to get two bishops to assist him in his ordinations at 
Carthage, yet it would not be practicable for him to get twelve: "For," says he, "we have frequently, and 
almost every Sunday, men to be ordained." He must mean bishops for otherwise it had been nothing to his 
purpose, because he could ordain priests or deacons by himself, without the assistance of other bishops: 
and yet it is very strange, that ordinations of bishops should be so frequent as to bear that expression of 
"almost every Sunday." There were indeed above one hundred bishoprics in his Province; but these could 
not occasion above six or eight ordinations in a year; but it is probable that the privilege belonging to him, 
Can. 55, brought very many ordinations to the church of Carthage; for it is evident, there was a great scarcity 
of men fit for the Episcopal office in Africa. It is further evident from this canon, that bishops were not ordained 
in the church of their own see, but in that of the Primate. See Can. Ant., 19. 

CANON L. (Greek liv.) 

How many bishops should be added to the number of those ordaining, if any opposition had 
been made to the one to be ordained. 

BUT this should be decreed, that when we shall have met together to choose a bishop, if any opposition 
shall arise, because such things have been treated by us, the three shall not presume to purge(2) him who 
was to be ordained, but one or two more shall be asked to be added to the aforesaid number, and the 
persons of those objecting shall first be discussed in the same place (plebe) for which he was to be 
ordained. And last of all the objections shall be considered; and only after he has been cleared in the public 
sight shall he at last be ordained. If this agrees with the mind of your holiness, let it be confirmed by the 

answer of your worthiness.AII the bishops said, We are well pleased. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON L. 

If any controversy arise concerning a bishop who has been elected by three bishops, let two others be 
coopted, and so let there be an examination made of his affairs; and if it shall appear that he is pure, let him 
be ordained. 
This canon is Canon iij., of the Synod of Carthage, Aug. 28th, 397. 

JOHNSON. 

Here the bishops meet to choose a new one, and it is evident by the foregoing canon, that they met not in 
the vacant church, but in that of the Primate; and that therefore not the people, but the bishops had the chief 
share in the election. The people might make their objections, which supposes they knew who their 
intended bishop was; but the bishops were the judges of the cause. And it seems probable, that if there 
were any dispute, some of the bishops went to the vacant church to hear the allegations against the person 
that was elected, or proposed. 

CANON LI. (Greek Iv.) 

Thatthe date of Easter is to be announced by the Church of Carthage. 

HONORATUS and Urban, the bishops, said: Since all things treated by our commonitory are known, (1) we 
add also what has been ordered concerning the day of Easter, that we be informed of the date always by 
the Church of Carthage, as has been accustomed and that no short time before. Aurelius, the bishop, said: If 
it seems good to your holiness, since we remember that we pledged ourselves sometime ago that every 
year we would come together for discussion, when we assemble, then let the date of the holy Easter be 
announced through the legates present at the Council. Honoratus and Urban, the bishops, said: Now we 
seek of the present assembly that ye deign to inform our province of that day by letters. Aurelius, the bishop, 
said:lt is necessary it should be so. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LI. 

Let the day on which Easter is to be kept be announced by the Church of Carthage in the annual synod. 
This canon is the first part of Canon iv. of the Synod of Carthage, August 28th, 397. 

JOHNSON. 

The synod met in August. See Can. 73. 

CANON Lll. (Greek Ivi.) 

Of visiting provinces. 

HONORATUS and Urban, the bishops, said: This was commanded to us in word, that because it had been 
decreed in the Council of Hippo that each province should be visited in the time of the council, that ye also 
deign that this year or next, according to the order ye have drawn up, you should visit the province of 
Mauritania. 

Aurelius, the bishop, said: Of the province of Mauritania because it is situated in the confines of Africa, we 
have made no decree, for they are neighbours of the barbarians; but God grant (not however that I make 
any rash promise of doing so), we may be able to come to your province. For ye should consider, brethren, 
that this same thing our brethren of Tripoli and of the Arzuges region(2) could demand also, if occasion 
offered. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON Lll. 

As the Synod at Hippo decreed, every province should be visited in an annual Synod. 
This canon is the last part of canon iv of the Council of Carthage, August 28th, A. D. 397. 

JOHNSON. 

The manner of visiting provinces, and that annually; and the persons by whom this visitation was performed, 
can scarce now be discovered; only it appears, by the words of Aurelius, that the Bishop of Carthage was 
one, if not the only visitor; but it was impossible that he could visit all the provinces in Africa personally every 
year, he must use delegates. 

CANON LIU. (Greek Ivii.) 

That dioceses should not receive a bishop except by the consent of its own bishop. 

EPIGONIUS, the bishop, said: In many councils it has been decreed by the sacerdotal assembly that such 
communities as are contained in other dioceses and ruled by their bishops, and which never had any 
bishops of their own, should not receive rulers, that is bishops, for themselves except with the consent of the 
bishop under whose jurisdiction they have been. But because some who have attained a certain 
domination abhor the communion of the brethren, or at least, having become depraved, claim for 
themselves domination with what is really tyranny, for the most part tumid and stolid presbyters, who lift up 
their heads against their own bishops or else win the people to themselves by feasting them or by 
malignant persuasion, that they may by unlawful favour wish to place themselves as rulers over them; we 
indeed hold fast that glorious desire of your mind, most pious brother Aurelius, for thou hast often opposed 
these things, paying no heed to such petitioners; but on account of their evil thoughts and basely conceived 
designs this I say, that such a community, which has always been subject in a diocese, ought not to receive 
a rector, nor should it ever have a bishop of its own. Therefore if this which I have proposed seems good to 
the whole most holy council, let it be confirmed. 

Aurelius, the bishop, said: I am not in opposition to the proposition of our brother and fellow bishop: but I 
confess that this has been and shall be my practice concerning those who were truly of one mind, not only 
with regard to the Church of Carthage, but concerning every sacerdotal assemblage. For there are many 
who, as has been said, conspire with the people whom they deceive, tickling their ears and blandly 
seducing them, men of vicious lives, or at least puffed up and separated from this meeting, who think to 
watch over their own people, and never come to our council for fear that their wickedness should be 
discussed. I say, if it seems good, that not only should these not keep their dioceses, but that every effort 
should be made to have them expelled by public authority from that church of theirs which has evilly 
favoured them, and that they be removed even from the chief sees. For it is right that he who cleaves to all 
the brethren and the whole council, should possess with full right not only his church but also the dioceses. 
But they who think that the people suffice them and spurn the love of the brethren, shall not only, lose their 
dioceses, but (as I have said,) they shall be deprived by public authority of their own cures as rebels. 
Honoratus and Urban, the bishops, said: The lofty provision of your holiness obtains the adherence of the 
minds of all of us, and I think that by the answer of all what you have deigned to propose will be confirmed. 
All the bishops said: Placet, placet. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LIU. 

Whoso shall neglect his call to a synod, and shall despise the charity of his brethren, putting his trust in the 

multitude who are with him, let him be deprived of them by the imperial authority. 

This canon is Canon v. of the Synod of Carthage of August 28th, A. D. 397, beginning with the second 

clause. 

JOHNSON. 

It is very evident that a diocese here signifies some town or village lying remote from the Bishop's City, but 

belonging to his jurisdiction; and is to be understood to be a place distinct from the bishop's church or 

cathedral. 

See also Can. 56 and Deer. Anast., 6. 

CANON LIV. (Greek Iviii.) 

That a strange cleric is under no circumstances to be received by another. 

EPIGONIUS, the bishop, said: This has been decreed in many councils, also just now it has been confirmed 
by your prudence, most blessed brethren, that no bishop should receive a strange cleric into his diocese 
without the consent of the bishop to whose jurisdiction the cleric belongs. But I say that Julian, who is 
ungrateful for the layouts bestowed upon him by God through my littleness, is so rash and audacious, that a 
certain man who was baptized by me, when he was a most needy boy, commended to me by the same, 
and when for many years he had been fed and reared by me, it is certain that this one, as I have said, was 
baptized in my church, by my own unworthy hands; this same man began to exercise the office of reader in 
the Mappalien diocese, and read there for nearly two years, with a most incomprehensible contempt of my 
littleness, the aforenamed Julian took this man, whom he declared to be a citizen of his own city Vazarita, 
and without consulting me ordained him deacon. If, most blessed brethren, that is permissible, let it be 
declared to us; but if not, let such an impudent one be restrained that he may in no way mix himself in 
someone's communion. 

Numidius, the bishop, said: If, as it seems, Julian did this without your worthiness being asked for his 
consent, nor even consulted, we all judge that this was done iniquitously and unworthily. Wherefore unless 
Julian shall correct his error, and shall return the cleric to your people with proper satisfaction, since what he 
did was contrary to the decrees of the council, let him be condemned and separated from us on account of 
his contumacy. Epigonius, the bishop, said: Our father in age, and most ancient by his promotion, that 
laudable man, our brother and colleague Victor wishes that this petition should be made general to all. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LIV. 

Since Julian has ordained a reader of Epigonius's to the diaconate, unless he shall shew authority received 

from him to do so, he shall increase the penalty of his contumacy. 

This canon is Canon vj. of the Synod of Carthage, August 28th, A. D. 397. 

JOHNSON. 

See Canon of the Apostles, 12 (15, 16), and Chalcedon, 10. 

CANON LV. (Greek lix.) 

That it be lawful for the bishop of Carthage to ordain a cleric whenever he wishes. 

AURELIUS, the bishop, said: My brethren, pray allow me to speak. It often happens that ecclesiastics who 
are in need seek deacons [proepositis in the Latin], or presbyters or bishops from me: and I, bearing in 
mind what things have been ordained these I observe, to wit, I summon the bishop of the cleric who is 
sought for, and I shew him the state of affairs, how that they of a certain church ask for a certain one of his 
clergy. Perchance then they make no objection, but lest it happen that afterwards they might object when in 
this case they shall have been demanded (postulati) by me, who (as you know) have the care of many 
churches and of the ordinands. It is fight therefore that I should summon a fellow bishop with two or three 
witnesses from our number. But if he be found indevotus [<greek>akaqosiwtos</greek>], what does your 
charity think should be done? For I, as ye know, brethren, by the condescension of God have the care of all 
the churches. 

Numidius, the bishop, said:(1) This see always had the power of ordaining a bishop according to the desire 
of each Church as he wills and on whose name there was agreement (fuisset conventus). Epigonius, the 
bishop, said: Your good nature makes small use of your powers, for you make much less use of them than 
you might, since, my brother, you are good and gentle to all; for you have the power, but it is far from your 
practice to satisfy the person of each bishop in prima tantummodo conventione. But if it should be thought 
that the rights of this see ought to be vindicated, you have the duty of supporting all the churches, wherefore 
we do not give thee power, but we confirm that power thou hast, viz.: that thou hast the right at thy will always 
to choose whom thou wilt, to constitute^) prelates over peoples and churches who shall have asked thee to 
do so, and when thou so desirest. Posthumianus, the bishop, said: Would it be right that he who had only 
one presbyter should have that one taken away from him? Aurelius, the bishop, said: But there may be one 

bishop by whom many presbyters can be made through the divine goodness, but one fit to be made bishop 
is found with difficulty. Wherefore if any bishop has a presbyter necessary for the episcopate and has one 
only, my brother, as you have said, even that one he ought to give up for promotion. Posthumianus, the 
bishop, said: If some other bishop has plenty of clergy, should that other diocese come to my help? 
Aurelius, the bishop, said: Of course, when you have come to the help of another Church, he who has many 
clerics should be persuaded to make one over to you for ordination. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LV. 

It is lawful for the bishop of Carthage, whenever he wills, to choose those who are to be set over the 
churches: even if there were only one presbyter worth of rule. For one bishop can ordain many presbyters, 
but one fit for the episcopate is hard to find. 
This canon is the first half of Canon vij. of the Council of Carthage held August 28th A. D. 397. 

JOHNSON. 

It is evident, that this privilege of the Bishop of Carthage extended to the whole African diocese or the six 
provinces of Africa, which contained near five hundred bishoprics. This was what caused such frequent 
ordinations of bishops in the Church of Carthage (See Can. Afr. 49, and the Note) And it is further apparent, 
that the Bishop of Carthage had some power over the whole African church, and was probably their visitor 
(See Can. 52). But that he had the sole power of ordaining bishops for every church, with the assistance of 
any two bishops, does not appear, though Justellus is of this opinion; nay, the 49th canon proves that he had 
it not. 

CANON LVI. (Greek Ix.) 

That bishops who were ordained for dioceses shall not choose forthemselves dioceses [in 
the Greek provinces]. 

HONORATUS and Urban, the bishops, said: We have heard that it has been decreed that dioceses should 
not be deemed fit to receive bishops, unless with the consent of their founder: but in our province since 
some have been ordained bishops in the diocese, by the consent of that bishop by whose power they were 
established, have even seized dioceses for themselves, this should be corrected by the judgment of your 
charity, and prohibited for the future. Epigonius, the bishop, said: To every bishop should be reserved what 
is right, so that from the mass of dioceses no part should be snatched away, so as to have its own bishop, 
without consent from the proper authority. For it shall suffice, if the consent be given, that the diocese thus set 
apart have its own bishop only, and let him(1) not seize other dioceses, for only the one cut off from the many 
merited the honour of receiving a bishop. Aurelius, the bishop, said: I do not doubt that it is pleasing to the 
charity of you all, that he who was ordained for a diocese by the consent of the bishop who held the mother 
see, should retain only the people for whom he was ordained. Since therefore I think that everything has 
been treated of, if all things are agreeable to your mind, pray confirm them all by your suffrage. All the 
bishops said: We all are well pleased, and we have confirmed them with our subscription. And they signed 
their names. 

I, Aurelius, bishop of the Church of Carthage, have consented to this decree, and have subscribed what has 
been read. So too did all the other bishops in like fashion sign. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LVI. 

If any diocese has received consent to have a bishop of its own from him who has the right, that one shall 

not invade the rest of the dioceses. 

This is the last part of Canon vij. of the Synod of Carthage, August 28, A. D. 397. 

JOHNSON. 

It had scarce been worth while to give so much of this canon in English if I had not thought it proper, in order 
to confirm the sense of the word diocese, mentioned in note on Can. 53, viz., a town or village, where there is 

a church subject to the bishop of the city. 

Between this canon and the following, there is a reference to a former council at Carthage forbidding 
bishops to sail, without a formal letter from the Primate; and this said to be done when Caesarius and Atticus 
were consuls, anno aerae vulg. 397, and there is mention of an embassy of two bishops from a council of 
Carthage to the Emperors, to procure the privilege of sanctuary to all impeached for any crime, if they fled to 
the Church. This is said to be done when Honorius and Eutychianus were consuls, anno aerae vulg. 398. 
And further, here is an account of a bishop sent legate to Anastasius, Bishop of the Apostolical see, and 
Venerius of Milan, to supply the African Church with men fit to be ordained. For Aurelius complains that many 
Churches have not so much as one man, not so much as an illiterate one, in deacon's orders, much less 
had they a competent number of men for the superior dignities. He speaks of the importunate clamours of 
many people, that were themselves almost killed, I suppose, by some common pestilence. 

In this council it was decreed that bishops should not travel by sea without formed letters. 

During the consulate of those illustrious men, Caesar and Atticus, on the sixth before the Calends of July, at 
Carthage, it seemed good that no bishop should travel by water without "formed letters" from the Primate. 
The authentic acts will be found by him who seeks them. 

In this council, bishops whose names are set down hereafter were sent as legates to the Emperor. 
After the consulate of the most glorious Emperor Honorius Augustus for the fourth time, and of the renowned 
Eutychian, on the fifth of the calends of May, at Carthage in the secretarium of the restored basilica. In this 
council Epigonius and Vincent, the bishops, received a legation, in order that they might obtain a law from 
the most glorious princes in behalf of those taking refuge in the Church, whatever might be the crime of which 
they were accused, that no one should dare to force them away. 

In this council a legation was sent to the Bishops of Rome and Milan with regard to children baptized by 
heretics, and to the Emperor with regard to having such idols as still remained taken away, and also with 
regard to many other matters. 

After the consulate of the renowned Flabius Stilico, on the sixteenth of the calends of July, at Carthage in the 
secretarium of the restored basilica. 

When Aurelius, the Bishop, together with his fellow-bishops had taken their seats, the deacons standing by, 
Aurelius, the Bishop, said: Your charity, most holy brethren, knows fully as well as I do the necessities of the 
churches of God throughout Africa. And since the Lord has vouchsafed that from a part of your holy 
company this present assembly should be convened, it seems to me that these necessities which in the 
discharge of our solicitude we have discovered, we ought to consider together. And afterwards, that there 
should be chosen a bishop from our number who may, with the help of the Lord and your prayers, assume 
the burden of these necessities, and zealously accomplish whatever ought to be done in the premises, 
going to the parts of Italy across seas, that he may acquaint our holy brethren and fellow-bishops, the 
venerable and holy brother Anastasius, bishop of the Apostolic see, and also our holy brother Venerius the 
Bishop of Milan, with our necessity and grief, and helplessness. For there has been withheld from these 
sees the knowledge of what was necessary to provide against the common peril, especially that the need 
of clergy is so great that many churches are in such destitution as that not so much as a single deacon or 
even an unlettered clerk is to be found. I say nothing of the superior orders and offices, because if, as I have 
said, the ministry of a deacon is not easily to be had, it is certainly much more difficult to find one of the 
superior orders. [And let them also tell these bishops] that we can no longer bear to hear the daily 
lamentations of the different peoples almost ready to die, and unless we do our best to help them, the 
grievous and inexcusable cause of the destruction of innumerable souls will be laid at our door before God. 

CANON LVII. (Greek Ixi.) 

That persons baptized when children by the Donatists may be ordained clergymen in the 
Catholic Church. 

SINCE in the former council it was decreed, as your unanimity remembers as well as I do, that those who as 
children were baptized by the Donatists, and not yet being able to know the pernicious character of their 
error, and afterward when they had come to the Use of reason, had received the knowledge of the truth, 
abhorred their former error, and were received, (in accordance with the ancient order) by the imposition of 
the hand, into the Catholic Church of God spread throughout the world, that to such the remembrance of the 
error ought to be no impediment to the reception of the clerical office. For in coming to faith they thought the 
true Church to be their own and there they believed in Christ, and received the sacraments of the Trinity. And 

that all these sacraments are altogether true and holy and divine is most certain, and in them the whole 
hope of the soul is placed, although the presumptuous audacity of heretics, taking to itself the name of the 
truth, dares to administer them. They are but one after all, as the blessed Apostle tells us, saying: "One God, 
one faith, one baptism," and it is not lawful to reiterate what once only ought to be administered. [Those 
therefore who have been so baptized] having anathematized their error may be received by the imposition 
of the hand into the one Church, the pillar as it is called, and the one mother of all Christians, where all these 
Sacraments are received unto salvation and everlasting life; even the same sacraments which obtain for 
those persevering in heresy the heavy penalty of damnation. So that which to those who are in the truth 
lighteneth to the obtaining of eternal life, the same to them who are in error tends but to darkness and 
damnation. With regard then to those who, having fled from error, acknowledge the breasts of their mother 
the Catholic Church, who believe and receive all these holy mysteries with the love of the truth, and besides 
the Sacraments have the testimony of a good life, there is no one who would not grant that without doubt 
such persons may be raised to the clerical office, especially in such necessity as the present. But there are 
others of this sect, who being already clergymen, desire to pass to us with their peoples and also with their 
honours, such as for the sake of office are converts to life, and that they may retain them seek for salvation 
[i.e., enter the Church]. I think that the question concerning such may be left to the graver consideration of our 
aforesaid brothers, and that when they have considered by their more prudent counsel the matter referred to 
them, they may vouchsafe to advise us what approves itself to them with regard to this question. Only 
concerning those who as children were baptized by heretics we decree that they consent, if it seems good, 
to our decision concerning the ordination of the same. All things, therefore, which we have set forth above 
with the holy bishops, let your honourable fraternity with me adjudge to be done. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LVII. 

Such as have been while children baptized by the Donatists may be ordained should they repent, 

anathematize their heresy, and be otherwise worthy. 

Of the three Introductions to Carthaginian Councils which precede this canon, the first refers to the synod 

held June 26, A.D. 397; the second to that held April 27, A.D. 399; and the third to that of June 15 (or 16), A.D. 

401. 

The canon is Canon j. of the Synod of Carthage of June 15 (or 16), A.D. 401. The eight other canons of this 

synod follow in the African Code in their own order. 

JOHNSON. 

See Can. 47, which was made in a former synod. 

CANON LVIII. (Greek Ixii.) 

Of the remaining idols or temples which should be done away by the Emperors. 

WHEREFORE the most religious Emperors should be asked(1) that they order the remaining idols to be 
taken entirely away throughout all Africa; for in many maritime places and in divers possessions the iniquity 
of this error still flourishes: that they command them to be taken away and their temples, (such as are no 
ornament, being set up in fields or out of the way places) be ordered to be altogether destroyed. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LVIII. 

The remains of the idols should be abolished altogether. 

This is Canon ij. of the Synod of Carthage of June 15 (16), A.D. 401. 

CANON LIX. (Greek Ixiii.) 

That clerics be not compelled to give testimony in public concerning the cognizance of their 
own judgment. 

IT should be petitioned also that they deign to decree, that if perchance any shall have been willing to plead 

their cause in any church according to the Apostolic law imposed upon the Churches, and it happens that 
the decision of the clergy does not satisfy one of the parties, it be not lawful to summon that clergyman who 
had been cognitor or present, (2) into judgment as a witness, and that no person attached to any ecclesiastic 
be compelled to give testimony. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LIX. 

A cleric who has decided a case shall not, if it be displeasing, be summoned to a tribunal to give evidence 
concerning it; and no ecclesiastical person shall be forced to give testimony. 
This is Canon iij. of the Synod of Carthage, June 15 (or 16). A.D. 401. 

JOHNSON. 

"According to the Apostolic law," viz., that of St. Paul, 1 Cor. vi. 1,2, etc. I follow the Greek scholia in rendering 
this canon. In Latin cognitor is he that is solicitor, or advocate, rather than the judge who takes cognizance. 

CANON LX. (Greek Ixiii.) 

Of heathen feasts. 

THIS also must be sought, that (since contrary to the divine precepts feasts are held in many places, which 
have been induced by the heathen error, so that now Christians are forced to celebrate these by heathens, 
from which state of things it happens that in the times of the Christian Emperors a new persecution seems to 
have secretly arisen:) they order such things to be forbidden and prohibit them from cities and possessions 
under pain of punishment; especially should this be done since they do not fear to commit such iniquities in 
some cities even upon the natal days of most blessed martyrs, and in the very sacred places themselves. 
For upon these days, shame to say, they perform the most wicked leapings throughout the fields and open 
places, so that matronal honour and the modesty of innumerable women who have come out of devotion for 
the most holy day are assaulted by lascivious injuries, so that all approach to holy religion itself is almost 
fled from. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LX. 

The Greek feasts must cease to be kept, because of their impropriety, and because they seduce many 
Christians, moreover they are celebrated on the commemorations of the martyrs. 
This is Canon iv. of the Synod of Carthage, Aug. 1 5 (or 1 6), A.D. 401 . 

JOHNSON. 

Bishop Beveridge and Tilius's edition of these canons, in Greek and Latin, number the two preceding 
canons as I have done in the margin, with the same figures [viz: 63]. I follow them in this error because by this 
means the reader may more readily be referred from the Latin original and from this English translation to 
the Greek. 

CANON LXI. (Greek Ixiv.) 

Of spectacles, thatthey be not celebrated on Lord's days nor on the festivals of the Saints. 

FURTHERMORE, it must be sought that theatrical spectacles and the exhibition of other plays be removed 
from the Lord's day and the other most sacred days of the Christian religion, especially because on the 
octave day of the holy, Easter [i.e., Low Sunday] the people assemble rather at the circus than at church, 
and they should be transferred to some other day when they happen to fall upon a day of devotion, nor shall 
any Christian be compelled to witness these spectacles, (1) especially because in the performance of 
things contrary to the precepts of God there should be no persecution made by anyone, but (as is right) a 
man should exercise the free will given him by God. Especially also should be considered the peril of the 
cooperators who, contrary to the precepts of God, are forced by great fear to attend the shews. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXI. 

There shall be no theatrical representations upon Lord's days or feast days. 
This is Canon V. of the Synod of Carthage, June 15th (16), A.D. 401. 

CANON LXII. (Greek Ixv.) 

Of condemned clerics. 

AND this should be sought, that they deign to decree that if any clergyman of whatever rank shall have been 
condemned by the judgment of the bishops for any crime, he may not be defended either by the churches 
over which he presided, nor by anyone whatever, under pain of loss both of money and office, and let them 
order that neither age nor sex be received as an excuse. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXII. 

No one shall justify a clergyman condemned by his own bishop. 
This is Canon vj. of the Synod of Carthage, June 15 (or 16), A.D. 401. 

CANON LXIII. (Greek Ixvi.) 

Of players who have become Christians. 

AND of them also it must be sought that if anyone wishes to come to the grace of Christianity from any 
ludicrous art (ludicra arte) and to remain free of that stain, it be not lawful for anyone to induce him or compel 
him to return to the performance of the same things again. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXIII. 

Whoever has turned away from the stage to adopt an honest life, shall not be led back thereto 
This is Canon vii. of the Synod of Carthage, June 15 (or 16), A. D. 401. 

JOHNSON. 

This canon is probably to be understood of slaves bought by their masters for the service of the Circ, or 
Theatre. 

CANON LXIV. (Greek Ixvii.) 

Of celebrating manumissions in church, that permission be asked from the Emperor. 

CONCERNING the publishing of manumissions in church, if our fellow bishops throughout Italy shall be 
found to do this, it will be a mark of our confidence to follow their order [of proceedings], full power being 
given to the legate we send, that whatever he can accomplish worthy of the faith, for the state of the Church 
and the salvation of souls, we shall laudably accept in the sight of the Lord. All which things, if they please 
your sanctity, pray set forth, that I may be assured that my suggestion has been ratified by you and that their 
sincerity may freely accept our unanimous action. And all the bishops said: The things which have been 
enjoined to be done and have been wisely set forth by your holiness are pleasing to all. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXIV. 

The Emperor's permission should be sought to allow the public manumission of slaves in church. 
This is Canon viij. of the Synod of Carthage, June 15 (or 16), A. D. 401. 

JOHNSON. 

It is certain, that in Italy, and some other parts of the Empire, slaves were solemnly set at liberty by their 
masters, in the church and presence of the bishop, from the time of Constantine, but it should seem this 
custom had not yet obtained in Africa. 

CANON LXV. (Greek Ixviii.) 

Concerning the condemned bishop Equitius. 

AURELIUS, the bishop, said: I do not think that the case of Equitius should be passed over in the legation, 
who some time ago for his crimes was condemned by an Episcopal sentence; that if by any chance our 
legate should meet him in those parts, our brother should take care for the state of the Church, as 
opportunity offered or where he could, to act against him. And all the bishops said: This prosecution is 
exceedingly agreeable to us, especially as Equitius was condemned some time ago, his impudent unrest 
ought to be repelled everywhere more and more for the good estate and health of the Church. And they 
subscribed, I, Aurelius, the bishop of the Church of Carthage, have consented to this decree, and after 
having read it have signed my name. Likewise also signed all the other bishops. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXV. 

Equitius, who had been condemned by the judgment of the bishops, and had behaved impudently against 

the ecclesiastical authority, ought to be opposed. 

This is Canon ix. of the Synod of Carthage, June 15 (or 16), A.D. 401. 

JOHNSON. 

See Can. Afr., 78. 

In this council the letters of Anastasius the Roman Pontiff were read, admonishing the Catholic bishops 
concerning the Donatists. 

In the consulship of those most illustrious men Vencentius and Flavius, on the Ides of September, at 
Carthage, in the secretarium of the restored basilica. When we had been gathered together in council in the 
church at Carthage and had taken our seats, bishops from all the African Provinces, that is to say, Aurelius, 
the bishop of that see with his colleagues (just who they were is made evident by their signatures) [the same 
bishop Aurelius said]: When the letters of our most blessed brother and fellow priest, Anastasius, bishop of 
the Church of Rome, had been read, in which he exhorted us out of the solicitude and sincerity of his 
paternal and brotherly love, that we should in no way dissimulate with regard to the wiles and wickednesses 
of the Donatist heretics and schismatics, by which they gravely vex the Catholic Church of Africa, we thank 
our Lord that he hath vouchsafed to inspire that best and holy archbishop with such a pious care for the 
members of Christ, although in divers lands, yet builded together into the one body of Christ. 

CANON LXVI. (Greek Ixix.) 

Thatthe Donatists are to be treated leniently. 

THEN when all firings had been considered and treated of which seem to conduce to the advantage of the 
church, the Spirit of God suggesting and admonishing us, we determined to act leniently and pacifically with 
the before-mentioned men, although they were cut off from the unity of the Lord's body by an unruly dissent, 
so that (as much as in us lies) to all those who have been caught in the net of their communion and society, it 
might be known throughout all the provinces of Africa, how they have been overcome by miserable error, 
holding different opinions, "that perchance," as the Apostle says, when we have corrected(l) them with 
gentleness, "God should grant them repentance for the acknowledging of the truth, and that they might be 
snatched out of the snares of the devil, who are led captive of him at his will." 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXVI. 

It seemed good that the Donatists should be treated kindly and with leniency, even if they should separate 

themselves from the Church, so that perchance through their respect f or our great gentleness they may be 

loosed from their captivity. 

The introduction refers to the Synod of Carthage of September 1 3,401 , and this canon is part of Canon j. of 

that Synod. We are indebted to the Ballerini for collecting the acts of this Synod by a comparison of the 

pseudo-Isidore, Dionysius, Ferrandus and the quotations contained in the acts of the Synod of Carthage of 

525. 

CANON LXVII. (Greek Ixx.) 

Of the letters to be sent to the judges, that they may take note of the things done between 
the Donatists and the Maximianists. 

THEREFORE it seemed good that letters should be given from our council to the African judges, from whom 
it would seem suitable that this should be sought, that in this matter they would aid the common mother, the 
Catholic Church, that the episcopal authority may be fortified(l) in the cities; that is to say that by their judicial 
power and with diligence out of their Christian faith, they enquire and record in the public acts, that all may 
have a firm notion of it, what has taken place in all those places in which the Maximianists, who made a 
schism from them, have obtained basilicas. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXVII. 

The secular arm must be implored by synodal letters to assist our common Mother the Catholic Church 

against those by whom the authority of the bishop is despised. 

This canon is the other half of Canon j. of the Synod of Carthage, September 1 3, A.D. 401 . 

JOHNSON. 

Maximianists were a sect bred out of the Donatists, and separating from them. 

CANON LXVIII. (Greek Ixxi.) 

Thatthe Donatist clergy are to be received into the Catholic Church as clergymen. 

IT moreover seemed good that letters be sent to our brethren and fellow-bishops, and especially to the 
Apostolic See, over which our aforesaid venerable brother and colleague Anastasius, presides, that 
[<greek>epeidh</greek> in the Greek, quo in the Latin] he may know that Africa is in great need, for the 
peace and prosperity of the Church, that those Donatists who were clergymen and who by good advice had 
desired to return to Catholic unity, should be treated according to the will and judgment of each Catholic 
bishop who governs the Church in that place; and, if it seem good for Christian peace, they be received with 
their honours, as it is clear was done in the former times of this same division. And that this was the case the 
example of the majority, yea, of nearly all the African Churches in which this error had sprung up, testify; not 
that the Council which met about this matter in foreign parts should be done away, but that it may remain in 
force with regard to those who so will to come over to the Catholic Church that there be procured by them no 
breaking of unity. But those through whom Catholic unity was seen to have been altogether perfected or 
assisted by the manifest winning of the souls of their brethren in the places where they live, there shall not be 
objected to them the decree contrary to their honour adopted by a foreign council, for salvation is shut off to 
no one, that is to say, that those ordained by the Donatist party, if having been corrected they have been 
willing to return to the Catholic Church, are not to be(2) received in their grades, according to the foreign 
council; but they are to be excepted through whom they received the advice to return to Catholic unity. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXVIII. 

Those ordained by the Donatists, even though their reception has been forbidden by a foreign synod, since 
it is truly good that all should be saved, if they correct themselves, let them be received. 

BALSAMON. 

This canon is special, for it seemed good to the fathers that such of the Donatists as came to the orthodox 
faith should be so received as to hold the grade of their holy orders, even though a transmarine, that is to 
say an Italian, council had decreed otherwise. 

ARISTENUS. 

Those Donatists who are penitent and anathematize their heresy are to be allowed to remain in their proper 
rank, and be numbered among the clergy of the Catholic Church, because Africa was labouring under a 
great shortness of clergy. 
This canon is Canon ij. of Carthage, Sept., A.D. 401 . 

JOHNSON. 

Whether the Donatists' clergy should be re-ordained was only a point of discipline; for the Donatists 
retained Episcopacy. Therefore the African fathers, as they leave other churches to their liberty, so at the 
same time they declare that they would continue their old practice, and leave every bishop to act according 
to his own discretion in this matter. Probably, one great motive, besides that of peace, which they had to this, 
was the great scarcity of clergymen in Africa, of which Aurelius complains in his speech, inserted into the 
Acts before Canon 77 (61), and proposes that they send to the bishops of Rome and Milan for a supply. And 
that this was the true reason, does in some measure appear from the words of the Latin canon at large, in 
which the occasion of this decree is said to be propter necessitatem. And this is the most probable reason 
why it is left to the discretion of the bishop, whether to admit Donatist clergymen as such, if he had occasion 
for their service. And after all it is clear from this very canon, that other churches had determined this point 
the contrary way. Therefore Mr. Calamy exceeds when he says: "As for the Donatists, all agree that their 
orders were acknowledged." Further, he would have it thought probable that orders were not always 
conferred among the Donatists by persons superior to presbyters. This he would infer from the great 
number of the bishops of that faction in Africa, viz., 278, many of which (says he) could be no more than 
parish ministers. But why so? Were there not above four hundred Catholic bishops? And why not as many of 
one side as the other? If our dissenters of any sort had fallen into the Episcopal form of government, no 
question but they would have had a bishop in every city at least, and equalled our church in the number of 
prelates. 

CANON LXIX. (Greek Ixxii.) 

That a legation be sent to the Donatists for the sake of making peace. 

IT further seemed good, that when these things were done, legates should be sent from our number to those 
of the Donatists whom they hold as bishops, or to the people, for the sake of preaching peace and unity, 
without which Christian salvation cannot be attained; and that these legates should direct the attention of all 
to the fact that they have no just objection to urge against the Catholic Church. And especially that this be 
made manifest to all by the municipal acts (on account of the weight of their documents) what they 
themselves had done in the case of the Maximianists, their own schismatics. For in this case it is shown 
them by divine grace, if they will but heed it, that their separation from the unity of the Church is as iniquitous 
as they now proclaim the schism of the Maximianists from themselves to be. Nevertheless from the number, 
those whom they condemned by the authority of their plenary council, they received back with their honours, 
and accepted the baptism which they had given while condemned and cut off. And thus let them see how 
with stupid heart they resist the peace of the Church scattered throughout the whole world, when they do 
these things on the part of Donatus, neither do they say that they are contaminated by communion with those 
whom they so receive for the making of peace, and yet they despise us, that is the Catholic Church, which is 
established even in the extreme parts of the earth, as being defiled by the communion of those whom the 
accusers have not been able to win over to themselves. (1) 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXIX. 

It seemed good that legates be sent to preach peace and unity to the Donatists who had been converted to 

the orthodox faith. 

This canon is Canon iij. of Carthage, September, A.D. 401 . 

CANON LXX. (Greek Ixxiii.) 

What clerics should abstain from their wives. 

MOREOVER since incontinence has been charged against some clergymen with regard to their own wives 
it has seemed good that bishops, presbyters, and deacons should according to the statutes already made 
abstain even from their own wives; and unless they do so that they should be removed from the clerical 
office. But the rest of the clergy shall not be forced to this but the custom of each church in this matter shall be 
followed. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXX. 

Bishops, presbyters and deacons shall abstain for their wives or else be removed from the ecclesiastical 
order. But the rest of the clergy shall not be forced to the same: but let the custom be observed. 
This is Canon iv. of Carthage, September, A.D. 401. 

JOHNSON. 

A repetition of Canon 25 (28). 

CANON LXXI. (Greek Ixxiv.) 

Of those who leave in neglect their own people. 

MOREOVER it seemed good that no one should be allowed to leave his chief cathedral and go to another 
church built in the diocese, or to neglect the care and frequent attendance upon his own cathedral by reason 
of too great care for his own affairs. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXI. 

It seemed good that no bishop shall translate himself to another see, leaviny his own, nor that through a care 
for his own affairs he should neglect his diocese. 
This is Canon vj. of Carthage, September, A.D. 401. 

JOHNSON. 

See Canons 53 (57), 56 (60). 

"Principalis Cathedra," his own Cathedral. 

CANON LXXII. (Greek Ixxv.) 

Of the baptism of infants when there is some doubt of their being already baptized. 

ITEM, it seemed good that whenever there were not found reliable witnesses who could testify that without 
any doubt they were baptized and when the children themselves were not, on account of their tender age, 
able to answer concerning the giving of the sacraments to them, all such children should be baptized without 
scruple, lest a hesitation should deprive them of the cleansing of the sacraments. This was urged by the 
Moorish Legates, our brethren, since they redeem many such from the barbarians. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXII. 

It seemed good that they should be baptized about whom there was an ambiguity whether they had been 
baptized or no; test they might through that doubt lose the divine ablution. 
This is Canon vij. of Carthage, September, A.D. 401 . 

CANON LXXIII. (Greek Ixxvi.) 

The date of Easter and the date of the Council should be announced. 

ITEM, it seemed good that the day of the venerable Easter should be intimated to all by the subscription of 
formed letters; and that the same should be observed with regard to the date of the Council, according to the 
decree of the Council of Hippo, that is to say the X. Calends of September, and that it should be written to the 
primates of each province so that when they summon their councils they do not impede this day. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXIII. 

It seemed good that the day of the Holy Easter should be announced on the day of the annual Synod, or on 
the tenth day before the calends of September. 
This is Canon viii. of Carthage, September, A.D. 401. 

JOHNSON. 

See Can. 51 (55). 

"The time of council," i.e., of the national council at Carthage. 

The Greek canon says <greek>h</greek> <greek>pro</greek> <greek>deka</greek> 

<greek>kalandwn</greek>, and Zonaras makes this the 21st of August, but he mistakes in his calculation. 

CANON LXXIV. (Greek Ixxvii.) 

That no bishop who is an intercessor is to hold the see where he is intercessor. 

ITEM, it has been decreed that it is not lawful to any intercessor to retain the see to which he has been 
appointed as intercessor, by any popular movements and seditions; but let him take care that within a year 
tie provide them with a bishop: but if he shall neglect to do so, when the year is done, another intercessor 
shall be appointed. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXIV. 

It seemed good that the bishop who had been called in as an intercessor, by the zeal and dissensions of 
the people, should not be allowed to become the occupant of its throne: but let a bishop be provided within 
a year, or else in the next, year let another intercessor be appointed. 
This is Canon IX. of Carthage, September, A.D. 401 . 

JOHNSON. 

We here call this officer "Guardian of the spiritualities" in the vacancy of the see. 

CANON LXXV. (Greek Ixxviii.) 

Of asking from the Emperors defenders of the Churches. 

ON account of the afflictions of the poor by whose troubles the Church is worn out without any intermission, it 
seemed good to all that the Emperors be asked to allow defenders for them against the power of the rich to 
be chosen under the supervision of the bishops. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXV. 

That the bishop be not annoyed, let Defensors be appointed. 
This is Canon X. of Carthage, September, 401 . 

JOHNSON. 

See note on Can. Chalcedon, 23. 

CANON LXXVI. (Greek Ixxix.) 

Of bishops who do not put in an appearance at Council. 

ITEM, it seemed good that as often as the council is to be assembled, the bishops who are impeded 
neither by age, sickness, or other grave necessity, come together, and that notice be given to the primates 
of their several provinces, that from all the bishops there be made two or three squads, and of each of these 
squads there be elected some who shall be promptly ready on the council day: but should they not be able 
to attend, let them write their excuses in the tractory,(1) or if after the coming ofthetractory certain necessities 
suddenly arise by chance, unless they send to their own primate an account of their impediment, they ought 
to be content with the communion of their own Church. 

NOTES. 

Those who do not attend the annual synod, unless they be involuntarily prevented, must be satisfied with the 

communion of their own churches. 

This is Canon xj., of Carthage, September, 401 . 

JOHNSON. 

"Tractory" has several significations; here it seems to denote the written return made by the Primate of the 
province to the synodical letter sent by the Bishop of Carthage. In the acts inserted between canon 90th and 
91st "Tractoria" seems to denote the letter of the Primate to the inferior bishops for choosing legates, if it do 
not rather denote the Bishop of Carthage's circular-letter to all the primates, as it does in the next paragraph. 
[The penalty in the last clause is] a very singular sort of censure, and very moderate. See Can. 80 (83). 

CANON LXXVI I. (Greek Ixxx.) 

Of Cresconius. 

CONCERNING Cresconius of Villa Regis this seemed good to all, that the Primate of Numidia should be 
informed on this matter so that he should by his letters summon the aforementioned Cresconius in order that 
at the next plenary Council of Africa he should not put off making an appearance. But if he contemns the 
summons and does not come, let him recognize the fact that sentence should be pronounced against him. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXVII. 

Unless Cresconius who has been summoned by letter to the Synod, shall appear, let him know that he will 
have sentence given against him. 

This canon was probably formerly an appendix (so Hefele thinks) to Canon xj., of the Synod of Carthage of 
September 13, 401. 

CANON LXXVIII. (Greek Ixxxi.) 

Of the Church of Hippo-Diarrhytus. 

IT further seemed good that since the destitution of the Church of Hippo-Diarrhytus should no longer be 

neglected, and the churches there are retained by those who have declined the infamous communion of 
Equitius, that certain bishops be sent from the present council, viz.: Reginus, Alypius, Augustine, Maternus, 
Theasius, Evodius, Placian, Urban, Valerius, Ambivius, Fortunatus, Quodvultdeus, Honoratus, Januarius, 
Aptus, Honoratus, Ampelius, Victorian, Evangelus and Rogation; and when those had been gathered 
together, and those had been corrected who with culpable pertinacity were of opinion that this flight of the 
same Equitius should be waited for, let a bishop be ordained for them by the vote of all. But if these should 
not be willing to consider peace, let them not prevent the choosing for ordination of a bishop, for the 
advantage of the church which has been so long destitute. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXVIII. 

It seemed good that, after Equitius had been condemned by the universal vote, a bishop of Hippo should 
be elected, and that they should in no way impede the ordination of a prelate for that church. 
This canon was likewise probably an appendix, to Canon xiij, of the Synod of Carthage of September 13th, 
401 , according to Hefele. 

JOHNSON. 

See Can. Afr., 65. 

Here the place of election and consecration seems to be the vacant see. 

CANON LXXIX. (Greek Ixxxii.) 

Of clerics who do not take care to have their causes argued within a year. 

IT was further decreed that as often as clergymen convicted and confessed(l) of any crime either on 
account of eorum, quorum verecundiae parcitur, or on account of the opprobrium to the Church, and of the 
insolent glorying of heretics and Gentiles, if perchance they are willing to be present at their cause and to 
assert their innocence, let them do so within one year of their excommunication; if in truth they neglect during 
a year to purge their cause, their voice shall not be heard afterwards. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME or CANON LXXIX. 

When a cleric has been convicted of a crime, if he says his cause should be heard upon appeal, let the 
appeal be made within a year; after that the appeal shall not be admitted. 
This is Canon xiij. of Carthage, September, A.D. 401 . 

JOHNSON. 

Though the Latin syntax of this canon is very confused, and, I am apt to think, corrupted, yet it is evident 
enough, that this is the intention of it. 

CANON LXXX. (Greek Ixxxiii.) 

That it is not permitted to make superiors of monasteries nor to ordain as clerics those who 
are received from a monastery not one's own. 

ITEM, it seemed good that if any bishop wished to advance to the clericature a monk received from a 
monastery not under his jurisdiction, or shall have appointed him superior of a monastery of his own, the 
bishop who shall have thus acted shall be separated from the communion of others and shall rest content 
with the communion of his own people alone, but the monk shall continue neither as cleric nor superior. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXX. 

Whoever shall receive a monk from a monastery not subject to his jurisdiction, and if he shall ordain him to 
the clerical estate or shall appoint him prior of his monastery, such an one shall be cut off from communion. 
This is Canon xiv. of Carthage, September, A.D. 401. 

JOHNSON. 

See Canons 76 (79) and 122 (123). 

CANON LXXXI. (Greek Ixxxiv.) 

Of bishops who appoint heretics or heathens as their heirs. 

ITEM, it was ordained that if any bishop should prefer to his Church strangers to blood relationship with him, 
or his heretical relatives, or pagans as his heirs, he shall be anathematized even after his death, and his 
name shall by no means be recited among those of the priests of God. Nor can he be excused if he die 
intestate, because being a bishop he was bound not to postpone making such a disposition of his goods 
as was befitting his profession. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXXI. 

Let a bishop be anathema if he make heretics and heathen his heirs. 
This is Canon xv. of Carthage, September, A.D. 401 . 

JOHNSON. 

There were in this age two written tables kept in every church, whereof one contained the names of all 
eminent bishops and clergymen now living, with whom that church held communion and correspondence; 
the other, the names of all eminent bishops, and other men of their own or other churches, now dead. The 
deacon rehearsed all the names, in both tables at the altar, whenever the Eucharist was celebrated. These 
tables were by the Greeks called <greek>Diptuka</greek>, and by some English writers "diptychs." See 
Can. of Peter of Alex., 14. 

CANON LXXXII. (Greek Ixxxv.) 

Of manumissions. 

ITEM, it seemed good that the Emperor be petitioned with regard to announcing manumissions in church. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXXII. 

The imperial permission must be asked for the making of the manumission of slaves in churches. 

ARISTENUS. 

This is the same as the sixty-fourth [Greek numbering] canon, and is there explained. 
This is Canon xvj. of Carthage, September, A.D. 401 . 

JOHNSON. 

A repetition of Canon 64 (67). 
CANON LXXXIII. (Greek Ixxxvi.) 
Of false Memories of Martyrs. 

ITEM, it seemed good that the altars which have been set up here and there, in fields and by the wayside as 

Memories of Martyrs, in which no body nor reliques of martyrs can be proved to have been laid up, should 
be overturned by the bishops who rule over such places, if such a thing can be done. But should this be 
impossible on account of the popular tumult it would arouse, the people should none the less be 
admonished not to frequent such places, and that those who believe rightly should be held bound by no 
superstition of the place. And no memory of martyrs should at all be accepted, unless where there is found 
the body or some reliques, on which is declared traditionally and by good authority to have been originally 
his habitation, or possession, or the scene of his passion. For altars which have been erected anywhere on 
account of dreams or inane quasi-revelations of certain people, should be in every way disapproved of. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXXIII. 

An altar in the fields or in a vineyard which lacks the reliques of the martyrs should be thrown down unless it 
would cause a public tumult to do so: and the same is the case with such as have been set up on account of 
dreams and false revelations. 
This is Canon xvij. of Carthage, September, A.D. 401 . 

CANON LXXXIV. (Greek Ixxxvii.) 

Of extirpating the remains of the idols. 

ITEM, it seemed good to petition the most glorious Emperors that the remains of idolatry not only in images, 
but in any places whatever or groves or trees, should altogether be taken away. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXXIV. 

Let all remains of idolatry be abolished whether in statues, or in places, or groves or trees. 

This is Canon xviij. of Carthage, September, A.D. 401 . 
JOHNSON. See Canon 58 (62.) 

CANON LXXXV. (Greek Ixxviii.) 

That by the bishop of Carthage, when there shall be need, letters shall be written and 
subscribed in the name of all the bishops. 

IT was said by all the bishops: If any letters are to be composed in the name of the council it seemed good 
that the venerable bishop who presides over this See should vouchsafe to dictate and sign them in the 
name of all, among which also are those to the episcopal legates, who are to be sent throughout the African 
provinces, in the matter of the Donatists; and it seemed good that the letters given them should contain the 
tenor of the mandate which they are not to go beyond. And they subscribed: I, Aurelius, bishop of the church 
of Carthage have consented to this decree and having read it have signed it. Likewise all the rest of the 
bishops subscribed. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXXV. 

It seemed good that whatever letters were to be sent from the Synod should be written and subscribed by 
the bishop of Carthage in the name of all. 

This is Canon xix. of Carthage, September, A. D. 401 . 

In this Council previous decrees are confirmed. 

In the fifth consulate of the most glorious Emperors Arcadius and Honorius, Augusti, the VI Calends of 
September, in the City of Milevis, in the secretarium of the basilica, when Aurelius the bishop of Carthage 

had taken his seat in plenary council, the deacons standing by, Aurelius, the bishop, said: Since the body of 
the holy Church is one, and there is one head of all the members, it has come to pass by the divine 
permission and assistance given to our weakness, that we, invited out of brotherly love, have come to this 
church. Wherefore I beg your charity to believe that our coming to you is neither superfluous, nor 
unacceptable to all; and that the consent of all of us may make it manifest that we agree with the decrees 
already confirmed by the Council at Hippo or which were defined afterwards by a larger synod at Carthage, 
these shall now be read to us in order. Then at last the agreement of your holiness will appear clearer than 
light, if they know that the things lawfully defined by us in former councils, ye have set forth, not only by your 
consent to these acts, but also by your subscriptions. 

Xantippus, bishop of the first see of Numidia said: I believe what pleased all the brethren and the statutes 
they confirmed with their hands; we by our subscribing our names shew that it pleases us also, and have 
confirmed them with our superscription. 

Nicetius, the bishop of the first see of Mauritania Sitifensis said: The decrees which have been read, since 
they do not lack reason, and have been approved by all, these also are pleasing to my littleness, and I will 
confirm them with my subscription. 

CANON LXXXVI. (Greek Ixxix.) 

Of the order of bishops, that those ordained more recently do not dare to take precedence 
of those ordained before them. 

VALENTINE, the bishop, said: If your good patience will permit, I follow the things which were done in time 
past in the Church of Carthage, and which were illustrious having been confirmed by the subscriptions of the 
brethren, and I profess that we intend to preserve this. For this we know, that ecclesiastical discipline has 
always remained inviolate: therefore let none of the brethren dare to place himself before those ordained 
earlier than himself; but by the offices of charity this has always been shewn to those ordained earlier, which 
always should be accepted joyfully by those ordained more recently. Let your holiness give command that 
this order be strengthened by your interlocutions. Aurelius, the bishop, said: It would not be fitting that we 
should repeat these things, were it not for the existence of certain inconsiderate minds, which would induce 
us to making such statutes; but this is a common cause about which our brother and fellow bishop has 
spoken, that each one of us should recognize the order decreed to him by God, and that the more recent 
should defer to the earlier ordained, and they should presume to do nothing when these have not been 
consulted. Wherefore I say, now that I think of it, that they who think they may presume to take precedence 
over those ordained before them, should be coerced suitably by the great council. Xantippus, bishop of the 
first see of Numidia, said: All the brethren present have heard what our brother and fellow bishop Aurelius 
has said, what answer o we make? Datian, the bishop, said: The decrees made by our ancestors should 
be strengthened by our assent, so that the action taken by the Church of Carthage in past synods should 
hold fast, being confirmed by the full assent of all of us. And all the bishops said: This order has been 
preserved by our fathers and by our ancestors, and shall be preserved by us through the help of God, the 
rights of the primacy of Numidia and of Mauritania being kept intact. 

Of the archives and matricula of Numidia. 

Moreover it seemed good to all the bishops who subscribed in this council that the matricula and the 
archives of Numidia should be at the first see and in the Metropolis, that is Constantina. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXXVI. 

Thou shalt not prefer thyself to thine elders, but shalt follow them. For he that spurns those who were before 
him should be frowned down upon. 

The introduction belongs to the Synod of Milevis, of August 27, A.D. 402. 
This canon (Ixxxvj.) is Canon j., of the above named Synod. 

JOHNSON. 

From this canon it appears that the primacy in Africa was ambulatory, and belonged to the senior bishop of 
the province. If the primacy had been fixed to the bishop of any certain city, as in other countries, there would 

have been a salvo or exception for that bishop, as there is in the 24th canon of the Synod of Bracara [Braga] 
in Spain, which orders that all bishops take place according to their seniority, with a reserve to the bishop of 
the metropolis. The bishop of Carthage was not included in this canon; for it is evident that he had a 
precedence annexed to his see, and that he was in reality a sort of patriarch. The reason why Numidia and 
Mauritania are particularly mentioned is, that some disputes had been started there on that subject. 

CANON LXXXVII. (Greek xc.) 

Concerning Quodvultdeus, the bishop. 

IN the case of Quodvultdeus of Centuria, it pleased all the bishops that no one should communicate with him 
until his cause should be brought to a conclusion, for his accuser when he sought to bring the cause before 
our council, upon being asked whether he was willing with him to be tried before the bishops, at first said that 
he was, but on another day answered that he was not willing, and went away. Under these circumstances to 
deprive him of his bishoprick, before the conclusion of his cause was known, could commend itself to no 
Christian as a just act. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXXVII. 

Since Quodvultdeus at first promised to come to our synod when his opposer had asked that he be 
admitted, and afterwards withdrew, saying that that was displeasing to him, he should be excommunicated, 
until the cause is finished. But it is not just that he be deposed before sentence is given. 

This canon is part of Canon ij. of Synod of Milevis, A.D. 402. 

CANON LXXXVIII. (Greek xci.) 

Of Maximian, the bishop. 

But in the case of Maximian of Vagai (1) it seemed good that letters be sent from the council both to him and 
to his people; that he should vacate the bishoprick, and that they should request another to be appointed for 
them. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXXVIII. 

Let Maximian of Bagai be expelled from his church, and another be set in his room. 

This canon is remaining part of Canon ij., of the Synod of Milevis, A.D. 402. 

CANON LXXXIX. (Greek xcii.) 

That bishops who are ordained shall receive letters from their ordainers bearing the date 
and the name of the consul. 

IT further seemed good that whoever thereafter should be ordained by the bishops throughout the African 
provinces, should receive from their ordainers letters, written in their own hands, containing the name of the 
consul and the date, that no altercation might arise concerning which were ordained first and which 
afterwards. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXXIX. 

Whoever is ordained in Africa let him have letters signed by the proper hand of him that ordained him, 
containing the date and the name of the Consul. 

This is Canon iij. of Milevis, A.D. 402. 

JOHNSON. 

It is evident from this canon that the church in this age followed the date of the civil government, which was in 
the consulship of Caius and Titius, as our civil date is in the 1st, 2d, 3d, etc., year of the reign of our King or 
Queen. 

CANON XC. (Greek xciii.) 

Of those who have once read in church, that they cannot be advanced by others. 

ITEM, it seemed good that whoever in church even once had read should not be admitted to the ministry 
(clericatum) by another church. 

And they subscribed: I, Aurelius, bishop of the Church of Carthage, have consented to this decree, and, 
having read it, have signed it. Likewise also the rest of the bishops signed. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XC. 

He who has only once read in a Church [i.e., diocese] shall not be admitted into the clergy by another 

Church. 

This is Canon iv. of Milevis, 402. 

There is set forth in this council what the bishops did who were sent as legates across seas. 

In the consulship of those most illustrious men, the most glorious Emperor Theodosius Augustus, and 
Rumoridus, the VIII. (1) Calends of September, at Carthage, in the basilica of the second region, when 
Aurelius the bishop had taken his seat in plenary council, the deacons standing by, Aurelius, the bishop, 
said: From stress of circumstances, venerable brethren, I, although so small, have been led to assemble 
you in council. For a while ago, as your holinesses will remember, while holding a council we sent our 
brothers as legates to the regions beyond seas. It is right that these should at this meeting of your 
holinesses narrate the course of their now finished legation, and although yesterday when we were in 
session concerning this matter, besides ecclesiastical matters, we paid some prolonged attention to what 
they had done, nevertheless it is right that to-day the discussion of yesterday should be confirmed by 
ecclesiastical action. 

Of the bishops of the African provinces who were not present at this council. (2) 

The right order of things demands that first of all we should enquire concerning our brethren and fellow 
bishops, who were to come to this council either from Byzacena or at least from Mauritania, like as they 
decreed that they would be present in this council. And when Philologius, Geta, Venustianus, and Felician, 
bishops of the province of Byzacena had presented and read their letters of legation, and Lucian and 
Silvanus, legates of the province of Mauritania. Sitiphensis, had done the same, the bishop Aurelius said: 
Let the text of these writings be placed in the acts. 

Of the Byzacene bishops. 

Numidius, the bishop, said: We observe that our brethren and fellow bishops of the province of Byzacena 
and of the province of Mauritania Sitiphensis have sent legates to the council; we now seek whether the 
legates of Numidia have come, or at least of the province of Tripoli or of Mauritania-Caesariensis. 

Of the bishops of Mauritania Sitiphensis. 

Lucian and Silvanus, the bishops, legates of the Province of Mauritania Sitiphensis said: The tractory came 
late to our Caesarian brethren or they would have been here; and they will certainly come, and we are 
confident of their attitude of mind that whatever shall be determined by this council, they without doubt will 
assent unto. 

Of the bishops of Numidia. 

Alypius, bishop of the church of Tagaste said: We have come from Numidia, I and the holy brethren 

Augustine and Possidius, but a legation could not be sent from Numidia, because by the tumult of the 
recruits the bishops have either been prevented from coming or fully occupied by their own necessary 
affairs in their sees. For after I had brought to the holy Senex Xantippus your holiness's tractory, this seemed 
good in the present business that a council should be appointed, to which a delegation with instructions 
should be sent, but when I reported to him in later letters the impediment of the recruits, of which I have just 
spoken, he excused them by his own rescripts. Aurelius, the bishop, said: There is no doubt that the 
aforesaid brethren and bishops of Numidia, when they shall have received the acts of the council, will give 
their consent and will take pains to carry into effect whatever shall have been adopted. It is therefore 
necessary that by the solicitude of this see what we shall have determined be communicated to them. 

Of the bishops of Tripoli. 

This is what I could learn concerning our brethren of Tripoli, that they appointed our brother Dulcicius as a 
legate: but because he could not come, certain of our sons coming from the aforesaid province asserted 
that the aforesaid had taken shipping, and that it was thought that his arrival had been delayed by storms; 
nevertheless also concerning these matters, if your charity is willing, this form shall be preserved, that the 
placets of the council be sent to them. And all the bishops said: What your holiness has decreed pleases 
us all. 

CANON XCI. (Greek xciv.) 

Of holding meetings with the Donatists. 

Aurelius, the bishop, said: What has come out in the handling of your charity, I think this should be confirmed 
by ecclesiastical acts. For the profession of all of you shews that each one of us should call together in his 
city the chiefs of the Donatists either alone and with one of his neighbour bishops, so that in like manner in 
the different cities and places there should be meetings of them assembled by the magistrates or seniors of 
the places. And let this be made an edict if it seems good to all. And all the bishops said: It seems good to 
all, and we all have confirmed this with our subscription. Also we desire that your holiness sign the letters to 
be sent from the council to the judges. Aurelius, the bishop, said: If it seems good to your charity, let the form 
of summoning them be read, in order that we all may hold the same tenour of proceeding. All the bishops 
said: Let it be read. Laetus the Notary read. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XCI. 

Let each of the bishops meet with the leaders of the Donatists in his own city; or let him associate with 
himself a neighbouring bishop, that they together may meet them. 

This introduction together with the propositions of the different bishops belongs to the Synod of Carthage of 

August, 403. 

This canon (xcj.) is Canon j. of that synod. 

CANON XCII. (Greek xcv.) 

Form of convening the Donatists. 

THAT bishop of that church said: What by the authority of that most ample see we shall have impetrated, we 
ask your gravity to have read, and that you order it to be joined to the acts and carried into effect. When the 
jussio had been read and joined to the acts, the bishop of the Catholic Church, (1) said: Vouchsafe to listen 
to the mandate to be sent through your gravity to the Donatists, and to insert it in the acts, and to carry it to 
them, and informs us in your acts of their answer. "We, sent by the authority of our Catholic Council, have 
called you together, desiring to rejoice in your correction, bearing in mind the charity of the Lord who said: 
Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God; and moreover he admonished 
through the prophet those who say they are not our brothers, that we ought to say: Ye are our brethren. 
Therefore you ought not to despise this pacific commonitory coming of love, so that if ye think we have any 
part of the truth, ye do not hesitate to say so: that is, when your council is gathered together, ye delegate of 
your number certain to whom you intrust the statement of your case; so that we may be able to do this also, 
that there shall be delegated from our Council who with them delegated by you may discuss peacefully, at a 

determined place and time, whatever question there is which separates your communion from us; and that 
at length the old error may receive an end through the assistance of our Lord God, lest through the animosity 
of men, weak souls, and ignorant people should perish by sacrilegious dissension. But if ye shall accept 
this proposition in a fraternal spirit, the truth will easily shine forth, but if ye are not willing to do this, your 
distrust will be easily known." And when this had been read, all the bishops said: This pleases us well, so let 
it be. And they subscribed: I, Aurelius, bishop of the Carthaginian Church, have consented to this decree, 
and having read it, have subscribed it. Likewise also the rest of the bishops signed. 

This synod sent a legation to the Princes against tits Donatists. 

The most glorious emperor Honorius Augustus, being consul for the sixth time, on the Calends of July, at 
Carthage in the basilica of the second region. In this council Theasius and Evodius received a legation 
against the Donatists. In this council was inserted the commonitorium which follows. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XCII. 

What things should be said to the Donatists are these: "We greatly desire to rejoice in your conversion; for 
we have been commanded to say even to those not desiring to be our brethren, ' Ye are our brothers.' We 
come therefore to you and we exhort you that if you have any defence to make, ye should appoint certain 
persons to whom this should be entrusted, who, at a fixed time and place, shall urge your case; otherwise 
your distrust wilt be thenceforward patent." 

This canon is Canon ij of the Synod of Carthage of August 25, A.D. 403. 

CANON XCIII. (Greek xcvi.) 

The character of the Commonitory which the legates received against the Donatists. 

THE Commonitorium for our brothers Theasius and Evodius, sent as legates from the Council of Carthage 
to the most glorious and most religious princes. When by the help of the Lord they are come into the 
presence of the most pious princes, they shall declare to them with what fulness of confidence, according to 
the direction of the council of the year before, the prelates of the Donatists had been urged by the municipal 
authority to assemble, in order that if they really meant their professions, they might by fit persons chosen 
from their number, enter into a peaceful conference with us in Christian meekness, and whatever they held 
as truth they might not hesitate to declare it frankly; so that from such conference the sincerity of the Catholic 
position, which has been conspicuous for so long a time, might be perceived even by those who from 
ignorance or obstinacy were opposing themselves to it. But deterred by their want of confidence they 
scarcely ventured to reply. And forsooth, because we had discharged toward them the offices which 
become bishops and peacemakers, and they had no answer to make to the truth, they betook themselves 
to unreasonable acts of brute force, and treacherously oppressed many of the bishops and clergy, to say 
nothing of the laity. And some of the churches they actually invaded, and tried to assault still others. 
And now, it behoves the gracious clemency of their Majesties to take measures that the Catholic Church, 
which has begotten them as worshippers of Christ in her womb, and has nourished them with the strong meat 
of the faith, should by their forethought, be defended, lest violent men, taking advantage of the times of 
religious excitement, should by fear overcome a weak people, whom by argument they were not able to 
pervert. It is well known how often the vile gatherings (detestabilis manus) of the Circumcelliones (1) have 
been forbidden by the laws, and also condemned by many decrees of the Emperors, their majesties most 
religious predecessors. Against the madness of these people it is not unusual nor contrary to the holy 
Scriptures to ask for secular [<greek>qeias</greek>] in the Greek] protection, since Paul the Apostle, as is 
related in the authentic Acts of the Apostles, warded off a conspiracy of certain lawless men by the help of 
the military. Now then we ask that there be extended to the Catholic Churches, without any dissimulation, the 
protection of the ordinum [i.e. companies of soldiers, stationed] in each city, and of the holders of the 
suburban estates in the various places. (1) At the same time it will be necessary to ask that they give 
commandment that the law, set forth by their father Theodosius, of pious memory, which imposed a fine of 
ten pounds of gold upon both the ordainers and the ordained among heretics, and which was also directed 
against proprietors at whose houses conventicles were held, be confirmed anew; so that it may be effective 
with persons of this sort when Catholics, provoked by their wiles, shall lay complaint against them; so that 
through fear at least, they may cease from making schisms and from the wickedness of the heretics, since 
they refuse to be cleansed and corrected by the thought of the eternal punishment. 

Let request be also made that the law depriving heretics of the power of being able to receive or bequeath 

by gift or by will, be straightway renewed by their Piety, so that all right of giving or receiving may be taken 

away from those who, blinded by the madness of obstinacy, are determined to continue in the error of the 

Donatists. 

With regard to those who by considerations of unity and peace are willing to correct themselves, let 

permission be granted to them to receive their inheritance, the law notwithstanding, even though the bequest 

by gift or inheritance was made while they were yet living in the error of the heretics; those of course being 

excepted, who under the stress of legal proceedings have sought to enter the Catholic Church; for it may 

well be supposed, that persons of this latter sort desired Catholic unity, not so much from fear of the 

judgment of heaven, as from the greed of earthly gain. 

For the furtherance of all these things the help of the Powers (Porestatum) of each one of the provinces is 

needed. With regard to other matters, whatever they shall perceive is for the Church's interests, this we have 

resolved that the legation have full authority to do and to carry into effect. Moreover it seemed good to us all, 

that letters from our assembly should be sent to the most glorious Emperors and most Excellent 

Worthinesses, whereby they may be assured of the agreement of us all that the legates should be sent by 

us to their most blessed court. 

Since it is a very slow business for us all to set our names to these letters, and in order that they may not be 

burdened with the signature of each one of us, we desire thee, brother Aurelius, that thy charity be good 

enough to sign them in the name of us all. And to this they all agreed. 

I, Aurelius, Bishop of the Church of Carthage have consented to this decree and have subscribed my name. 

And so all the other bishops subscribed. 

Letters ought likewise to be sent to the judges that, until the lord permit the legates to return to us, they give 

protection through the soldiers of the cities, and through the holders of the farms of the Catholic Church. It 

ought also to be added concerning the dishonest Equitius, which he had shewn by laying claim to the jus 

sacerdotum, that he be rejected from the diocese of Hippo according to the statutes of the Emperors. 

Letters ought also to be sent to the Bishop of the Church of Rome in commendation of the legates, and to the 

other Bishops who may be where the Emperor is. To this they assented. 

Likewise I, Aurelius, Bishop of the Church of Carthage, have consented to this decree, and having read it, 

have set my name to it. 

And all the other bishops likewise subscribed. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XCIII. 

The Emperors who were born in the true religion and were educated in the faith, ought to stretch forth a 

helping hand to the Churches. For the military band overthrew the dire conspiracy which was threatening 

Paul. 

Here follows a brief declaration of what things were decreed in this Synod. 

When Stilico a second time and Anthemius, those illustrious men, were consuls, on the tenth before the 
calends of September, at Carthage in the basilica of the second region. I have not written out in full the acts 
of this council (1) because they treat of the necessities of the time rather than of matters of general interest, 
but for the instruction of the studious I have added a brief digest of the same council. (2) 

CANON XCIV. (Greek xcvii.) 

Summary of Chapters. 

THAT a free delegation be sent to the council from all the provinces to Mizoneum. Legates (3) and letters 
were ordered to be sent for the purpose of directing the free legation: that became the unity had been made 
only at Carthage, letters should also be given to the judges, that they might order in the other provinces and 
cities the work of union to be proceeded with, and the thanksgivings of the Church of Carthage for the whole 
of Africa concerning the exclusion of the Donatists should be sent with the letters of the bishops to Court (ad 
Comitatum). 

The letters of Pope Innocent were read: that bishops ought not readily to carry causes across seas, and this 
very thing was confirmed by the judgment of the bishops themselves; that on account of thanksgiving and 
the exclusion of the Donatists, two clerics of the Church of Carthage should be sent to Court. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XCIV. 

It seemed good that letters be sent to the Magistrates that the Donatists be expelled. (4) 

This introduction is taken from the Synod of Carthage of August 23, 405. There is also added the introduction 
of the Synod of Carthage of June 13, 407. 

In this synod certain things already decreed are corrected. 

Under the most illustrious emperors Honorius for the Vllth time, and Theodosius for the second time, the 
consuls being the Augusti, on the Ides of July in Carthage in the basilica of the second region, when bishop 
Aurelius together with his other bishops had taken his seat, and while the deacons stood by, he said: Since 
it was decreed in the council of Hippo, that each year there should assemble a plenary council of Africa, not 
only here in Carthage but also in the different provinces in their order, and this was reserved that we should 
determine its place of meeting sometimes in Numidia and sometimes in Byzacium. But this seemed 
laborious to all the brethren. 

CANON XCV. (Greek xcviii.) 

An universal council to be held only when necessary. 

IT seemed good that there should be no more the yearly necessity of fatiguing the brethren; but as often as 
common cause, that is of the whole of Africa, demands, that letters shall be given on every side to that see 
in this matter, that a synod should be gathered in that province, where the desirability of it induces; but let the 
causes which are not of general interest be judged in their own provinces. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XCV. 

When general necessity so urges, letters are to be sent to the chief see, and a synod held in a convenient 
place. But let ordinary causes be settled in their own provinces. 

This canon is Canon j. of the Synod of Carthage, A.D. 407. 

JOHNSON. 

This canon is a tacit revocation of that clause for annual synods in the 18th canon, which was made in a 
former council. 

CANON XCVI. (Greek xcix.) 

That from judges who have been chosen, no appeals may be taken. 

IF an appeal be taken, let him who makes it choose the judges, and with him he also against whom the 
appeal is taken; and from their decision no appeal may be made. 

Concerning the delegates of the different provinces. 

When all the delegates of the different provinces came together, they have been most graciously received, 
that is those of the Numidians, Byzacenes, Stifensian Moors, as well as Caesarians and Tripolitans. 

Concerning the executors of Churches. 

It has seemed good moreover that the appointment of five executors should be asked for in all matters 
pertaining to the necessities of the Church, who shall be portioned off in the different provinces. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XCVI. 

If one party to a suit takes an appeal, and if both choose together a judge, no further appeal shall be 
allowed. 

This canon is Canon ij. of Carthage, A.D. 407. 

CANON XCVII. (Greek c.) 

Thatthere be sought from the Emperorthe protection of Advocates in causes 
ecclesiastical. 

IT seemed good that the legates who were about leaving, viz., Vincent and Fortunatian, should in the name 
of all the provinces ask from the most glorious Emperors to give a faculty for the establishment of scholastic 
defensors, whose shall be the care of this very kind of business: so that as the priests (1) of the province, 
they who have received the faculty as defensors of the Churches in ecclesiastical affairs, as often as 
necessity arises, may be able to enter the private apartments of the judges, so as to resist what is urged on 
the other side, or to make necessary explanations. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XCVII. 

That there be asked of the Emperor the appointment of Patrons for ecclesiastical heads, whose care it 
should be to defend the Church in its affairs, and who as priests could easily refer what things were urgent. 

(Greek ci.) 

Thatthe legation be free. 

IT seemed good that the chosen legates should have at the meeting freedom of action (legationem 
liberam). The protest of the Mauritanian bishops against Primosus. 

It is evident that those of Mauritania Caesariensis gave evidence in their own writings that Primosus had 
been summoned by the chiefs of the Thiganensian city, that he should present himself to the plenary council 
according to the imperial constitutions, and, when sought for, as was right, Primosus was not found, at least 
so the deacons reported. But since the same Mauritanians petitioned that letters be sent from the whole 
synod to the venerable brother, the aged Innocent, it seemed good that they should be sent, that he might 
know that Primosus had been sought at the council and not found at all. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME. 

[Lacking.] 

BALSAMON. 

The contents of this canon being special are useless, therefore no explanation has been given. 

This Canon is Canon iij. of Carthage, A.D. 407. 

JOHNSON. 

See can. 75 (78) and note on Can. Chalced., 23. 

These officers [i.e. "defensors"] seem to be called "executores" in the acts of synod just before this canon. 
The "priest of the province" was one chosen out of the body of advocates to be counsel to the province, to 
act and plead in their behalf; and that he might do it more effectually he was allowed to have private 
conference with the judge. 

CANON XCVIII. (Greek cii.) 

Of the peoples which never had bishops. 

IT seemed good that such peoples as had never had bishops of their own should in no way receive such 
unless it had been decreed in a plenary council of each province and by the primates, and with the consent 
of the bishop of that diocese to which the church belonged. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XCVIII. 

Whoso never heretofore had a bishop of their own, unless the general synod of the Province shall agree to 
it, and the Primate, in agreement with him to whom the province in which the Church is, is subject, shall not 
have bishops of their own. 

This canon is Canon iv. of the Synod of Carthage, A.D. 407. 

CANON XCIX. (Greek ciii.) 

Of people or dioceses returned from the Donatists. 

Such communities as have returned from the Donatists and have had bishops, without doubt may continue 
to have them even without any action of the councils, but such a community as had a bishop and when he 
dies wish no longer to have a bishop of their own, but to belong to the diocese of some other bishop, this is 
not to be denied them. Also such bishops as before the promulgation of the imperial law concerning unity as 
brought back their people to the Catholic Church, they ought to be allowed still to rule them: but from the time 
of that law of unity, all the Churches, and their dioceses, and if perchance there be any instruments of the 
Church or things pertaining to its rights should belong to the Catholic bishops of those places to whom the 
places pertained while under the heretics, whether they be converted to the Catholic Church or remain 
unconverted heretics. Whoever after this law shall make any such usurpation, shall restore as is meet the 
usurped possessions. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XCIX. 

Whoever are converted from the Donatists may retain their own bishops, although they had them without the 
consent of the synod; and when the bishop is dead, if they do not wish another to be substituted in his room, 
but desire to place themselves under some other bishop, they shall be allowed to do so. And such bishops 
as before the union have brought back the people they ruled, let them still rule them. After the imperial Edict 
on Unity every church must defend its own rights. 

This canon is Canon v. of Carthage, A.D. 407. 

JOHNSON. 

"An imperial law concerning unity" i.e. For uniting all in the catholic faith, and ejecting the donatistical 
bishops. 

CANON C. (Greek civ.) 

Of the suggestion of Bishop Maurentius. 

[Hefele says "The text of this canon is much corrupted and very difficult to be understood." He gives as a 
synopsis, "The council appoints judges in the affair of Bishop Maurentius." (Hefele, Vol. II, p. 443.)] 
Johnson thus condenses and translates. 

Bishop Maurentius having an information against him, lying before the council, moves for a hearing; but the 
informers don't appear upon three calls made by the deacons on the day appointed. The cause is referred 
to Senex Xantippus, Augustinus, and five more summoned by the council, the informers were to make up the 

number twelve. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON C. 

It is right that sentence be given on the subdeacons who are said to be present from Nova Germania, who 
have thrice been sought and not found. But out of regard to ecclesiastical gentleness, let some be sent to 
look into the matter. 

BALSAMON. 

The contents of this canon are of a private character, and therefore have not been commented on. 

This canon is Canon vj. of Carthage, A.D. 407. 

JOHNSON. 

"Senex" i.e. Primate Xantippus, as is commonly believed. He and others have this title frequently given 
them in the acts of these councils. See can. 8. 

CANON CI. (Greek civ. bis) 

Of making peace between the Churches of Rome and Alexandria. 

IT seemed good that a letter be written to the holy Pope Innocent concerning the dissension between the 
Churches of Rome and Alexandria, so that each Church might keep peace with the other as the Lord 
commanded. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CI. 

It seemed good to write to Innocent that the Roman and Alexandrian churches might be at peace between 
themselves. 

This canon is Canon vii. of Carthage, A.D. 407. 

CANON CM. (Greek cv.) 

Of those who put away their wives or husbands, that so they remain. 

IT seemed good that according to evangelical and apostolical discipline a man who had been put away 
from his wife, and a woman put away from her husband should not be married to another, but so should 
remain, or else be reconciled the one to the other; but if they spurn this law, they shall be forced to do 
penance, covering which case we must petition that an imperial law be promulgated. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CM. 

Married people who are loosed must remain unmarried or else be reconciled, otherwise they shall be 
forced to do penance. 

This canon is Canon viii. of Carthage, A.D. 407, and is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's 
Decretum, P. II., Causa xxxij., Quaest. vij., can. v. 

CANON CIM. (Greek cvi.) 

Of the prayers to be said at the Altar. 

THIS also seemed good, that the prayers which had been approved in synod should be used by all, 
whether prefaces, commendations, or laying on of the hand, and that others contrary to the faith should not 
be used by any means, but that those only should be said which had been collected by the learned. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CHI. 

[The same as the canon, but omits the last phrase.] 
This canon is Canon ix. of Carthage, A.D. 407. 

JOHNSON. 

That is, such forms fitted for the present time or occasion, as our Church uses in her Communion Office 
before the trisagium, on Christmas, Easter, etc. These prefaces were very ancient in the Christian church. 
Prayers used to recommend the catechumens, penitents, and dying souls to God's protection were styled 
"Commendations." 

CANON CIV. (Greek cvii.) 

Of these who ask from the Emperorthat secular judges may take cognizance of their 
causes. 

IT seemed good that whoever should seek from the Emperor, that secular judges should take cognizance 
of his business, should be deprived of his office; if however, he had asked from the Emperor an episcopal 
trial, no objection should be made. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CIV. 

Let not him be a bishop who from the Emperor seeks a public judgment. 

This canon is Canon X. of Carthage, A.D. 407. 

JOHNSON. See Canon Ant., 12. 

CANON CV. (Greek cviii.) 

Of those who do not communicate in Africa and would go across seas. 

WHOEVER does not communicate in Africa, and goes to communicate across seas, let him be cast out of 
the clergy. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPIOME OF CANON CV. 

Whoever is cut off from communion in Africa, and goes to parts across seas that he may there 
communicate, is to be cast out of the clergy. 

This canon is Canon j. of Carthage, A.D. 407. 

CANON CVI. (Greek cix.) 

That those who are going to carry their case to court should be careful to inform eitherthe 
bishop of Carthage or (1) the bishop of Rome. 

IT seemed good that whoever wished to go to court, should give notice in the form which is sent to the 

Church of the city of Rome, that from thence also he should receive a formed letter to court. But if receiving 
only a formed letter to Rome, and saying nothing about the necessity which he had of going to court, he 
willed immediately to go thither, let him be cut off from communion. But if while at Rome the necessity of 
going to court suddenly arose, let him state his necessity to the bishop of Rome and let him carry with him a 
rescript of the same Roman bishop. But let the formed letters which are issued by primates and by certain 
bishops to their own clergy have the date of Easter; but if it be yet uncertain what is the date of Easter of that 
year, let the preceding Easter's date be set down, as it is customary to date public acts after the consulship. 
It further seemed good that those who were sent as delegates from this glorious council should ask of the 
most glorious princes whatever they saw would be useful against the Donatists and Pagans, and their 
superstitions. 

It also seemed good to all the bishops that all conciliar letters be signed by your holiness alone. And they 
subscribed: I, Aurelius, Bishop of Carthage, have consented to this decree, and having read it, now 
subscribe my name. Likewise also the rest of the bishops subscribed. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CVI. 

Whoever from any necessity was going to court, must declare his intention to the bishop of Carthage and to 
the bishop of Rome, and receive a letter dimissory, and otherwise he shall be excommunicated. 
Whatever shall seem to the legates useful against the Donatists and Greeks, and their superstitions, that 
shall be sought from the Emperor. 

(Greek ex.) 

Synod against the pagans and heretics. 

In the consulship of those most illustrious men Bassus and Philip, the xvith Calends of July, at Carthage, in 
the secretarium of the restored basilica.* In this council the bishop Fortunatian received a second 
appointment as legate against the pagans and heretics. 
Item, a council against the pagans and heretics. 

In the consulship of those most illustrious men Bassus and Philip, the iii. Ides of October at Carthage, in the 
Secretarium of the restored basilica *. In this council the bishops Restitutus and Florentius received a 
legation against the pagans and heretics, at the time Severus and Macarius were slain, and on their 
account the bishops Euodius, Theasius and Victor were put to death. 

NOTES. 

This canon is Canon xij. of Carthage, A.D. 407. 

JOHNSON. 

Of "Formal Letters" see Can. Ap., 10 (13). 

CANON CVII. (Greek ex. continued.) 

A Council concerning a bishop taking cognizance. 

IN the consulate of the most glorious Emperors Honorius for the Vllth time and Theodosius for the llld, 
Augusti, xvii. Calends of July, a synod was held at Carthage in the basilica of the second region. In this 
council it seemed good that no one bishop should claim the right to take cognizance of a cause. The acts of 
this council I have not here written down, because it was only provincial and not general. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CVII. 

One bishop shall not claim for himself to take cognizance of a cause alone. 

(Greek cxi.) 

Synod against the Donatists. 

After the consulate of the most illustrious Emperors Honorius for the Vlllth time and Theodosius for the IVth 

time, Augusti, xviii. Calends of July, at Carthage in the basilica of the second region. In this council the 
bishops, Florentius, Possidius, Praesidius and Benenatus received legation against the Donatists, at that 
time at which a law was given that anyone might practice the Christian worship at his own will. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CVII. 

Let each one receive the practice of piety of his own free will. 

The two first introductions belong respectively to the Synods of Carthage of June 1 6 and of October 1 3, A.D. 
408. 

Canon cvij. of the African code and that which follows it are the introductions to the Synods of Carthage of 
June 15, A.D. 409, and of June 14, A.D. 410. 

JOHNSON. 

See can. 10, 11, 12, 28 (31), 79 (80). Recognises, a law of the Empire, that everyone receive Christianity at his 
own free choice. 

CANON CVIII. (Greek cxii.) 

Synod against the heresy of Pelagius and Celestius. 

IN the consulate of the most glorious Emperors, Honorius for the Xllth time and Theodosiusforthe Vlllth, 
Augusti most exalted, on the Calends of May, at Carthage in the secretarium of the Basilica of Faustus. 
When Aurelius the bishop presided over the whole council, the deacons standing by, it pleased all the 
bishops, whose names and subscriptions are indicated, (1) met together in the holy synod of the Church of 
Carthage to define - (2) 

CANON CIX. (Greek cxij. continued.) 

That Adam was not created by God subject to death. 

THAT whosoever says that Adam, the first man, was created mortal, so that whether he had sinned or not, 
he would have died in body - that is, he would have gone forth of the body, not because his sin merited this, 
but by natural necessity, let him be anathema. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CIX. 

Whoso shall assert that the protoplast would have died without sin and through natural necessity, let him be 
anathema. 

Canon CVIII. is the introduction to the Synod of Carthage of May 1, A.D. 418; and Canon CIX. is Canon j. of 
that synod. 

CANON CX. (Greek cxii. bis) 

That infants are baptized for the remission of sins. 

LIKEWISE it seemed good that whosoever denies that infants newly from their mother's wombs should be 
baptized, or says that baptism is for remission of sins, but that they derive from Adam no original sin, which 
needs to be removed by the layer of regeneration, from whence the conclusion follows, that in them the form 
of baptism for the remission of sins, is to be understood as false and not true, let him be anathema. 
For no otherwise can be understood what the Apostle says, "By one man sin is come into the world, and 
death through sin, and so death passed upon all men in that all have "sinned," than the Catholic Church 
everywhere diffused has always understood it. For on account of this rule of faith (regulam fidei) even 

infants, who could have committed as yet no sin themselves, therefore are truly baptized for the remission of 
sins, in order that what in them is the result of generation may be cleansed by regeneration. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CX. 

Whoso affirms that those newly born and baptized contract nothing from Adam's transgression, which needs 
to be washed away by baptism, is to be execrated: for through one both death and sin invaded the whole 
world. 

This is Canon ij. of Carthage, A.D. 418 [Greek Canon 112]. 

JOHNSON. 

See Can. 63, 104, both which are double, as this likewise is in the old Greek scholiasts. 

[Also it seemed good, that if anyone should say that the saying of the Lord, "In my Father's house are many 
mansions "is to be understood as meaning that in the kingdom of heaven there will be a certain middle 
place, or some place somewhere, in which infants live in happiness who have gone forth from tiffs life without 
baptism, without which they cannot enter the kingdom of heaven, which is eternal life, let him be anathema. 
For after our Lord has said: "Except a man be born again of water and of the Holy Spirit he shall not enter the 
kingdom of heaven," what Catholic can doubt that he who has not merited to be coheir with Christ shall 
become a sharer with the devil: for he who fails of the right hand without doubt shall receive the left hand 
portion.] 

NOTES. 

The foregoing, says Surius, is found in this place in a very ancient codex. It does not occur in the Greek, nor 
in Dionysius. Bruns relegates it to a foot-note. 

CANON CXI. (Greek cxiij.) 

Thatthe grace of God not only gives remission of sins, but also affords aid that we sin no 
more. 

LIKEWISE it seemed good, that whoever should say that the grace of God, by which a man is justified 
through Jesus Christ our Lord, avails only for the remission of past sins, and not for assistance against 
committing sins in the future, let him be anathema. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXI. 

Whoever is of opinion thatthe grace of God only gives remission of those sins we have already committed, 
and does not afford aid against sin in the future, is to be twice execrated. 

CANON CXII. (Greek cxiij. continued.) 

Thatthe grace of Christ gives not only the knowledge of our duty, but also inspires us with a 
desire that we may be able to accomplish what we know. 

ALSO, whoever shall say that the same grace of God through Jesus Christ our Lord helps us only in not 
sinning by revealing to us and opening to our understanding the commandments, so that we may know what 
to seek, what we ought to avoid, and also that we should love to do so, but that through it we are not helped 
so that we are able to do what we know we should do, let him be anathema. For when the Apostle says: 
"Wisdom puffeth up, but charity edifieth" it were truly infamous were we to believe that we have the grace of 
Christ for that which puffeth us up, but have it not for that which edifieth, since in each case it is the gift of God, 
both to know what we ought to do, and to love to do it; so that wisdom cannot puff us up while charity is 
edifying us. For as of God it is written, "Who teacheth man knowledge," so also it is written, "Love is of God." 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXII. 

Whoever says that the grace of God is given to us only that we may know what we ought to do and what to 
flee from, but not also that we may love the thing known, and be able to accomplish it, let him be anathema. 

Canon cxi. is Canon iij. of Carthage, A.D. 418, and Canon cxii. is Canon iv. of the same synod. 

CANON CXIII. (Greek cxiiii.) 

That without the grace of God we can do no good thing. 

IT seemed good that whosoever should say that the grace of justification was given to us only that we might 
be able more readily by grace to perform what we were ordered to do through our free will; as if though 
grace was not given, although not easily, yet nevertheless we could even without grace fulfil the divine 
commandments, let him be anathema. For the Lord spake concerning the fruits of the commandments, when 
he said: "Without me ye can do nothing," and not "Without me ye could do it but with difficulty." 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXIII. 

Whoso preaches that without grace we could keep the commandments although with difficulty, is to be thrice 

execrated. For the Lord 

says, " Without me ye can do nothing." 

This is Canon V. of Carthage, A.D. 418. 

CANON CXIV. (Greek cxv.) 

That not only humble butalsotrue isthatvoice of the Saints: "If we saythatwe have no sin 
we deceive ourselves." 

IT also seemed good that as St. John the Apostle says, "If we shall say that we have no sin we deceive 
ourselves and the truth is not in us," whosoever thinks that this should be so understood as to mean that out 
of humility, we ought to say that we have sin, and not because it is really so, let him be anathema. For the 
Apostle goes on to add, "But if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to 
cleanse us from all iniquity," where it is sufficiently clear that this is said not only of humility but also truly. For 
the Apostle might have said, "If we shall say we have no sins we shall extoll ourselves, and humility shall 
have no place in us;" but when he says, "we deceive ourselves and the truth is not in us" he sufficiently 
intimates that he who affirmed that he had no sin would speak not that which is true but that which is false. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXIV. 

Whosoever shall interpret the saying of the Divine [i.e. St. John]: "If we shall saythatwe have no sin, we 
deceive ourselves" as not being really true but as spoken out of humility, let him be anathema. 

This is Canon vj. of Carthage, A.D. 41 8. 

CANON CXV. (Greek cxvi.) 

That in the Lord's Prayer the Saints say forthemselves: "Forgive us our trespasses." 

IT has seemed good that whoever should say that when in the Lord's prayer, the saints say, "forgive us our 
trespasses," they say this not for themselves, because they have no need of this petition, but for the rest 
who are sinners of the people; and that therefore no one of the saints can say, "Forgive me my trespasses," 
but "Forgive us our trespasses;" so that the just is understood to seek this for others rather than for himself; 
let him be anathema. For holy and just was the Apostle James, when he said, "For in many things we offend 
all." For why was it added "all," unless that this sentence might agree also with the psalm, where we read, 

"Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified;" and in the 
prayer of the most wise Solomon: "There is no man that sinneth not;" and in the book of the holy Job: "He 
sealeth in the hand of every man, that every man may know his own infirmity ;" wherefore even the holy and 
just Daniel when in prayer said several times: "We have sinned, we have done iniquity," and other things 
which there truly and humbly he confessed; nor let it be thought (as some have thought) that this was said not 
of his own but rather of the people's sins, for he said further on: "When I shall pray and confess my sins and 
the sins of my people to the Lord my God;" he did not wish to say our sins, but he said the sins of his people 
and his own sins, since he as a prophet foresaw that those who were to come would thus misunderstand his 
words. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXV. 

Whoso expounds this, "forgive us our trespasses" as speaking only of the multitude and not of individuals 
let him be anathema: Since Daniel even he can behold saying with the multitude "I confessed my sins and 
the sins of my people." 

This is Canon vii. of Carthage, A.D. 41 8. 

CANON CXVI. (Greek cxvii.) 

That the Saints say with accuracy, "Forgive us our trespasses." 

LIKEWISE also it seemed good, that whoever wished that these words of the Lord's prayer, when we say, 
"Forgive us our trespasses" are said by the saints out of humility and not in truth let them be anathema. For 
who would make a lying prayer, not to men but to God? Who would say with his lips that he wished his sins 
forgiven him, but in his heart that he had no sins to be forgiven. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXVI. (Lacking.) 

This is Canon viii. of Carthage, A.D. 41 8. 

CANON CXVII. (Greek cxviii.) 

Of peoples converted from the Donatists. 

ITEM, it seemed good, since it was so decreed some years ago by a plenary council, that whatever 
churches were erected in a diocese before the laws were made concerning Donatists when they became 
Catholic, should pertain to the sees of those bishops through whom their return to Catholic unity was brought 
about; but after the laws whatever churches communicated were to belong there where they belonged when 
they were Donatists. But because many controversies afterward arose and are still springing up between 
bishops concerning dioceses, which were not then at all in prospect, now it has seemed good to this 
council, that wherever there was a Catholic and a Donatist party, pertaining to different sees, at whatever 
time unity has been or shall be made, whether before or after the laws, the churches shall belong to that see 
to which the Catholic church which was already there belonged. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXVII. 

Whenever conversions and unions of Donatists are effected, let them be subject to that throne to which the 
Catholic Church which was formerly there was subject. 
This is Canon ix. of Carthage, A.D. 41 8. 

CANON CXVIII. (Greek cxix.) 

How bishops as well Catholic as those who have been converted from the Donatists are to 

divide between themselves the dioceses. 

So, too, it has seemed good that if a bishop has been converted from the Donatists to Catholic unity, that 
equally there should be divided what shall have been so found where there were two parties; that is, that 
some places should pertain to one and some to the other; and let the division be made by him who has 
been the longest time in the episcopate, and let the younger choose. But should there be only one place let 
it belong to him who is found to be the nearer. But should the distance be equal to each of the two cathedrals 
let it belong to the one the people may choose. But should the old Catholics wish their own bishop, and if the 
same be the case with the converted Donatists, let the will of the greater number prevail, but should the 
parties be equal, let it belong to him who has been longest bishop. But if so many places be found in which 
there were both parties, that an equal division is impossible, as for example, if they are unequal in number, 
after those places have been distributed which have an equal number, the place that remains over shall be 
disposed of as is provided above in the case where there is but one place to be treated. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXVIII. 

Those who have been converted from Donatus, let them divide the dioceses; and let the senior bishop 
make the division, and the junior choose which he will. 
This is Canon x. of Carthage, A.D. 418. 

CANON CXIX. (Greek cxx.) 

That if a bishop shall possess a diocese which he has snatched from heresy for three 
years, no one may take it from him. 

ITEM, it seemed good that if anyone after the laws should convert any place to Catholic unity and retain it for 
three years without opposition, it should not be taken away from him afterwards. If however there was during 
those three years a bishop who could claim it and was silent, he shall lose the opportunity. But if there was 
no bishop, no prejudice shall happen to the see, (1) but it shall be lawful when the place that had none shall 
receive a bishop, to make the claim within three years of that day. Item, if a Donatist bishop shall be 
converted to the Catholic party, the time that has elapsed shall not count against him, but from the day of his 
conversion for three years he shall have the right of making a claim on the places which belonged to his 
See. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXIX. 

Whosoever shall convert a region to Orthodoxy and shall keep it converted for three years, let him be 

without blame. But if the bishop converted from Donatus within three years of its conversion seeks his 

diocese again, let it be returned to him (<greek>ei</greek> <greek>enagei</greek>, 

<greek>enagetw</greek>.) 

This is Canon xj. of Carthage, A.D. 41 8. 

CANON CXX. (Greek cxxi.) 

Of those who intrude upon peoples which they think belong to them, without the consent of 
those by whom they are held. 

ITEM, it seemed good that whatever bishops seek the peoples whom they consider to pertain to their see, 
not by bringing their causes before the episcopal judges, but rush in while another is holding the place, all 
such, (whether said people are willing to receive them or no) shall lose their case. And whoever have done 
this, if the contention between the two bishops is not yet finished but still going on, let him depart who 
intruded without the decree of the ecclesiastical judges; nor let anyone flatter himself that he will retain [what 
he has seized] if he shall obtain letters from the primate, but whether he has such letters or has them not, it is 
suitable that he who holds and receives his letters should make it appear then that he has held the church 
pertaining to him peaceably. But if he has referred any question, let the cause be decided by the episcopal 
judges, whether those whom the primates have appointed for them, or the neighbouring bishops whom they 

have chosen by common consent. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXX. 

Let no one seize for himself what he thinks belongs to him: but let the bishops judge or where the Primate will 
give, or whom the neighbouring bishops shall give with his consent. But whosoever has received letters 
from the primate concerning the keeping [of such regions and churches] merely deceives himself. 

This is Canon xij. of Carthage, A.D. 418. 

CANON CXXI. (Greek cxxii.) 

Of those who neglect the peoples belonging to them. 

ITEM, it seemed good that whoever neglect to bring the places belonging to their see into Catholic unity 
should be admonished by the neighbouring diligent bishops, that they delay no longer to do this; but if within 
six months from the day of the convention they do nothing, let them pertain to him who can win them: but with 
this proviso however, that if he to whom it seemed they naturally belonged can prove that this neglect was 
intentional and more efficacious in winning them than the greater apparent diligence of others; when the 
episcopal judges shall be convinced that this is the case, they shall restore the places to his see. If the 
bishops between whom the cause lies are of different provinces, let the Primate in whose province the 
place is situated about which there is the dispute, appoint judges; but if by mutual consent they have chosen 
as judges the neighbouring bishops, let one or three be chosen: so that if they choose three they may follow 
the sentence of all or of two. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXXI. 

If any neglect what belongs to their jurisdiction, let them be admonished ; and if they shall do nothing within a 
six month, let them be adjudged to him who can win them. But if they have committed the neglect out of 
policy so as not to irritate the heretics, and this shall appear to have been the case, their sees shall be 
restored to them, by the judgment of the bishops either appointed or elected. 

This is Canon xiij. of Carthage, A.D. 41 8. 

CANON CXXII. (Greek cxxiii.) 

The sentence of the elected judges ought not to be spurned. 

FROM the judges chosen by common consent of the parties, no appeal can be taken; and whoever shall 
be found to have carried such an appeal and contumaciously to be unwilling to submit to the judges, when 
this has been proved to the primate, let him give letters, that no one of the bishops should communicate with 
him until he yield. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXXII. 

A judge chosen by both parties cannot be repudiated. 

This is Canon xiv. of Carthage, A.D. 41 8. 

JOHNSON. 

See Canons 76 (79) and 80 (83). 

CANON CXXIII. (Greek cxxiv.) 

That if a bishop neglects his diocese he is to be deprived of communion. 

IF in the mother cathedrals a bishop should have been negligent against the heretics, let a meeting be held 
of the neighbouring diligent bishops, and let his negligence be pointed out to him, so that he can have no 
excuse. But if within six months after this meeting, if an execution was in his own province, and he had taken 
no care to convert them to Catholic unity, no one shall communicate with him till he does his duty. But if no 
executor shah have come to the places, then the fault shall not be laid to the bishop. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXXIII. 

A bishop who spurns the care of heretics, and if after being warned he continues for six months in his 
contempt, and has no care for their conversion, is to be excommunicated. 

This is Canon xv. of Carthage, A.D. 41 8. 

JOHNSON. 

So [i.e. "Metropoles"] I turn matrices cathedrae. I know indeed there were no fixed ecclesiastical 
metropoles, in Africa; but they had civil metropoles called by that name, can. 86, (89) which see. 
Of these officers [i.e. "Executors "] see can. 97 (100). 

CANON CXXIV. (Greek cxxv.) 

Of bishops who shall lie with regard to Donatists' communions. 

IF it shall be proven that any bishop has lied concerning the communion of those [who had been Donatists], 
and had said that they had communicated when he knew it was an established fact that they had not done 
so, let him lose his bishoprick. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXXIV. 

Whoso says that a man, whom he knows does not communicate, does communicate is to be deprived of 
his episcopate. 

This is Canon xvj. of Carthage, A.D. 41 8. 

CANON CXXV. (Greek cxxvi.) 

That presbyters and clerics are not to appeal except to African Synods. 

ITEM, it seemed good that presbyters, deacons, or other of the lower clergy who are to be tried, if they 
question the decision of their bishops, the neighbouring bishops having been invited by them with the 
consent of their bishops, shall hear them and determine whatever separates them. But should they think an 
appeal should be carried from them, let them not carry the appeal except to African councils or to the 
primates of their provinces. But whoso shall think of carrying an appeal across seas he shall be admitted to 
communion by no one in Africa. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXXV. 

A presbyter and deacons, who has been condemned by his own bishop, let him appeal to the neighbouring 
bishops: but let them not cross the sea. In Africa they shall be excommunicated. 

This is Canon xvij. of Carthage, A.D. 418. 

JOHNSON. 

A repetition of Canon 28 (31). 

CANON CXXVI. (Greek cxxvii.) 

That Virgins, even when minors, should be given the veil. 

ITEM, it seemed good that whatever bishop, by the necessity of the dangers of virginal purity, when either a 
powerful suitor or some ravisher is feared, or if she shall be pricked with some scruple of death that she 
might die unveiled, at the demand either of her parents or of those to whose care she has been entrusted, 
shall give the veil to a virgin, or shall have given it while she was under twenty-five years of age, the council 
which has appointed that number of years shall not oppose him. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXXVI. 

Whosoever has veiled or shall veil a virgin before she is twenty-five years of age (that is give her the habit, 
or clothe her), being forced thereto on account of a powerful lover, or a ravisher, or deadly disease, 
provided those ,who have the charge of her so exhort, shall receive no damage from the synod concerning 
that age. 

This is Canon xviij. of Carthage, A.D. 41 8. The reference to a former canon is to Canon j. of the second 
series of the canons of the Synod of Hippo in A.D. 393. 

CANON CXXVII. (Greek cxxviii.) 

That bishops be not detained too long in council, letthem choose three judges from 
themselves of the singular provinces. 

ITEM, it seemed good, lest all the bishops who are assembled at a council be kept too long, that the whole 
synod should choose three judges of the several provinces; and they elected for the province of Carthage 
Vincent, Fortunatian, and Clarus; for the province of Numidia Alypius, Augustine, and Restitutus; for the 
province of Byzacena, with the holy Senex Donatian the Primate, Cresconius, Jocundus, and AEmilian; for 
Mauritania Sitephensis Severian, Asiaticus, and Donatus; for the Tripolitan province Plautius, who alone 
was sent as legate according to custom; all these were to take cognizance of all things with the holy senex 
Aurelius, from whom the whole council sought that he should subscribe all things done by the council 
whether acts or letters. And they subscribed: I, Aurelius, bishop of the church of Carthage consent to this 
decree and having read it sign my name. Likewise also signed they all. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXXVII. 

Whenever the bishops who come to synod can remain no longer in attendance, let three be chosen from 
each province. 

This is Canon xix. of Carthage, A.D. 418. 

JOHNSON. 

Two Sancti Senes mentioned, who we are 

sure were both primates. See can. 100 (104). See can. 14. 

And here we have an ancient precedent for synods delegating their authority to a committee, with the 

primate of all Africa at the head of it. 

Item, at this council there was present a legation from the Roman Church. 

After the consulate of the most glorious emperors HonoriusfortheXllth. time and Theodosius for the VI Nth., 
Augusti, on the III. Calends of June, at Carthage, in the Secretarium of the restored basilica, when Aurelius 
the bishop together with Faustinus of the church of Potentia in the Italian province of Picenum, a legate of the 

Roman Church, Vincent of Calvita (1) (Culositanus), Fortunatian of Naples, Marianus Uzipparensis, 
Adeodatus of Simidica, Pentadius of Carpi, Rufinian of Muzuba, Praetextatus of Sicily, Quodvultdeus of Veri 
(Verensis), Candidus of Abbirita, Gallonian of Utica, legates of the proconsular province; Alypius of 
Tagaste, Augustine of Hippo Regia and Posidonius of Calama, legates of the province of Numidia; 
Maximian of Aquae, Jocundus of Sufetula, and Hilary of Horrea-Cascilia, legates of the province of 
Byzacena; Novatus of Sitifi and Leo of Mocta, legates of the province of Mauritania Sitiphensis; Ninellus of 
Rusucarrum, Laurence of Icosium and Numerian of Rusgunium, legates of the Province of Mauritania 
Caesariensis, the judges chosen by the plenary council, had taken their seats, the deacons standing by, 
and when, after certain things had been accomplished, many bishops complained that it was not possible 
for them to wait for the completion of the rest of the business to be treated of, and that they must hasten to 
their own churches; it seemed good to the whole council, that by all some should be chosen from each 
province who should remain to finish up what was left to be done. And it came about that those were present 
whose subscriptions testify that they were present. 

CANON CXXVIII. (Greek cxxix.) 

That those out of communion should not be allowed to bring accusation. 

IT seemed good to all, as it had been decreed by the former councils, concerning what persons were to be 
admitted to bring accusations against clerics; and since it had not been expressed what persons should not 
be admitted, therefore we define, that he cannot properly be admitted to bring an accusation, who had been 
already excommunicated, and was still lying under that censure, whether he that wished to be the accuser 
were cleric or layman. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXXVIII. 

One excommunicated is not to give witness. 

The Council of Carthage of 41 9 had at its first session on May 25th done thus much. But when it met again on 
the 30th of the same month, it continued the code. The introduction in regard to this new session is this 
introduction. The Canons then enacted were original, viz. numbers 128, 129, 130, 131, 132 and 133. 

CANON CXXIX. (Greek cxxx.) 

That slaves and freedmen and all infamous persons ought not to bring accusation. 

To all it seemed good that no slaves or freedmen, properly so called, be admitted to accusation nor any of 
those who by the public laws are debarred from bringing accusation in criminal proceedings. This also is 
the case with all those who have the stain of infamy, that is actors, and persons subject to turpitudes, also 
heretics, or heathen, or Jews; but even all those to whom the right of bringing accusation is denied, are not 
forbidden to bring accusation in their own suits. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXXIX. 

A slave, and a freedman, and he who before was accused of any of these crimes on account of which he is 
not admitted in court, and a player, and a heathen, and a heretic, and a Jew 

[There is no verb to finish the sentence. However, this is intended as a continuation of the epitome of the 
former canon, the words to be supplied being "are not to give witness."] 

JOHNSON. 

See Can., Const., 6. 

CANON CXXX. (Greek cxxxi.) 

That he who has failed to prove one charge shall not be allowed to give evidence to 

another. 

So, too, it seemed good that as often as many crimes were laid to clerics by their accusers, and one of the 
first examined could not be proved, (1) they should not be allowed to go on giving evidence on the other 
counts. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXXX. 

He who makes many accusations and proves nothing [is not to give witness]. 

CANON CXXXI. (Greek cxxxii.) 

Who should be allowed to give evidence. 

THEY who are forbidden to be admitted as accusers are not to be allowed to appear as witnesses, nor any 
that the accuser may bring from his own household. And none shall be admitted to give witness under 
fourteen years of age. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXXXI. 

And whoso is not past fourteen years of age [is not to give witness]. An accuser is not to produce witnesses 
from his own house. 

JOHNSON. 

See Can. 129. 

CANON CXXXII. (Greek cxxxiii.) 

Concerning a bishop who removes a man from communion who says he has confessed to 
the bishop alone his crime. 

IT also seemed good that if on any occasion a bishop said that someone had confessed to him alone a 
personal crime, and that the man now denies it; let not the bishop think that any slight is laid upon him if he is 
not believed on his own word alone, although he says he is not willing to communicate with the man so 
denying through a scruple of his own conscience. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXXXII. 

If a bishop says "someone has confessed to me alone a crime," if the someone denies it, he [i.e. the 
bishop] is not easily to be believed. 

N.B. The word used for "someone" in the Epitome is <greek>pelas</greek>, which ordinarily means a 
"neighbour" but may mean "any one." Vide Liddell and Scott. 

CANON CXXXIII. (Greek cxxxiv.) 

That a bishop should not rashly deprive anyone of communion. 

As long as his own bishop will not communicate with one excommunicated, the other bishops should have 
no communion with that bishop, that the bishop may be more careful not to charge anyone with what he 
cannot prove by documentary evidence to others. 

(Greek cxxxv.) 

BISHOP AURELIUS said: According to the statutes of this whole assembled council, and the opinion of my 

littleness, it seems good to make an end of all the matters of the whole of the before-manifested title, and let 
the ecclesiastical acts receive the discussion of the present day's constitution. 
And what things have not yet been expressed (" treated of in the Greek) we shall write on the next day 
through our brethren, Bishop Faustinus and the Presbyters Philip and Asellus to our venerable brother and 
fellow-bishop Boniface; and they gave their assent in writing. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXXXIII. 

If a bishop deprives of communion an unconvicted man, he shall likewise be deprived of communion with 
his fellows. 

JOHNSON. 

Never was a more impartial law made, especially when all the legislators were bishops except two. There 
were 217 bishops, and two priests, being legates from the bishop of Rome. 

The Greeks make a canon of the ratifications, and reckon no more than 1 35. Aurelius, Bishop of Carthage, 
subscribes first, and after him 217 bishops, then Asellus and Philippus, priests, legates of the church of 
Rome. And it does not appear that any other priests were present in any of the councils, mentioned in the 
body of this code; but there is several times notice taken of the deacons who stood by. 

CANON CXXXIV. (Continuation of cxxxv. in the Greek.) 

Here beginneth the letter directed from the whole African Council to Boniface, bishop of the 
City of Rome, by Faustinus the bishop, and Philip and Asellus the presbyters, legates of the 
Roman Church. 

To the most blessed lord, and our honourable brother Boniface, Aurelius, Valentine of the primatial See of 
Numidia, and others present with us to the number of 21 7 from the whole council in Africa. 

Since it has pleased the Lord that our humility should write concerning those things which with us our holy 
brethren, Faustinus a fellow-bishop and Philip and Asellus, fellow presbyters, have done, not to the bishop 
Zosimus of blessed memory, from whom they brought commands and letters to us, but to your holiness, who 
art constituted in his room by divine authority, we ought briefly to set forth what has been determined upon by 
mutual consent; not indeed those things which are contained in the prolix volumes of the acts, in which, while 
charity was preserved, yet we loitered not without some little labour of altercation, deliberating those things 
in the acts which now pertain to the cause. However the more gratefully would he have received this news 
as he would have seen a more peaceful ending of the matter, my lord and brother, had he been still in the 
body! Apiarius the presbyter, concerning whose ordination, excommunication, and appeal no small 
scandal arose not only at Sicca but also in the whole African Church, has been restored to communion upon 
his seeking pardon for all his sins. First our fellow bishop Urban of Sicca doubtless corrected whatever in 
him seemed to need correction. For there should have been kept in mind the peace and quiet of the Church 
not only in the present but also in the future, since so many evils of such a kind had gone before, that it was 
incumbent to take care that like or even graver evils should be prevented thereafter. It seemed good to us 
that the presbyter Apiarius should be removed from the church of Sicca, retaining only the honour of his 
grade, and that he should exercise the office of the presbyterate wherever else he wished and could, 
having received a letter to this effect. This we granted without difficulty at his own petition made in a letter. But 
truly before this case should be thus closed, among other things which we were treating of in daily 
discussions, the nature of the case demanded that we should ask our brothers, Faustinus our fellow bishop, 
and Philip and Asellus our fellow presbyters, to set forth what they had been enjoined to treat of with us that 
they might be inserted in the ecclesiastical acts. And they proceeded to make a verbal statement, but when 
we earnestly asked that they would present it rather in writing, then they produced the Commonitory. This 
was read to us and also set down in the acts, which they are bringing with them to you. In this they were 
bidden to treat of four things with us, first concerning the appeal of bishops to the Pontiff of the Roman 
Church, second that bishops should not unbecomingly be sailing to court, thirdly concerning the treating the 
causes of presbyters and deacons by contiguous bishops, if they had been wrongly excommunicated by 
their own, and fourthly concerning the bishop Urban who should be excommunicated or even sent to Rome, 
unless he should have corrected what seemed to need correction. Of all which things concerning the first 
and third, that is that it is allowed to bishops to appeal to Rome and that the causes of clerics should be 

settled by the bishops of their own provinces, already last year we have taken pains to insinuate, in our 
letter to tile same bishop Zosimus of venerable memory, that we were willing to observe these provisions 
for a little while without any injury to him, until the search for the statutes of the Council of Nice had been 
finished. And now we ask of your holiness that you would cause to be observed by us the acts and 
constitutions of our fathers at the Council of Nice, and flint you cause to be exercised by you there, those 
things which they brought in the commonitory: that is to say, If a bishop shall have been accused, etc. [Here 
follows Canon vii. of Sardica.] 

Item concerning presbyters and deacons. If any bishop has been quickly angered, etc. [ Here follows 
Canon xvii. of Sardica.] 

These are the things which have been inserted in the acts until the arrival of the most accurate copies of the 
Nicene Council, which things, (1) if they are contained there (as in the Commonitory, which our brethren 
directed to us from the Apostolic See alleged) and be even kept according to that order by you in Italy, in no 
way could we be compelled either to endure such treatment as we are unwilling to mention or could suffer 
what is unbearable: (2) but we believe, through tile mercy of our Lord God, while your holiness presides over 
the Roman Church, we shall not have to suffer that pride (istum typhum passuri). And there will be kept 
toward us, what should be kept with brotherly love to us who are making no dispute. You will also perceive 
according to the wisdom and the justice which the most Highest has given thee, what should be observed, 
(3) if perchance the canons of the Council of Nice are other [than you suppose]. For although we have read 
very many copies, yet never have we read in the Latin copies that there were any such decrees as are 
contained in the commonitory before mentioned. So too, because we can find them in no Greek text here, 
we have desired that there should be brought to us from the Eastern Churches copies of the decrees, for it is 
said that there correct copies of the decrees are to be found. For which end we beg your reverence, that you 
would design yourself also to write to the pontiffs of these parts, that is of the churches of Antioch, Alexandria, 
and Constantinople, (4) and to any others also if it shall please your holiness, that thence there may come to 
us the same canons decreed by the Fathers in the city of Nice, and thus you would confer by the help of the 
Lord this most great benefit upon all the churches of the West. For who can doubt that the copies of the 
Nicene Council gathered in the Greek empire are most accurate, which although brought together from so 
diverse and from such noble Greek churches are found to agree when compared together? And until this be 
done, the provisions laid down to us in the Commonitory aforesaid, concerning the appeals of bishops to 
the pontiff of the Roman Church and concerning the causes of clerics which should be terminated by the 
bishops of their own provinces, we are willing to allow to be observed until the proof arrives and we trust 
your blessedness will help us in this according to the will of God. The rest of the matters treated and defined 
in our synod, since the aforesaid brethren, our fellow bishop Faustinus, and the presbyters Philip and 
Asellus are carrying the acts with them, if you deign to receive them, will make known to your holiness. And 
they signed. (5) Our Lord keep thee to us for many years, most blessed brother. Alypius, Augustine, 
Possidius, Marinus and the rest of the bishops [217] also signed. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXXXXV. 

Urban, the bishop of Siccas, is either to be excommunicated or else summoned to Rome unless he 
corrects what should be corrected by him. 

CANON CXXXV. (Not numbered in the Greek.) 

Here begin the rescripts to the African Council from Cyril bishop of Alexandria in which he 
sends the authentic proceedings of the Nicene Council, (1) translated from the Greek by 
Innocent the presbyter: these letters with the same Nicene council were also sent through 
the aforementioned presbyter Innocent and by Marcellus a subdeacon of the Church of 
Carthage, to the holy Boniface, bishop of the Roman Church, on the sixth day before the 
calends of December in the year 419. (2) 

To the most honourable lords, our holy brethren and fellow bishops, Aurelius, Valentinus, as well as to the 
whole holy synod met in Carthage, Cyril salutes your holiness in God. 

I have received with all joy at the hands of our son, the presbyter Innocent, the letters of your reverence so 
full of piety, in which you express the hope that we will send you most accurate copies of the decrees of the 
holy Fathers at the Synod held at Nice the metropolis of Bithynia from the archives of our church; with our 
own certificate of accuracy attached thereto. In answer to which request, most honourable lords and 
brethren, I have thought it necessary to send to you, with our compliments, by our son, Innocent the 
presbyter, the bearer of these, most faithful copies of the decisions of the synod held at Nice in Bithynia. And 

when ye have sought in the history of the church, you will find them there also. Concerning Easter, as you 
have written, we announce to you that we shall celebrate it on the xviiith (3) before the calends of May of the 
next indiction. The subscription. May God and our Lord preserve your holy synod as we desire, dear 
brethren. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXXXV. 

According to your written request, we have sent to your charity most faithful copies of the authentic decrees 
of the Synod which was held at Nice, a city of Bithynia. 

CANON CXXXVI. (Not numbered in the Greek but with a new heading.) 

Here beginneththe letter of Atticus, bishop of Constantinople to the same. 

To our holy lords, and rightly most blessed brethren and fellow bishops, Aurelius, Valentine, and (4) to the 
other beloved ones met together in the Synod held at Carthage, Atticus the bishop. 

By our son Marcellus the subdeacon, I have received with all thanksgiving the writings of your holiness, 
praising the Lord that I enjoyed the blessing of so many of my brethren. O my lords and most blessed 
brethren, ye have written asking me to send you most accurate copies of the canons enacted at the city of 
Nice, the metropolis of Bithynia, by the Fathers for the exposition of the faith. And who is there that would 
deny to his brethren the common faith, or the statutes decreed by the Fathers. Wherefore by the same son 
of mine, Marcellus, your subdeacon, who was in great haste, I have sent to you the canons in full as they 
were adopted by the Fathers in the city of Nice; and I ask of you that your holy synod would have me much 
in your prayers. The subscription. May our God keep your sanctity, as we desire, most holy brethren. 

CANON CXXXVII. (Continuation of the last in the Greek.) 

Here begin the examples of the Nicene Council, sent on the sixth day before the calends of 
December in the year 419, (1) afterthe consulate of the most glorious emperor Honorius for 
the Xllth time, and Theodosius for the IXth time (2) Augustuses, to Boniface the bishop of the 
City of Rome. 

WE believe in one God etc. ... the Catholic and Apostolic Church anathematizes them. (3) 
To this symbol of the faith there were also annexed copies of the statutes of the same Nicene Councils from 
the aforenamed pontiffs, in all respects as are contained above; which we do not think it necessary to write 
out here again. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXXXVII. 

The Canons of the Synod of Nice are sent, as they were decreed by the Fathers, in accordance with your 
letters. 

[Here follows the Nicene Creed in full.] 

CANON CXXXVIII. (Not numbered in the Greek.) 

Here beginneththe epistle of the African synod to Pope Celestine, bishop of the City of 
Rome. 

To the lord and most beloved and our honourable brother Celestine, Aurelius, Palatinus, Antony, Totus, 
Servusdei, Terentius, Fortunatus, Martin, Januarius, Optatus, Ceticius, Donatus, Theasius, Vincent, 
Fortunatian, and the rest of us, assembled at Carthage in the General Council of Africa. 

We could wish that, like as your Holiness intimated to us, in your letter sent by our fellow presbyter Leo, your 
pleasure at the arrival of Apiarius, so we also could send to you these writings with pleasure respecting his 
clearing. Then in truth both our own satisfaction, and yours of late would be more reasonable; nor would that 
lately expressed by you concerning the hearing of him then to come, as well as that already past, seem 

hasty and inconsiderate. Upon the arrival, then, of our holy Brother and fellow-Bishop Faustinus, we 
assembled a council, and believed that he was sent with that man, in order that, as he [Apiarius] had before 
been restored to the presbyterate by his assistance, so now he might with his exertions be cleared of the 
very great crimes charged against him by the inhabitants of Tabraca. But the due course of examination in 
our council discovered in him such great and monstrous crimes as to overhear even Faustinus, who acted 
rather as an advocate of the aforementioned person than as a judge, and to prevail against what was more 
the zeal of a defender, than the justice of an inquirer. For first he vehemently opposed the whole assembly, 
inflicting on us many injuries, under pretence of asserting the privileges of the Roman Church, and wishing 
that he should be received into communion by us, on the ground that your Holiness, believing him to have 
appealed, though unable to prove it, had restored him to communion. But this we by no means allowed, as 
you will also better see by reading the acts. After however, a most laborious inquiry carried on for three 
days, during which in the greatest affliction we took cognizance of various charges against him, God the just 
Judge, strong and long suffering, cut short by a sudden stroke both the delays of our fellow-bishop 
Faustinus and the evasions of Apiarius himself, by which he was endeavouring to veil his foul enormities. 
For his strong and shameless obstinacy was overcome, by which he endeavoured to cover, through an 
impudent denial, the mire of his lusts, and God so wrought upon his conscience and published, even to the 
eyes of men, the secret crimes which he was already condemning in that man's heart, a very sty of 
wickedness, that, after his false denial he suddenly burst forth into a confession of all the crimes he was 
charged with, and at length convicted himself of his own accord of all infamies beyond belief, and changed 
to groans even the hope we had entertained, believing and desiring that he might be cleared from such 
shameful blots, except indeed that it was so far a relief to our sorrow, that he had delivered us from the 
labour of a longer inquiry, and by confession had applied some sort of remedy to his own wounds, though, 
lord and brother, it was unwilling, and done with a struggling conscience. Premising, therefore, our due 
regards to you, we earnestly conjure you, that for the future you do not readily admit to a hearing persons 
coming hence, nor choose to receive to your communion those who have been excommunicated by us, 
because you, venerable Sir, will readily perceive that this has been prescribed even by the Nicene council. 
For though this seems to be there forbidden in respect of the inferior clergy, or the laity, how much more did it 
will this to be observed in the case of bishops, lest those who had been suspended from communion in their 
own Province might seem to be restored to communion hastily or unfitly by your Holiness. Let your Holiness 
reject, as is worthy of you, that unprincipled taking shelter with you of presbyters likewise, and the inferior 
clergy, both because by no ordinance of the Fathers hath the Church of Africa been deprived of this 
authority, and the Nicene decrees have most plainly committed not only the clergy of inferior rank, but the 
bishops themselves to their own Metropolitans. For they have ordained with great wisdom and justice, that 
all matters should be terminated in the places where they arise; and did not think that the grace of the Holy 
Spirit would be wanting to any Province, for the bishops of Christ (Sacerdotibus) wisely to discern, and firmly 
to maintain the right: especially since whosoever thinks himself wronged by any judgment may appeal to 
the council of his Province, or even to a General Council [i.e. of Africa] unless it be imagined that God can 
inspire a single individual with justice, and refuse it to an innumerable multi-rude of bishops (sacerdotum) 
assembled in council. And how shall we be able to rely on a sentence passed beyond the sea, since it will 
not be possible to send thither the necessary witnesses, whether from the weakness of sex, or advanced 
age, or any other impediment? For that your Holiness should send ally on your part we can find ordained by 
no council of Fathers. Because with regard to what you have sent us by file same our brother bishop 
Faustinus, as being contained in the Nicene Council, we can find nothing of the kind in the more authentic 
copies of that council, which we have received from the holy Cyril our brother, Bishop of the Alexandrine 
Church, and from the venerable Atticus the Prelate of Constantinople, and which we formerly sent by 
Innocent the presbyter, and Marcellus the subdeacon through whom we received them, to Boniface the 
Bishop, your predecessor of venerable memory. Moreover whoever desires you to delegate any of your 
clergy to execute your orders, do not comply, lest it seem that we are introducing the pride of secular 
dominion into the Church of Christ which exhibiteth to all that desire to see God the light of simplicity and the 
day of humility. For now that the miserable Apiarius has been removed out of the Church of Christ for his 
horrible crimes, we feel confident respecting our brother Faustinus, that through the uprightness and 
moderation of your Holiness, Africa, without violating brotherly charity, will by no means have to endure him 
any longer. Lord and brother, may our Lord long preserve your Holiness to pray for us. (1) 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CXXXVIII. 

Those excommunicated by us, ye are not be willing to admit afterwards to communion, according to the 
decree of the Nicene Synod. For Apiarius, who restored by you, has resisted the Synod, and treated it with 
scorn, and at length has been converted and confessed himself guilty with sighs and tears. 

COUNCIL OF CONSTANTINOPLE HELD UNDER 
NECTARIUS 

COUNCIL OF CONSTANTINOPLE HELD UNDER NECTARIUS. 
A.D. 394. 

Elenchus. 

Introductory Note. 
Extracts from the Acts. 
Ancient Epitome and Notes. 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE. 

The acts of this Council are found in Balsamon, page 761 of the Paris edition, with Hervetus's translation. 
Labbe (1) has taken Balsamon's text and inserted it into his Collection, from which the following translation is 
made. There is another version extant in Leunclavius, Jus Groeco-Roman. p. 247. 

On September the twenty-ninth of the year 394, a magnificent church, dedicated to SS. Peter and Paul, built 
by the munificence of Rufinus the Praetoreal prefect, and situated at a place called "the Oaks," a suburb of 
Chalcedon, was consecrated. Most scholars have adopted Tillemont's suggestion that this was the 
occasion which brought the patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch to Constantinople, and that occasion was 
taken advantage of to hold a synod with regard to the dispute as to the see of Bostra. At this council, in 
accordance with the canon of the Second Ecumenical Council, adopted only a dozen years before, 
Constantinople took the first place and its bishop presided, but so strong was the hold of Alexandria that 
three centuries afterwards the Quinisext Synod speaks of this council as held "under Nectarius and 
Theophilus." In passing it may not be amiss to remark that St. Gregory of Nyssa and Theodore of 
Mopsuestia, and Flavian were present at this council! Well may Tillemont (2) exclaim, "It is remarkable to 
see Theophilus there with Flavian, although they were not in communion with each other." 

COUNCIL OF CONSTANTINOPLE UNDER NECTARIUS OF CONSTANTINOPLE AND 
THEOPHILUS OF ALEXANDRIA. 

A.D. 394. 

(Found in Beveridge, Synodicon. Tom. I., p. 678; Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. [[., 
col. 1 151 . Both taken from Balsamon.) 

In the consulate of our most religious and beloved-of-God Emperors, Flavius Arcadius Augustus, for the 
third time, and Honorius for the second time, on the third day before the calends of October, in the baptistery 
of the mOst holy church of Constantinople, when the most holy bishops had taken their seats [here follow the 
names], Nectarius, the bishop of Constantinople, said: Since by the grace of God this synod has met in this 
holy place, if the synod of my holy brethren and fellow ministers in holy things thinks good, since I see our 
brothers Bagadius and Agepius, who contend between themselves about the bishopric of Bostra, are also 
present, let these begin to set forth their mutual rights. And after some things had been done by them for the 
sake of this cause, and it had been shewn that the afore-named Bagadius was deposed by only two 
bishops, both of whom were dead, Arabianus, bishop of Ancyra, said: Not on account of this judgment, but 
fearing henceforth for my whole life, I desire the holy Synod to make a decree, whether or no, a bishop can 
be deposed by only two bishops, and whether the Metropolitan is absent or not, without prejudice to the 
present cause. For I fear that some, taking their power from these acts, may dare to attempt such things. I 
wish therefore your response. 

Nectarius, the bishop of Constantinople, said: The most religious bishop Arabianus hath spoken most 
laudably. But since it is impossible to go backward in judgment, let us, without condemning that which is 
past, establish things for the future. Arabianus, bishop of Ancyra, said: The synod of blessed fathers who 
met at Nice condemns what has taken place, for it orders that not less than three shall ordain, nor even so 

without the metropolitan. But of the future I, full of fear, have made this question. I would wish therefore that 
you would say clearly and without delay or doubt, that a bishop could not, according to the decree of the 
Synod of Nice, lawfully be ordained or deposed by two men. 

And, after some further debate, Theophilus, the bishop of Alexandria, said: Against those who have gone 
forth, no sentence of indignation can be pronounced, since those to be condemned were not present. But if 
any one were to consider those who are to be deposed in future, it seems to me that not only these ought to 
assemble, but so far as possible all the other provincials, that by the sentence of many there may be 
rendered a more accurate condemnation of him who is present and is being judged, and who deserves 
deposition. Nectarius, the bishop of Constantinople, said: Since, the controversy is concerning legitimate 
institutions and decrees, it follows that nothing must be decreed on account of personal causes. Wherefore 
as the most holy bishop Arabianus has said, wishing to make the future certain, the sentence of the most 
holy bishop Theophilus hath consistently and considerately decreed that for the future it shall be lawful not 
even for three, far less for two bishops to depose him who is examined as a defendant: but by the sentence 
of the greater synod and of the bishops of the province, according to the Apostolic Canons. Flavian, the 
bishop of Antioch, said: What things the most holy bishop Nectarius, and the most holy bishop Theophilus 
have set forth are clearly right. And all the ecclesiastics agreed with these. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME. 

In future when a defendant is examined, he ought not to be deposed by two or three bishops: but by the 
sentence of the greater Synod and of his own provincials, as also the Apostolic Canons provide. 

BALSAMON. 

As Bagadius, the bishop of Bostra, had been deposed by only two bishops, the matter was considered in 
the synod at Constantinople, whether that deposition had been rightly decreed. Agapius, the elect, laying 
claim to it under the decision. And it was decreed that the deposition was not canonical, since not two but a 
number should judge of those accusations which are made against bishops. But know that this constitution 
has no force to-day, for by the twelfth canon of the synod of Carthage, which is much later, crimes charged 
against bishops are to be judged of by twelve bishops. Read that canon, and know that this synod was held 
in the time of the Emperor Arcadius, while that of Carthage was in the days of Theodosius the younger. 

Zonaras explains that by the words "have gone forth" in the speech of Theophilus of Alexandria is to be 
understood have died. 

THE COUNCIL OF CARTHAGE HELD UNDER CYPRIAN. 
A.D. 257. 

Elenchus. 

Introductory Note. 

The remains of the Acts. 

Notes, with St. Cyprian's Epistle to Januarius et al. 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE. 

It is commonly supposed by the commentators that what follows is the "Canon of St. Cyprian" referred to in 
the Second canon of the Synod in Trullo. Johnson(1) thinks that that canon comes down to us as Canon 
XXXIX. of the Apostolic Canons. Baronius (2) agrees with Asseman (3) in thinking that from hatred to Rome 
the Greeks adopted the theory of the non-validity of heretical baptism. "But," as Hefele (4) well remarks, "in 
that case they would have contradicted themselves." 

Zonaras remarks: "This is the most ancient of all the synods. For that which was held at Antioch in Syria 
concerning Paul of Samorata was more ancient than the others, being holden in the time of the Roman 
Emperor Aurelius, but this one is still earlier. For the great Cyprian finished his martyr course in the time of 
the Emperor Decius: but there was a long interval between Aurelian and Decius. For many emperors 
reigned after the death of Decius, to whom at last Aurelian succeeded on the throne. Therefore this is by far 
the most ancient of all synods. In it moreover above eighty-four bishops were gathered together, and 
considered the question as to what was to be done about the baptism of those who came to the Church after 
abandoning their heresies, and of schismatics who returned to the Church." 

THE SYNOD HELD AT CARTHAGE OVER WHICH PRESIDED THE GREAT AND HOLY 
MARTYR CYPRIAN, BISHOP OF CARTHAGE. 

A.D. 257. 

(Found in Beveridge, Synodicon, Tom. I., p. 365, and in Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. I., col. 786.) 

When very many bishops were met together at Carthage on the Calends of September from the province of 
Africa, Numidia and Mauritania, with the presbyters and deacons (the greater part of the people being 
likewise present) and when the holy letters of Jubaianus to Cyprian had been read, and Cyprian's answers 
to Jubaianus, concerning heretical baptisms, as well as what the same Jubaianus afterwards wrote to 
Cyprian, 

Cyprian said: Ye have heard, my dearly beloved colleagues, what our fellow bishop Jubaianus has written 
to me, taking counsel of my littleness concerning the illicit and profane baptisms of heretics, and the answer 
which I made him; being of the same opinion as we have been on former occasions, that heretics coming to 
the Church should be baptized and sanctified with the Church's baptism. Moreover there has been read to 
you also the other letter of Jubaianus, in which answering for his sincere and pious devotion to our letter, not 
only he agrees therewith but offered thanks that he has been so instructed by it. It only remains therefore that 
we, each one of us, one by one, say what our mind is in this matter, without condemning any one or 
removing any one from the right of communion who does not agree with us. 

For no one [of us(1)] has set himself up [to be] bishop [of bishops ],(1) or attempted with tyrannical dread to 
force his colleagues to obedience to him, since every bishop has, for the license of liberty and power, his 
own will, and as he cannot be judged by another, so neither can he judge another. But we await the 
judgment of our universal Lord, our Lord Jesus Christ, who one and alone hath the power, both of advancing 
us in the governance of his Church, and of judging of our actions [in that position]. 

[ The bishops then one by one declared against heretical baptism. (2) Last of all (col. 796)]: 

Cyprian, the Confessor and Martyr of Carthage, said: The letter which was written to Jubaianus, my 
colleague, most fully set forth my opinion, that heretics who, according to the evangelical and apostolic 
witness, are called adversaries of Christ's and anti-Christs, when they come to the Church, should be 
baptized with the one (unico) baptism of the Church, that they may become instead of adversaries friends, 
and Christians instead of Antichrists. 

NOTES. 

ZONARAS. 

These are the opinions therefore of the fathers, which assembled in council with the great Cyprian: but they 
do not apply to all heretics nor to all schismatics. For the Second Ecumenical Council, as we have just said 
[i.e. in the Preface he has placed to the acts of the synod. Vide L. and C, Cone, Tom. i., col. 801] makes an 
exception of some heretics, and give its sanction to their reception without baptism, only requiring their 
anointing with the holy chrism, and then anathematizing at the same time their own and all heresies. 

Balsamon does not print the acts of the Council at all but only the letter of St. Cyprian (Labbe and Cossart, 
Concilia, Tom. I., col. 799.) I have not thought it worth while to place here the remarks of the eighty-six 
bishops, <greek>ws</greek> <greek>mh</greek> <greek>anagkaiai</greek>, <greek>oia</greek> 
<greek>mhde</greek> <greek>energousai</greek>, to quotequote Zonaras's words. 

BINIUS. 

The allusion here is to the decree of Stephen, who was wont, according to the custom of his elders, to be 
styled "Bishop of bishops," and because he had acrimoniously threatened excommunication to all not 
agreeing with him. 

On the disputed historical fact as to whether St. Cyprian died in or out of the communion of the See of Rome 
the reader will do well to consult Puller, The Primitive Saints and the See of Rome. 

I place here St. Cyprian's Seventieth Epistle in the Oxford Translation (Epistle of St. Cyprian, pp. 232 et 
seqq.). This letter is ad. dressed to Januarius, Satterninus, etc., and is headed in Beveridge's Synodicon 
"Canon I." 

EPISTLE LXX. 

Cyprian, Liberalis, Caldonius, etc., to their brethren Januarius, etc. Greeting. 

When we were together in council, dear-est brethren, we read the letter which you addressed to us 
respecting those who are thought to be baptized by heretics and schismatics, whether, when they come to 
the one true Catholic Church, they ought to be baptized. Wherein, although ye yourselves also hold the 
Catholic rule in its truth and fixedness, yet since, out of our mutual affection, ye have thought good to consult 
us, we deliver not our sentence as though new but, by a kindred harmony, we unite with you in that long since 
settled by our predecessors, and observed by us; thinking, namely, and holding for certain, that no one can 
be baptized without the Church, in that there is one Baptism appointed in the holy Church, and it is written, the 
Lord himself speaking, "They have forsaken me, the Fountain of living water, and hewed them out broken 
cisterns that can hold no water." Again, holy Scripture admonishes us, and says, "Keep thee from the 
strange water, and drink not from a fountain of strange water." The water then must first be cleansed and 
sanctified by the priest, that it may be able, by Baptism therein, to wash away the sins of the baptized, for the 
Lord says by the prophet Ezekiel, "Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be cleansed from 
all your filthiness, and from all your idols will I cleanse you; a new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit 
will I put within you." But how can he cleanse and sanctify the water, who is himself unclean, and with whom 
the Spirit is not? whereas the Lord says in Numbers, "And whatsoever the unclean person toucheth shall be 
unclean." Or how can he that baptizeth give remission of sins to another, who cannot himself free himself 
from his own sins, out of the Church? 

Moreover, the very interrogatory which is put in Baptism, is a witness of the truth. For when we say, "Dost 
thou believe in eternal life, and remission of sins through the holy Church?" we mean, that remission of sins 
is not given, except in the Church; but that, with heretics, where the Church is not, sins cannot be remitted. 
They, therefore, who claim that heretics can baptize, let them either change the interrogatory, or maintain the 

truth; unless indeed they ascribe a Church also to those who they contend have Baptism. 
Anointed also must he of necessity be, who is baptized, that having received the chrism-that is, unction, he 
may be the anointed of God, and have within him the grace of Christ. Moreover, it is the Eucharist through 
which the baptized are anointed, the oil sanctified on the altar. But he cannot sanctify the creature of oil, who 
has neither altar nor church. Whence neither can the spiritual unction be with heretics, since it is 
acknowledged that the oil cannot be sanctified nor the Eucharist celebrated among them. But we ought to 
know and remember that it is written, "Let not the oil of a sinner anoint my head;" which the Holy Ghost 
forewarned in the Psalms, lest any, quitting the track, and wandering out of the path of truth, be anointed by 
heretics and adversaries of Christ. Moreover, when baptized, what kind of prayer can a profane priest and a 
sinner offer? in that it is written, "God heareth not a sinner; but if any man be a worshipper of God, and doeth 
his will, him he heareth." 

But who can give what himself hath not? or how can he perform spiritual acts, who hath himself lost the Holy 
Spirit? Wherefore he is to be baptized and received, who comes uninitiated to the Church, that within he may 
be hallowed through the holy; for it is written, "Be ye holy, for I am holy, saith the Lord." So that he who has 
been seduced into error and washed without should, in the true Baptism of the Church, put off this very thing 
also; that he, a man coming to God, while seeking for a priest, fell, through the deceit of error, upon one 
profane. But to acknowledge any case where they have baptized, is to approve the baptism of heretics and 
schismatics. 

For neither can part of what they do be void and part avail. If he could baptize, he could also give the Holy 
Ghost. But if he cannot give the Holy Ghost because, being set without, he is not with the Holy Ghost, neither 
can he baptize any that cometh: for that there is both one Baptism, and one Holy Ghost, and one Church, 
founded by Christ the Lord upon Peter, through an original and principle of unity; so it results, that since all 
among them is void and false, nothing that they have done ought to be approved by us. For what can be 
ratified and confirmed by God, which they do whom the Lord calls his enemies and adversaries, 
propounding in his Gospel, "He that is not with me, is against me; and he that gathereth not with me, 
scattereth." And the blessed Apostle John also, keeping the commandments and precepts of the Lord, has 
written in his Epistle, "Ye have heard that Antichrist shall come; even now are there many Antichrists, 
whereby we know that it is the last time. They went out from us, but were not of us; for if they had been of us, 
they would no doubt have continued with us." Whence we, too, ought to infer and consider, whether they who 
are the adversaries of the Lord, and are called Antichrists, can give the grace of Christ. Wherefore we who 
are with the Lord, and who hold the unity of the Lord, and according to this vouchsafement administer his 
priesthood in the Church, ought to repudiate and reject and account as profane, whatever his adversaries 
and Antichrists do; and to those who, coming from error and wickedness, acknowledge the true faith of the 
one Church, we should impart the reality of unity and faith by all the sacraments of Divine grace. 
We bid you, dearest brethren, ever heartily farewell.
