Canons of the Provincial Synods of Ancyra, Neocaesarea, Gangra, Antioch and Laodicea
Translation: Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Second Series, vol. 14, ed. Henry R. Percival (1900), Public Domain
Source: https://archive.org/details/EarlyChurchFathers38Volumes

THE CANONS OF THE COUNCILS OF ANCYRA, 
GANGRA NEOCAESAREA, ANTIOCH AND 
LAODICEA-ACCEPTED AND RECEIVED BY THE 
ECUMENICAL SYNODS, INTRODUCTORY NOTE 

THE CANONS OF THE COUNCILS OF ANCYRA, GANGRA NEOCAESAREA, ANTIOCH AND 
LAODICEA, WHICH CANONS WERE ACCEPTED AND RECEIVED BY THE ECUMENICAL 
SYNODS. 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE TO THE CANONS OF THE PROVINCIAL SYNODS WHICH IN THIS 
VOLUME ARE INTERJECTED BETWEEN THE FIRST AND THE SECOND ECUMENICAL 
COUNCILS. 

The First Canon of the Fourth Ecumenical Council, Chalcedon, reads as follows: "We have judged it right 
that the canons of the Holy Fathers made in every synod even until now, should remain in force." And the 
Council in Trullo, in its second canon, has enumerated these synods in the following words. "We set our 
seal to all the rest of the canons which have been established by our holy and blessed fathers, that is to say 
by the 318 God-inspired fathers who met at Nice, and by those who met at Ancyra, and by those who met at 
Neocaeesarea, as well as by those who met at Gangra: in addition to these the canons adopted by those 
who met at Antioch in Syria, and by those who met at Laodicea in Phry-gia; moreover by the 150 fathers who 
assembled in this divinely kept and imperial city, and by the 200 who were gathered in the metropolis of 
Ephesus, and by the 630 holy and blessed fathers who met at Chalcedon," etc., etc. 
There can be no doubt that this collection of canons was made at a very early date, and from the fact that 
the canons of the First Council of Constantinople do not appear, as they naturally would, immediately after 
those of Nice, we may not improbably conclude that the collection was formed before that council 
assembled. For it will be noticed that Nice, although not the earliest in date, takes the precedence as being 
of ecumenical rank. And this is expressly stated in the caption to the canons of Ancyra according to the 
reading in the Paris Edition of Balsamon. "The canons of the holy Fathers who assembled at Ancyra; which 
are indeed older than those made at Nice, but placed after them, on account of the authority 
<greek>auqentian</greek> of the Ecumenical Synod." 

On the arrangement of this code much has been written and Archbishop Ussher has made some interesting 
suggestions, but all appear to be attended with more or less difficulties. The reader will find in Bp: 
Beveridge, in the Prolegomena to his Synodicon a very full treatment of the point,(1) the gist of the matter is 
admirably given in the following brief note which I take from Hammond. In speaking of this early codex of the 
Church he says: 

(Hammond, Definitions of Faith and Canons of Discipline, pp. 134 and 135.) 

That this collection was made and received by the Church previous to the Council of Chalcedon is evident 
from the manner in which several of the Canons are quoted in that Council. Thus in the 4th Action, in the 
matter of Carosus and Dorotheus, who had acknowledged Dioscorus as Bishop, though he had been 
deposed from his bishopric, "the holy Synod said, let the holy Canons of the Fathers be read, and inserted 
in the records; and Actius the Archdeacon taking the book read the 83d Canon, If any Bishops, etc. And 
again the 84th Canon, concerning those who separate themselves, If any Presbyter," etc. These Canons 
are the 4th and 5th of Antioch. Again, in the 11th Action, in the matter of Bassianus and Stephanus who 
disputed about the Bishopric of Ephesus, both requested the Canons to be read, "And the Judges said, Let 
the Canons be read. And Leontius Bishop of Magnesia read the 95th Canon, If any Bishop, etc., and again 
out of the same book the 96th Canon, If any Bishop," etc. These Canons are the 16th and 17th of Antioch. 
Now if we add together the different Canons in the Code of the Universal Church in the order in which they 
follow in the enumeration of them by the Council of Trullo and in other documents, we find that the 4th and 5th 
of Antioch, are the 83d and 84th of the whole Code, and the 16th and 17th of Antioch, the 95th and 96th. Nice 
20, Ancyra 25, Neocaesarea 14, Gangra 20; all which make 79. Next come those of Antioch, the 4th and 5th 
of which therefore will be respectively the 83d and 84th, and the 16th and 17th the 95th and 96th. 
The fact of the existence of such a code does not prove by any means that it was the only collection extant 

at the time nor that it was universally known. In fact we have good reason, as we shall see in connexion with 
the Council of Sardica, to believe that in many codices, probably especially in the West, the canons of that 
council followed immediately after those of Nice, and that without any break or note whatever. But we know 
that the number of canons attributed to Nice must have been twenty or else the numbering of the codex read 
from at Chalcedon would be quite inexplicable. It would naturally suggest itself to the mind that possibly the 
divergence in the canonical codes was the result of the local feelings of East and West with regard to the 
decrees of Sardica. But this supposition, plausible as it appears, must be rejected, since at the Quinisext 
Council, where it is not disputed there was a strong anti-Western bias, the canons of Sardica are expressly 
enumerated among those which the fathers receive as of Ecumenical authority. It will be noticed that the 
code set forth by the Council in Trullo differs from the code used at Chalcedon by having the so-called 
"Canons of the Apostles" prefixed to it, and by having a large number of other canons, including those of 
Sardica, appended, of which more will be said when treating of that Council. 

The order which I have followed my justly be considered as that of the earliest accepted codex canonum, at 
least of the East. 

THE COUNCIL OF ANCYRA, HISTORICAL NOTE & 
ANONS 

a 

THE COUNCIL OF ANCYRA 
A.D. 314. 

Emperors.-CONSTANTINE and LICINIUS. 

Elenchus. 

Historical Note. The Canons with the Ancient Epitome and Notes. Excursus to Canon XIX on Digamy 

HISTORICAL NOTE. 

Soon after the death of the Emperor Maximin,(1) a council was held at Ancyra, the capital of Galatia. Only 
about a dozen bishops were present, and the lists of subscriptions which are found appended to the canons 
are not to be depended on, being evidently in their present form of later authorship; as has been shewn by 
the Ballerini. If we may at all trust the lists, it would seem that nearly every part of Syria and Asia Minor was 
represented, and that therefore the council while small in numbers was of considerable weight. It is not 
certain whether Vitalis, (bishop of Antioch,) presided or Marcellus, who was at the time bishop of Ancyra. The 
honour is by the Libellus Synodicus assigned to the latter. 

The disciplinary decrees of this council possess a singular interest as being the first enacted after the 
ceasing of the persecution of the Christians and as providing for the proper treatment of the lapsed. 
Recently two papyri have been recovered, containing the official certificates granted by the Roman 
government to those who had lapsed and offered sacrifice. These apostates were obliged to acknowledge 
in public their adhesion to the national religion of the empire, and then were provided with a document 
certifying to this fact to keep them from further trouble. Dr. Harnack(Preussische Jahrbucher) writing of the 
yielding of the lapsed says: 

"The Church condemned this as lying and denial of the faith, and after the termination of the persecution, 
these unhappy people were partly excommunicated, partly obliged to submit to severe discipline. Who 
would ever suppose that the records of their shame would come doom to our time?-and yet it has actually 
happened. Two of these papers have been preserved, contrary to all likelihood, by the sands of Egypt 
which so carefully keep what has been entrusted to them. The first was found by Krebs in a heap of papyrus, 
that had come to Berlin; the other was found by Wessely in the papyrus collection of Archduke Rainer. 'I, 
Diogenes, have constantly sacrificed and made offerings, and have eaten in your presence the sacrificial 
meat, and I petition you to give me a certificate.' Who to-day, without deep emotion, can read this paper and 
measure the trouble and terror of heart under which the Christians of that day collapsed?" 

THE CANONS OF THE COUNCIL OF ANCYRA. 

(Found in Labbe and Cossart's Concilia, and all Collections, in the Greek text together with several Latin 
versions of different dates. Also in Justellus and Beveridge. There will also be found annotations by Routh, 
and a reprint of the notes of Christopher Justellus and of Bp. Beveridge in Vol. IV. of the Reliquiae Sacrae, 
ed. alters, 1846.) 

CANON I. 

WITH regard to those presbyters who have offered sacrifices and afterwards returned to the conflict, not with 
hypocrisy, but in sincerity, it has seemed good that they may retain the honour of their chair; provided they 
had not used management, arrangement, or persuasion, so as to appear to be subjected to the torture, 
when it was applied only in seeming and pretence. Nevertheless it is not lawful for them to make the 
oblation, nor to preach, nor in short to perform any act of sacerdotal function. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME TO CANONS I. AND II. 

Presbyters and deacons who offered sacrifice and afterwards renewed the contest for the truth shall have 
only their seat and honour, but shall not perform any of the holy functions. 

ZONARAS. 

Of those that yielded to the tyrants in the persecution, and offered sacrifice, some, after having been 
subjected to torture, being unable to withstand to the end its force and intensity, were conquered, and 
denied the faith; some, through effeminacy, before they experienced any suffering, gave way, and lest they 
should seem to sacrifice voluntarily they persuaded the executioners, either by bribes or entreaties, to 
manifest perhaps a greater degree of severity against them, and seemingly to apply the torture to them, in 
order that sacrificing under these circumstances they; might seem to have denied Christ, conquered by 
force, and not through effeminacy. 

HEFELE. 

It was quite justifiable, and in accordance with the ancient and severe discipline of the Church, when this 
Synod no longer allowed priests, even when sincerely penitent, to discharge priestly functions. It was for this 
same reason that the two Spanish bishops, Martial and Basilides, were deposed, and that the judgment 
given against them was confirmed in 254 by an African synod held under St. Cyprian. 
The reader will notice how clearly the functions of a presbyter are set forth in this canon as they were 
understood at that time, they were "to offer" (<greek>prosfer</greek»<greek>ein</greek>), "to preach" 
(<greek>omilein</greek>, and "to perform any act of sacerdotal function"(<greek>leitourgein</greek> 
<greek>ti</greek> <greek>tpn</greek> <greek>ieratikpn</greek> <greek>leitourgipn</greek>). 
This canon is in the Corpus Juris Canonici. Decretum. Pars I., Dist. 1., c. xxxii. 

CANON II. 

IT is likewise decreed that deacons who have sacrificed and afterwards resumed the conflict, shall enjoy 
their other honours, but shall abstain from every sacred ministry, neither bringing forth the bread and the cup, 
nor making proclamations. Nevertheless, if any of the bishops shall observe in them distress of mind and 
meek humiliation, it shall be lawful to the bishops to grant more indulgence, or to take away[what has been 
granted]. 

For Ancient Epitome see above under Canon I. 

In this canon the work and office of a deacon as then understood is set forth, viz.: "to bring forth"(whatever 
that may mean) "bread or wine" (<greek>arton</greek> <greek>h</greek> <greek>pothrion</greek> 
<greek>anaferein</greek>) and "to act the herald" (<greek>khrussein</greek>). There is considerable 
difference of opinion as to the meaning of the first of these expressions. It was always the duty of the deacon 
to serve the priest, especially when he ministered the Holy Communion, but this phrase may refer to one of 
two such ministrations, either to bringing the bread and wine to the priest at the offertory, and this is the view 
of Van Espen, or to the distribution of the Holy Sacrament to the people. It has been urged that the deacon 
had ceased to administer the species of bread before the time of this council, but Hefele shews that the 
custom had not entirely died out. If I may be allowed to offer a suggestion, the use of the disjunctive 
<greek>h</greek> seems rather to point to the administration of the sacrament than to the bringing of the 
oblations at the offertory. 

The other diaconal function "to act the herald" refers to the reading of the Holy Gospel, and to the numerous 
proclamations made by the deacons at mass both according to the Greek and Latin Rite. 
This canon is in the Corpus Juris Canonici united with the foregoing. Decretum., Pars I., Dist. 1., c. xxxii. 

CANON III. 

THOSE who have fled and been apprehended, or have been betrayed by their servants; or those who 
have been otherwise despoiled of their goods, or have endured tortures, or have been imprisoned and 
abused, declaring themselves to be Christians; or who have been forced to receive something which their 
persecutors violently thrust into their hands, or meat[offered to idols], continually professing that they were 
Christians; and who, by their whole apparel, and demeanour, and humility of life, always give evidence of 

grief at what has happened; these persons, inasmuch as they are free from sin, are not to be repelled from 
the communion; and if, through an extreme strictness or ignorance of some things, they have been repelled, 
let them forthwith be re-admitted. This shall hold good alike of clergy and laity. It has also been considered 
whether laymen who have fallen under the same compulsion may be admitted to orders, and we have 
decreed that, since they have in no respect been guilty, they may be ordained; provided their past course 
of life be found to have been upright. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON III. 

Those who have been subjected to torments and have suffered violence, and have eaten food offered to 
idols after being tyrannized over, shall not be deprived of communion. And laymen who have endured the 
same sufferings, since they have in no way transgressed, if they wish to be ordained, they may be, if 
otherwise they be blameless. 

In the translation the word "abused" is given as the equivalent of <greek>periskisqentas</greek>) which 
Zonaras translated, "if their clothes have been torn from their bodies," and this is quite accurate if the 
reading is correct, but Routh has found in the Bodleian several MSS. which had 

<greek>periskeqentas</greek>. Hefele adopts this reading and translates "declaring themselves to be 
Christians but who have subsequently been vanquished, whether their oppressors have by force put 
incense into their hands or have compelled them, etc." Hammond translates "and have been harassed by 
their persecutors forcibly putting something into their hands or who have been compelled, etc." The phrase 
is obscure at best with either reading is reading. 

This canon is in the Corpus Juris Canonici united to the two previous canons, Decretum, Pars I., Diet. 1 ., c. 
xxxii. 

CANON IV. 

CONCERNING those who have been forced to sacrifice, and who, in addition, have partaken of feasts in 
honour of the idols; as many as were haled away, but afterwards went up with a cheerful countenance, and 
wore their costliest apparel, and partook with indifference of the feast provided; it is decreed that all such be 
hearers for one year, and prostrators for three years, and that they communicate in prayers only for two 
years, and then return to full communion. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON IV. 

Such as have been led away and have with joy gone up and eaten are to be in subjection for six years. 
In the Greek the word for "full communion" is <greek>to</greek> <greek>teleion</greek>("the perfection"), 
an expression frequently used by early writers to denote the Holy Communion.Vide Suicer, Thesaurus ad h. 
v. 

BINGHAM. 

[The Holy Communion was so called as being] that sacred mystery which unites us to, Christ, and gives us 
the most consummate perfection that we are capable of in this world. 

CANON V. 

As many, however, as went up in mourning attire and sat down and ate, weeping throughout the whole 
entertainment, if they have fulfilled the three years as prostrators, let them be received without oblation; and 
if they did not eat, let them be prostrators two years, and in the third year let them communicate without 
oblation, so that in the fourth year they may be received into full communion. But the bishops have the right, 
after considering the character of their conversion, either to deal with them more leniently, or to extend the 
time. But, first of all, let their life before and since be thoroughly examined, and let the indulgence be 
determined accordingly. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON V. 

Those who have gone up in mourning weeds, and have eaten with tears, shall be prostrators for three 
years; but if they basic not eaten, then, for two years. And according to their former and after life, whether 
good or evil, they shall find the bishop gentle or severe, Herbst and Routh have been followed by many in 
supposing that "oblation"(<greek>prosfora</greek> in this canon refers to the sacrament of the altar. But this 
seems to be a mistake, as the word while often used to denote the whole, act of the celebration of the Holy 
Eucharist, is not used to mean the receiving alone of that sacrament. Suicer(Thesaurus s. v. 
<greek>prosfora</greek>) translates "They may take part in divine worship, but not actively," that is, "they 
may not mingle their offerings with those of the faithful." 

HEFELE. 

But as those who cannot present their offerings during the sacrifice are excluded from the communion, the 
complete meaning of the canon is: "They may be present at divine service, but may neither offer nor 
communicate with the faithful." 

CANON VI. 

CONCERNING those who have yielded merely upon threat of penalties and of the confiscation of their 
goods, or of banishment, and have sacrificed, and who till this present time have not repented nor been 
converted, but who now, at the time of this synod, have approached with a purpose of conversion, it is 
decreed that they be received as hearers till the Great Day, and that after the Great Day they be prostrators 
for three years, and for two years more communicate without oblation, and then come to full communion, so 
as to complete the period of six full years. And if any have been admitted to penance before this synod, let 
the beginning of the six years be reckoned to them from that time. Nevertheless, if there should be any 
danger or prospect of death whether from disease or any other cause, let them be received, but under 
limitation. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON VI. 

A man who yielded to threats alone, and has sacrified, and then repented let him for five years be a 
prostrator. 

ZONARAS. 

But should any of those debarred from communion as penitents be seized with illness or in any other way 
be brought nigh to death, they may be received to communion; but in accordance with this law or distinction, 
that if they escape death and recover their health, they shall be altogether deprived again of communion 
until they have finished their six years penance. 

HAMMOND. 

"The Great Day," that is, Easter Day. The great reverence which the Primitive Church from the earliest ages 
felt for the holy festival of Easter is manifested by the application of the epithet Great, to everything 
connected with it. The preceding Friday, i.e., Good Friday, was called the Great Preparation, the Saturday, 
the Great Sabbath, and the whole week, the Great Week. 

CANON VII. 

CONCERNING those who have partaken at a heathen feast in a place appointed for heathens, but who 
have brought and eaten their own meats, it is decreed that they be received after they have been 
prostrators two years; but whether with oblation, every bishop must determine after he has made 
examination into the rest of their life. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON VII. 

If anyone having his own food, shall eat it with heathen at their feasts, let him be a prostrator for two years. 

HEFELE. 

Several Christians tried with worldly prudence, to take a middle course. On the one hand, hoping to escape 
persecution, they were present at the feasts of the heathen sacrifices, which were held in the buildings 
adjoining the temples; and on the other, in order to appease their consciences, they took their own food, 
and touched nothing that had been offered to the gods. These Christians forgot that St. Paul had ordered 
that meats sacrificed to the gods should be avoided, not because they were tainted in themselves, as the 
idols were nothing, but from another, and in fact a twofold reason: 1st, Because, in partaking of them, some 
had still the idols in their hearts, that is to say, were still attached to the worship of idols, and thereby sinned; 
and 2dly, Because others scandalized their brethren, and sinned in that way. To these two reasons a third 
may be added, namely, the hypocrisy and the duplicity of those Christians who wished to appear heathens, 
and nevertheless to remain Christians. The Synod punished them with two years of penance in the third 
degree, and gave to each bishop the right, at the expiration of this time, either to admit them to communion, 
or to make them remain some time longer in the fourth degree. 

CANON VIM. 

LET those who have twice or thrice sacrificed under compulsion, be prostrators four years, and 
communicate without oblation two years, and the seventh year they shall be received to full communion. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON VIM. 

Whoever has sacrificed a second or third time, but has been led thereto by force, shall be a prostrator for 
seven years. 

VAN ESPEN. 

This canon shews how in the Church it was a received principle that greater penances ought to be imposed 
for the frequent commission of the same crime, and consequently it was then believed that the number of 
times the sin had been committed should be expressed in confession, that the penance might correspond 
to the sin, greater or less as the case may be, and the time of probation be accordingly protracted or 
remitted. 

CANON IX. 

As many as have not merely apostatized, but have risen against their brethren and forced them[to 
apostatize], and have been guilty of their being forced, let these for three years take the place of hearers, 
and for another term of six years that of prostrators, and for another year let them communicate without 
oblation, in order that, when they have fulfilled the space often years, they may partake of the communion; 
but during this time the rest of their life must also be enquired into. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON IX. 

Whoever has not only sacrificed voluntarily but also has forced another to sacrifice, shall be a prostrator for 

ten years. 

[It will be noticed that this epitome does not agree with the canon, although Aristenus does not note the 

discrepancy.] 

VAN ESPEN. 

From this canon we are taught that the circumstances of the sin that has been committed are to be taken into 
account in assigning the penance. 

ARISTENUS. 

When the ten years are past, he is worthy of perfection, and fit to receive the divine sacraments. Unless 
perchance an examination of the rest of his life demands his exclusion from the divine communion. 

CANON X. 

THEY who have been made deacons, declaring when they were ordained that they must marry, because 
they were not able to abide so, and who afterwards have married, shall continue in their ministry, because it 
was conceded to them by the bishop. But if any were silent on this matter, undertaking at their ordination to 
abide as they were, and afterwards proceeded to marriage, these shall cease from the diaconate. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON X. 

Whoso is to be ordained deacon, if he has before announced to the bishop that he cannot persevere 
unmarried, let him marry and let him be a deacon; but if he shall have kept silence, should he take a wife 
afterwards let him be east out. 

VAN ESPEN. 

The case proposed to the synod and decided in this canon was as follows: When the bishop was willing to 
ordain two to the diaconate, one of them declared that he did not intend to bind himself to preserving 
perpetual continence, but intended to get married, because he had not the power to remain continent. The 
other said nothing. The bishop laid his hands on each and conferred the diaconate. 
After the ordination it fell out that both got married, the question propounded is, What must be done in each 
case? The synod ruled that he who had made protestation at his ordination should remain in his ministry, 
"because of the license of the bishop," that is that he might contract matrimony after the reception of the 
diaconate. With regard to him who kept silence the synod declares that he should cease from his ministry. 
The resolution of the synod to the first question shews that there was a general law which bound the 
deacons to continence; but this synod judged it meet that the bishops for just cause might dispense with this 
law, and this license or dispensation was deemed to have been given by the bishop if he ordained him after 
his protestation at the time of his ordination that he intended to be married, because he could not remain as 
he was; giving by the act of ordination his tacit approbation. Moreover from this decision it is also evident 
that not only was the ordained deacon allowed to enter but also to use matrimony after his ordination ... 
Moreover the deacon who after this protestation entered and used matrimony, not only remained a deacon, 
but continued in the exercise of his ministry. 

On the whole subject of Clerical Celibacy in the Early Church see the Excursus devoted to that matter. 
This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici. Decretum Pars I., Dist. xxviii, c. viii. 

CANON XI. 

IT is decreed that virgins who have been betrothed, and who have afterwards been carried off by others, 
shall be restored to those to whom they had formerly been betrothed, even though they may have suffered 
violence from the ravisher. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XI. 

If a young girl who is engaged be stolen away by force by another man, let her be restored to the former. 

HEFELE. 

This canon treats only of betrothed women (of the sponsalia de futuro) not of those who are married (of the 
sponsalia de proesenti). In the case of the latter there could be no doubt as to the duty of restitution. The 
man who was betrothed was, moreover, at liberty to receive his affianced bride who had been carried off or 
not. 

JOHNSON. 

Here Balsamon puts in a very proper cave, viz.: If he to whom she was espoused demand her to be his 

wife. 

Compare St. Basil's twenty-second canon in his letter to Amphilochius, where it is so ruled. 

CANON XII. 

IT is decreed that they who have offered sacrifice before their baptism, and were afterwards baptized, may 
be promoted to orders, inasmuch as they have been cleansed. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XII. 

Whoso has sacrificed before his baptism, after it shall be guiltless. 

HEFELE. 

This canon does not speak generally of all those who sacrificed before baptism; for if a heathen sacrificed 
before having embraced Christianity, he certainly could not be reproached for it after his admission. It was 
quite a different case with a catechumen, who had already declared for Christianity, but who, during the 
persecution had lost courage, and sacrificed. In this case it might be asked whether he could still be 
admitted to the priesthood. The Council decided that a baptized catechumen could afterwards be promoted 
to holy orders. 

CANON XIII. 

IT is not lawful for Chorepiscopi to ordain presbyters or deacons., and most assuredly not presbyters of a 
city, without the commission of the bishop given in writing, in another parish. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XIII. 

A chorepiscopus is not to ordain without the consent of the bishop. 

HEFELE. 

If the first part of the thirteenth canon is easy to understand, the second, on the contrary, presents a great 
difficulty; for a priest of a town could not in any case have the power of consecrating priests and deacons, 
least of all in a strange diocese. Many of the most learned men have, for this reason, supposed that the 
Greek text of the second half of the canon, as we have read it, is incorrect or defective. It wants, say they, 
<greek>poiein</greek> <greek>ti</greek>, or aliquid agere, i.e., to complete a religious function. To confirm 
this supposition, they have appealed to several ancient versions, especially to that of Isidore: sed nee 
presbyteris civitatis sine episcopi proecepto amplius aliquid imperare, vel sine auctoritate literature ejus in 
unaquaque (some read <greek>en</greek> <greek>ekasth</greek> instead of <greek>en</greek> 
<greek>etera</greek>) parochia aliquid agere. The ancient Roman MS. of the canons, Codex Canonum, 
has the same reading, only that it has provincia instead of parochia. Fulgentius Ferrandus, deacon of 
Carthage, who long ago made a collection of canons, translates in the same way in his Breviatio Canonum: 
Ut presbyteri civitatis sine jussu episcopi nihil jubeant, nee in unaquaque parochia aliquid agant. Van 
Espen has explained this canon in the same way. 

Routh has given another interpretation. He maintained that there was not a word missing in this canon, but 
that at the commencement one ought to read, according to several MSS. <greek>kwrepiskopois</greek> in 
the dative, and further down <greek>alla</greek> <greek>mhn</greek> <greek>mhde</greek> instead of 
<greek>alla</greek> <greek>mhde</greek> then <greek>presbuterous</greek> (in the accusative) 
<greek>polews</greek> and finally <greek>ekasth</greek> instead of <greek>etere</greek>, and that we 
must therefore translate, "Chorepiscopi are not permitted to consecrate priests and deacons (for the 
country) still less (<greek>alla</greek> <greek>mhn</greek> <greek>mhde</greek>) can they consecrate 
priests for the town without the consent of the bishop of the place." The Greek text, thus modified according 

to some MSS., especially those in the Bodleian Library, certainly gives a good meaning. Still 
<greek>alla</greek> <greek>mhn</greek> <greek>mhde</greek> does not mean, but still less: it means, 
but certainly not, which makes a considerable difference. 

Besides this, it can very seldom have happened that the chorepiscopi ordained presbyters or deacons for 
a town; and if so, they were already forbidden, at least implicitly, in the first part of the canon. 

CANON XIV. 

IT is decreed that among the clergy, presbyters and deacons who abstain from flesh shall taste of it, and 
afterwards, if they shall so please, may abstain. But if they disdain it, and will not even eat herbs served with 
flesh, but disobey the canon, let them be removed from their order. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XIV. 

A priest who is an abstainer from flesh, let him merely taste it and so let him abstain. But if he will not taste 

even the vegetables cooked with the meat let him be deposed (<greek>pepausqw</greek>). 

There is a serious dispute about the reading of the Greek text. I have followed Routh, who, relying on three 

MSS. the Collectio of John of Antioch and the Latin versions, reads <greek>ei</greek> <greek>de</greek> 

<greek>bdelussointo</greek> instead of the <greek>ei</greek> <greek>de</greek> 

<greek>boulointo</greek> of the ordinary text, which as Bp. Beveridge had pointed out before has no 

meaning unless a <greek>mh</greek> be introduced. 

Zonaras points out that the canon chiefly refers to the Love feasts. 

I cannot agree with Hefele in his translation of the last clause. He makes the reference to "this present 

canon," I think it is clearly to the 53 (52) of the so-called Canons of the Apostles, <greek>tw</greek> 

<greek>kanoni</greek> "the well-known Canon." 

CANON XV. 

CONCERNING things belonging to the church, which presbyters may have sold when there was no bishop, 
it is decreed that the Church property shall be reclaimed; and it shall be in the discretion of the bishop 
whether it is better to receive the purchase price, or not; for oftentimes the revenue of the things sold might 
field them the greater value. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XV. 

Sales of Church goods made by presbyters are null, and the matter shall rest with the bishop. 

HEFELE. 

If the purchaser of ecclesiastical properties has realized more by the temporary revenue of such properties 
than the price of the purchase, the Synod thinks there is no occasion to restore him this price, as he has 
already received a sufficient indemnity from the revenue, and as, according to the rules then in force, 
interest drawn from the purchase money was not permitted. Besides, the purchaser had done wrong in 
buying ecclesiastical property during the vacancy of a see (sede vacante). Beveridge and Routh have 
shown that in the text <greek>anakaleisqai</greek> and <greek>prosodon</greek> must be read.(1) 

CANON XVI. 

LET those who have been or who are guilty of bestial lusts, if they have sinned while under twenty years of 
age, be prostrators fifteen years, and afterwards communicate in prayers; then, having passed five years in 
this communion, let them have a share in the oblation. But let their life as prostrators be examined, and so let 
teem receive indulgence; and if any have been insatiable in their crimes, then let their time of prostration be 
prolonged. And if any who have passed this age and had wives, have fallen into this sin, let them be 
prostrators twenty-five years, and then communicate in prayers; and, after they have been five years in the 
communion of prayers, let them share the oblation. And if any married men of more than fifty years of age 
have so sinned, let them be admitted to communion only at the point of death. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XVI. 

Whoever shall have commerce with animals devoid of reason being younger than twenty, shall be a 

prostrator for fifteen years If he is over that age and has a wife when he falls into this wickedness he shall be 

a prostrator for twenty-five years. But the married man who shall do so when over fifty years of age, shall be 

a prostrator to his life's end. 

It is interesting to compare with this, as Van Espen does, the canon of the Church of England set forth in the 

tenth century under King Edgar, where, Part II., canon xvi., we read- 

"If any one twenty years of age shall defile himself with a beast, or shall commit sodomy let him fast fifteen 

years; and if he have a wife and be forty years of age, and shall do such a deed let him abstain now and 

fast all the rest of his life, neither shall he presume until he is dying to receive the Lord's body. Youths and 

fools who shall do any such fixing shall be soundly trounced." 

CANON XVII. 

DEFILERS of themselves with beasts, being also leprous, who have infected others [with the leprosy of this 
crime], the holy Synod commands to pray among the hie-mantes. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XVII. 

A leper who goes in to a beast or even to leprous women, shall pray with the hybernantes. 

<greek>Deprwsantas</greek> is from <greek>leprow</greek> not from <greek>lepraw</greek> and 

therefore cannot mean "have been lepers," but "have made others rough and scabby." It is only in the 

passive and in Alexandrian Greek that it has the meaning to become leprous. Vide Liddell and Scott. 

There seems but little doubt that the word is to be understood spiritually as suggested above. 

The last word of the canon is also a source of confusion. Both Beveridge and Routh understand by the 

<greek>keimazomenoi</greek> those possessed with devils. Suicer however (Thesaurus) thinks that the 

penitents of the lowest degree are intended, who had no right to enter the church, but were exposed in the 

open porch to the inclemencies (<greek>keimwn</greek>) of the weather. But, after all it matters little, as the 

possessed also were forced to remain in the same place, and shared the same name. 

Besides the grammatical reason for the meaning of <greek>leprwsantas</greek> given above there is 

another argument of Hefele's, as follows: 

HEFELE. 

It is clear that <greek>leprwsantas</greek> cannot possibly mean "those who have been lepers"; for there 
is no reason to be seen why those who were cured of that malady should have to remain outside the church 
among the flentes. Secondly, it is clear that the words <greek>leprous</greek> <greek>ontas</greek>, etc. 
are added to give force to the expression <greek>alogeusamenoi</greek>. The preceding canon had 
decreed different penalties for different kinds of <greek>alogeusamenoi</greek>. But that pronounced by 
canon xvii. being much severer than the preceding ones, the <greek>alogeusamenoi</greek> of this canon 
must be greater sinners than those of the former one. This greater guilt cannot consist in the fact of a literal 
leprosy; for this malady was not a consequence of bestiality. But their sin was evidently greater when they 
tempted others to commit it. It is therefore <greek>lepra</greek> in the figurative sense that we are to 
understand, and our canon thus means; "Those who were spiritually leprous through this sin, and tempting 
others to commit it made them leprous." 

CANON XVIII. 

IF any who have been constituted bishops, but have not been received by the parish to which they were 
designated, shall invade other parishes and wrong the constituted [bishops] there, stirring up seditions 
against them, let such persons be suspended from office and communion. But if they are willing to accept a 
seat among the presbyterate, where they formerly were presbyters, let them not be deprived of that honour. 
But if they shall act seditiously against the bishops established there, the honour of the presbyterate also 

shall be taken from them and themselves expelled. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XVIII. 

If a bishop who has been duly constituted, is not received by the Church to which he was elected, but gives 
trouble to other bishops, let him be excommunicated. 

If he wishes to be numbered among the presbyters, let him be so numbered. But if he shall be at outs with 
the bishops duly constituted there, let him be deprived of the honour of being even a presbyter. The word I 
have translated "suspended from office and communion" is <greek>aforizesqai</greek>. Suicer in his 
Thesaurus shews that this word does not mean only, as some have supposed, a deprivation of office and 
dignity (e. g., Van Espen), but also an exclusion from the communion of the Church. 

CANON XIX. 

IF any persons who profess virginity shall disregard their profession, let them fulfil the term of digamists. 
And, moreover, we prohibit women who are virgins from living with men as sisters. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XIX. 

Whoever has professed virginity and afterwards annuls it, let him be cut off for four years. And virgins shall 
not go(1) to any as to brothers. 

HAMMOND. 

According to some of the ancient canons digamists were to be suspended from communion for one or two 
years, though Beveridge and others doubt whether the rule was not meant to apply to such marriages only 
as were contracted before a former one was dissolved. Bingham thinks that it was intended to 
discountenance marrying after an unlawful divorce. (Ant., Bk. xv, c. iv., 18.)(2) 

HEFELE. 

The first part of this canon regards all young persons-men as well as women-who have taken a vow of 
virginity, and who, having thus, so to speak, betrothed themselves to God are guilty of a quasi digamy in 
violating that promise. They must therefore incur the punishment of digamy (successiva) which, according to 
St. Basil the Great, consisted of one year's seclusion. 

This canon is found in Gratian's Decretum (P. II., Causa xxvii., Q. i., c. xxiv.) as follows: "As many as have 
professed virginity and have broken their vow and contemned their profession shall be treated as 
digamists, that is as those who have contracted a second marriage." 

EXCURSUS ON SECOND MARRIAGES, CALLED DIGAMY. 

To distinguish contemporaneous from successive bigamy I shah use throughout this volume the word 

"digamy" to denote the latter, and shall thus avoid much confusion which otherwise is unavoidable. 

The whole subject of second, and even of third and fourth marriages has a great interest for the student of 

early ecclesiastical legislation, and I shall therefore treat the matter here (as I shall hope) sufficiently and 

refer the reader for its fuller treatment to books more especially upon the subject. 

The general position of the Church seems to have been to discourage all second marriages, and to point to 

a single matrimonial connexion as the more excellent way. But at the same time the principle that the 

marriage obligation is severed by death was universally recognised, and however much such fresh 

marriages may have been disapproved of, such disapproval did not rest upon any supposed adulterous 

character in the new connexion. I cite a portion of an admirable article upon the subject by an English 

barrister of Lincoln's Inn. 

(J. M. Ludlow, in Smith and Cheetham, Dictionary of Christian Antiquities, sub voce Digamy.) 

Although among the earlier Romans(1) there was one form of marriage which was indissoluble, viz., that by 

confarreatio, still generally a second marriage either after death or divorce was by no means viewed with 

disfavour.Meanwhile an intensifying spirit of asceticism was leading many in the Church to a condemnation 

of second marriage in all eases. Minucius Felix (Octavius, c. 31, 5) only professes on behalf of the Christians 
a preference for monogamy. Clement of Alexandria (A.D. 150-220) seems to confine the term marriage to 
the first lawful union (Stromata, Bk. ii.). ... It would seem, however, that when these views were carried to the 
extent of absolute prohibition of second marriages generally by several heretical sects, the Montanists (see 
Augustine, De Hoeresibus, c. xxvi.), the Cathari (ib., c. xxxviii.), and a portion at least of the Novatianists (see 
Cotel., Patr. Apol., vol. i., p. 91, n. 16) the Church saw the necessity of not fixing such a yoke on the necks of 
the laity. The forbiddance of second marriage, or its assimilation to fornication, was treated as one of the 
marks of heresy (Augustin. u. s.; and see also his De Bono Vid., c. vi.). The sentiment of Augustine (in the 
last referred to passage) may be taken to express the Church's judgment at the close of the fourth century: 
"Second marriages are not to be condemned, but had in less honour," and see also Epiphanius, in his 
Exposition of the Catholic Faith. 

To these remarks of Mr. Ludlow's, I may add that St. Ambrose had written (De Viduis, c. xi.), "We do not 
prohibit second marriages, but we do not approve marriages frequently reiterated." St. Jerome had spoken 
still more strongly (Ep. Ixvii., Apol. pro libris adv. Jovin.), "I do not condemn digamists, or even trigamists or, 
if such a thing can be said, octagamists." It does not seem that the penance which was imposed in the East 
upon those entering into second nuptials was imposed in the West. The Corpus Juris Canonici contains two 
decretals, one of Alexander III. and another of Urban III., forbidding priests to give the nuptial benediction in 
cases of reiterated marriage. In the East at second marriages the benediction of the crown is omitted and 
"propitiatory prayers" are to be said. Mr. Ludlow points out that in the "Sanctions and Decrees," falsely 
attributed to the Council of Nice and found in Mansi (vol. ii., col. 1029) it is expressly stated that widowers and 
widows may marry, but that "the blessing of the crowns is not to be imparted to them, for this is only once 
given, at first marriages, and is not to be repeated. ... But if one of them be not a widower or widow, let such 
one alone receive the benediction with the paranymphs, those whom he will." 

CANON XX. 

IF the wife of anyone has committed adultery or if any man commit adultery it seems fit that he shall be 
restored to full communion after seven years passed in the prescribed degrees [of penance]. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XX. 

An adulteress and an adulterer are to be cut off for seven years. 

HEFELE. 

The simplest explanation of this canon is "that the man or woman who has violated the marriage bond shall 
undergo a seven years' penance"; but many reject this explanation, because the text says 
<greek>auton</greek> <greek>tukein</greek> and consequently can refer only to the husband. Fleury and 
Routh think the canon speaks, as does the seventieth of Elvira, of a woman who has broken the marriage tie 
with the knowledge and consent of her husband. The husband would therefore in this case be punished for 
this permission, just as if he had himself committed adultery. Van Espen has given another explanation: 
"That he who marries a woman already divorced for adultery is as criminal as if he had himself committed 
adultery." But this explanation appears to us more forced than that already given; and we think that the 
Greek commentators Balsamon and Zonaras were right in giving the explanation we have offered first as 
the most natural. They think that the Synod punished every adulterer, whether man or woman, by a seven 
years' penance. There is no reason for making a mistake because only the word <greek>auton</greek> 
occurs in the passage in which the penalty is fixed; for <greek>auton</greek> here means the guilty party, 
and applies equally to the woman and the man: besides, in the preceding canon the masculine 
<greek>osoi</greek> <greek>epaggellomenoi</greek> includes young men and young women also. It is 
probable that the Trullan Synod of 692, in forming its eighty-seventh canon, had in view the twentieth of 
Ancyra. The sixty-ninth canon of Elvira condemned to a lighter punishment-only five years of penance-him 
who had been only once guilty of adultery. 

CANON XXI. 

CONCERNING women who commit fornication, and destroy that which they have conceived, or who are 
employed in making drugs for abortion, a former decree excluded them until the hour of death, and to this 
some have assented. Nevertheless, being desirous to use somewhat greater lenity, we have ordained that 

they fulfil ten years [of penance], according to the prescribed degrees. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXI. 

Harlots taking injurious medicines are to be subjected to penance for ten years. 

The phrase "and to this some have assented" is the translation of Hervetus, Van Espen, and Hefele. Dr. 

Routh suggests to understand <greek>ai</greek> and translate, "the same punishment will be inflicted on 

those who assist in causing miscarriages," but this seems rather an unnatural and strained rendering of the 

Greek. 

CANON XXII. 

CONCERNING wilful murderers let them remain prostrators; but at the end of life let them be indulged with full 
communion. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXII. 

A voluntary homicide may at the last attain perfection. (1) 

VAN ESPEN. 

It is noteworthy how singularly appositely Constantine] Harmenopulus the Scholiast in the Epitom. 
Canonum., Sect, v., tit. 3, tells the following story: "In the time of the Patriarch Luke, a certain bishop gave 
absolution in writing to a soldier who had committed voluntary homicide, after a very short time of penace; 
and afterwards when he was accused before the synod of having done so, he defended himself by citing 
the canon which gives bishops the power of remitting or increasing the length of their penance to penitents. 
But he was told in answer that this was granted indeed to pontiffs but not that they should use it without 
examination, and with too great lenity. Wherefore the synod subjected the soldier to the canonical penance 
and the bishop it mulcted for a certain time, bidding him cease from the exercise of his ministry." 

CANON XXIII. 

CONCERNING involuntary homicides, a former decree directs that they be received to full communion after 
seven years [of penance], according to the prescribed degrees; but this second one, that they fulfil a term of 
five years. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXIII. 

An involuntary homicide shall be subjected to penance for five years. 

VAN ESPEN. 

Of voluntary and involuntary homicides St. Basil treats at length in his Canonical Epistle ad Amphilochium, 
can. viii., Ivi. and Ivii., and fixes the time of penance at twenty years for voluntary and ten years for involuntary 
homicides. It is evident that the penance given for this crime varied in different churches, although it is clear 
from the great length of the penance, how enormous the crime was considered, no light or short penance 
being sufficient. 

CANON XXIV. 

THEY who practice divination, and follow the customs of the heathen, or who take men to their houses for 
the invention of sorceries, or for lustrations, fall under the canon of five years' [penance], according to the 
prescribed degrees; that is, three years as prostrators, and two of prayer without oblation. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXIV. 

Whoso uses vaticination and whoso introduces anyone into his house for the sake of making a poison or a 

lustration let him be subject to penance for five years. 

I read <greek>eqnwn</greek> for <greek>kronwn</greek> and accordingly translate "of the heathen." 

VAN ESPEN. 

It is greatly to be desired that bishops and pastors to-day would take example from the fathers of Ancyra 
and devote their attention strenuously to eliminate superstition from the people, and would expound with 
animation to the people the enormity of this crime. 

CANON XXV. 

ONE who had betrothed a maiden, corrupted her sister, so that she conceived. After that he married his 
betrothed, but she who had been corrupted hanged herself. The parties to this affair were ordered to be 
received among the co-standers after ten years [of penance] according to the prescribed degrees. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME TO CANON XXV. 

A certain body after being engaged to marry a young girl, violates her sister and then takes her to wife. The 
first is suffocated. All who were cognizant of the affair are to be subject to penance for ten years. 
I have followed the usual translation "hanged herself," which is the ordinary dictionary-meaning of 
<greek>apagkw</greek>, but Hefele says that it signifies any and every variety of suicides. 

BALSAMON. 

In this case we have many nefarious crimes committed, fornication, unlawful marriage [i.e. with the sister of 
one's mistress] and murder. In that case [mentioned by St. Basil in Canon Ixxviij. where only seven years 
penance is enjoined] there is only a nefarious marriage [i.e. with a wife's sister]. 

THE COUNCIL OF NEOCAESAREA, HISTORICAL NOTE 
& CANONS 

THE COUNCIL OF NEOCAESAREA 
A.D. 315 (circa). 

(Hefele thinks somewhat later, but before 325.) 

Elenchus. 

Historical Note. The Canons with the Ancient Epitome and Notes. 

HISTORICAL NOTE. 

(Zonaras and Balsamon prefix to the canons this note.) 

The Synod gathered together at Neocaesares, which is a city of Pontus, is next in order after that of Ancyra, 
and earlier in date than the rest, even than the First Ecumenical Synod at Nice. In this synod the Holy 
Fathers gathered together, among whom was the holy Martyr Basil, bishop of Amasea, adopted canons for 
the establishing of ecclesiastical order as follow- 

THE CANONS OF THE HOLY AND BLESSED FATHERS WHO ASSEMBLED AT 
NEOCAESAREA, WHICH ARE INDEED LATER IN DATE THAN THOSE MADE AT ANCYRA, 
BUT MORE ANCIENT THAN THE NICENE: HOWEVER, THE SYNOD OF NICE HAS BEEN 
PLACED BEFORE THEM ON ACCOUNT OF ITS PECULIAR DIGNITY. (1) 

(Annotations by Routh, and reprint of the Notes of Christopher Justellus and of Bp. Beveridge will be found in 
Vol. iv. of the Reliquioe Sacroe.) 

CANON I. 

IF a presbyter marry, let him be removed from his order; but if he commit fornication or adultery, let him be 
altogether east out [i.e. of communion] and put to penance. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON I. 

If a presbyter marries he shall be deposed from his order. If he commits adultery or whoredom he shall be 
expelled, and shall be put to penance. 

ARISTENUS. 

A presbyter who marries is removed from the exercise of the priesthood but retains his honour and seat. But 
he that commits fornication or adultery is cast forth altogether and put to penance. 

VAN ESPEN. 

These fathers [i.e. of Neocaesarea] shew how much graver seemed to them the sin of the presbyter who 
after ordination committed fornication or adultery, than his who took a wife. For the former they declare shall 
simply be deposed from his order or deprived of the dignity of the Priesthood, but the latter is to "be 
altogether cast out, and put to penance." ... Therefore such a presbyter not only did they remove from the 
priestly functions, or the dignity of the priesthood, but perfectly or altogether east him out of the Church. 
This canon Gratian has inserted in the Corpus Juris Canonici. Decretum. Pars I., Dist. xxviii., c. ix. Gratian has 

followed Isidore in adding after the word "penance" the words "among the laity" (inter laicos) which do not 

occur in the Greek, (as is noted by the Roman Correctors) nor in the version of Dionysius Exiguus; these 

same correctors fall however themselves into a still graver error in supposing that criminous clerks in the 

early days of the Church were sent out to wander over the country, as Van Espen well points out. 

On the whole subject of the marriage of the clergy in the Early Church see the Excursus devoted to that 

subject. 

CANON II. 

IF a woman shall have married two brothers, let her be east out [i.e. of communion] until her death. 
Nevertheless, at the hour of death she may, as an act of mercy, be received to penance, provided she 
declare that she will break the marriage, should she recover. But if the woman in such a marriage, or the 
man, die, penance for the survivor shall be very difficult. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON II. 

A woman married to two brothers shall be expelled all her life. But if when near her death she promises that 
she will loose the marriage should she recover, she shall be admitted to penance. But if one of those 
coupled together die, only with great difficulty shall penitence be allowed to the one still living. 

It will be carefully observed that this canon has no provision for the case of a man marrying two sisters. It is 
the prohibited degree of brother's wife, not that of wife's sister which is in consideration. Of course those who 
hold that the affinity is the same in each case will argue from this canon by parity of reasoning, and those 
who do not accept that position will refuse to do so. 

In the Greek text of Balsamon (Vide Beveridge, Synod.) after the first clause is added, "if she will not be 
persuaded to loose the marriage." 

VAN ESPEN. 

The meaning of this canon seems to be that which Balsamon sets forth, to wit, that if a woman at the point of 
death or in extremis promises that if she gets better she will dissolve the marriage, or make a divorce, or 
abstain from the sacrilegious use of matrimony, then "she may be received to penance as an act of mercy"; 
and surely she is immediately absolved from the excommunication inflicted upon her when she was cast out 
and extruded from the Church. For it is certain that according to the discipline of the Fathers he was thought 
to be loosed from excommunication whoever was admitted to penance, and it is of this that the canon 
speaks;(1) but he did not obtain perfect reconciliation until his penance was done. 

To this performance of penance this woman was to be admitted if she got well and dissolved the marriage 
according to her promise made when she was in peril of death, as the Greek commentators note; and this 
too is the sense given by Isidore. 

CANON III. 

CONCERNING those who fall into many marriages, the appointed time of penance is well known; but their 
manner of living and faith shortens the time. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON III. 

The time of polygamists is well known.A zeal for penance may shorten it. 

HEFELE. 

As the Greek commentators have remarked, this canon speaks of those who have been married more than 
twice. It is not known what were the ancient ordinances of penitence which the synod here refers to. In later 
times digamists were condemned to one year's penance, and trigamists from two to five years. St. Basil 
places the trigamists for three years among the "hearers," and then for some time among the consistentes. 

VAN ESPEN. 

"The appointed time of penance is well known." These words Zonaras notes must refer to a custom, for, 

says he, "before this synod no canon is found which prescribes the duration of the penance of bigamists 

[i.e. digamists]." It is for this reason that St. Basil says (in Epist. ad Amphilogium, Can. 4) in speaking of the 

penance of trigamists "we have received this by custom and not by canon, but from the following of 

precedent," hence the Fathers received many things by tradition, and observed these as having the force of 

law. 

From the last clause of this canon we see the mind of the Fathers of this synod, which agrees with that of 

Ancyra and Nice, that; with regard to the granting of indulgences, for in shortening the time of penance, 

attention must be paid to the penitence, and conversation, or "conversation and faith" of each one 

separately. 

With this agrees Zonaras, whose remarks are worthy of consideration. On this whole subject of the 

commutation of the primitive penance and of the rise of the modern indulgences of the Roman Church Van 

Espen has written at length in his excursus De Indulgentiis (Jure Eccles., P. I. i., Tit. vij.) in which he assigns 

the change to the end of the Xlth century, and remarks that its introduction caused the "no small collapse of 

penitential discipline. "(2) 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian, Decretum, Pars II., Causa xxxi., Quaest. i., c. viij. 

where for "conversio," (<greek>anastrofh</greek>) is read "conversatio," and the Greek word is used in this 

sense in Polybius, and frequently so in the New Testament. 

CANON IV. 

IF any man lusting after a woman purposes to lie with her, and his design does not come to effect, it is 
evident that he has been saved by grace. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON IV. 

Whoso lusteth but doth not accomplish his pleasure is preserved of God. 

HEFELE. 

Instead of <greek>epiqumhsai</greek> we must read, with Beveridge and Routh, who rely upon several 

MSS., <greek>epiqumhsas</greek>. They also replace <greek>met</greek> <greek>auths</greek> by 

<greek>auth</greek>. 

The meaning of the canon appears to me to be very obscure. Hefele refers to Van Espen and adopts his 

view, and Van Espen in turn has adopted Fleury's view and given him credit for it, referring to his Histoire 

Ecclesiastique, Lib. X., xvij. Zonaras' and Balsamon's notes are almost identical, I translate that of the latter 

in full. 

BALSAMON. 

In sins, the Fathers say, there are four stages, the first-motion, the struggle, the consent, and the act: the first 
two of these are not subject to punishment, but in the two others the case is different. For neither is the first 
impression nor the struggle against it to be condemned, provided that when the reason receives the 
impression it struggles with it and rejects the thought. But the consent thereto is subject to condemnation and 
accusation, and the action to punishment. If therefore anyone is assailed by the lust for a woman, and is 
overcome so that he would perform the act with her, he has given consent, indeed, but to the work he has not 
come, that is, he has not performed the act, and it is manifest that the grace of God has preserved him; but 
he shall not go off with impunity. For the consent alone is worthy of punishment. And this is plain from canon 
Ixx. of St. Basil, which says; "A deacon polluted in lips (<greek>en</greek> <greek>keilesi</greek>)" or who 
has approached to the kiss of a woman "and confesses that he has so sinned, is to be interdicted his 
ministry," that is to say is to be prohibited its exercise for a time. "But he shall not be deemed unworthy to 
communicate in sacris with the deacons. The same is also the case with a presbyter. But if anyone shall go 
any further in sin than this, no matter what his grade, he shall be deposed." Some, however, interpret the 
pollution of the lips in another way; of this I shall speak in commenting on Canon Ixx. of St. Basil. (1) 

CANON V. 

IF catechumen coming into the Church have taken his place in the order of catechumens, and fall into six, let 
him, if a kneeler, become a hearer and sin no more. But should he again sin while a hearer, let him be cast 
out. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON V. 

If a catechumen falls into a fault and if while a kneeler he sins no more, let him be among the hearers; but 
should he sin while among the hearers, let him be cast out altogether. 

ZONARAS. 

There are two sorts of catechumens. For some have only just come in and these, as still imperfect, go out 
immediately after the reading of the scriptures and of the Gospels. But there are others who have been for 
some time in preparation and have attained some perfection; these wait after the Gospel for the prayers for 
the catechumens, and when they hear the words "Catechumens, bow down your heads to the Lord," they 
kneel down. These, as being more perfect, having tasted the good words of God, if they fall, are removed 
from their position; and are placed with the "hearers"; but if any happen to sin while "hearers" they are east 
out of the Church altogether. 

CANON VI. 

CONCERNING a woman with child, it is determined that she ought to be baptized whensoever she will; for in 
this the woman communicates nothing to the child, since the bringing forward to profession is evidently the 
individual [privilege] of every single person. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON VI. 

If a woman with child so desires, let her be baptized. For the choice of each one is judged of. 

VAN ESPEN. 

That the reason of the canon may be understood it must be noted that in the first ages of the Church 
catechumens were examined concerning their faith before they were baptized, and were made publicly to 
confess their faith and to renounce openly the pomps of the world, as Albaspinaeus (Aubespine) observes 
on this canon, "A short while before they were immersed they declared with a loud voice that they desired 
baptism and wished to be baptized. And since these confessions could not be made by those still shut up in 
their parent's womb, to them the thing (res) and grace of baptism could not come nor penetrate." And 
altogether in accord with this is the translation of lsidore-"because the free will of each one is declared in 
that confession," that is, in that confession he declares that he willingly desires to be baptized. 

CANON VII. 

A PRESBYTER shall not be a guest at the nuptials of persons contracting a second marriage; for, since the 
digamist is worthy of penance, what kind of a presbyter shall he be, who, by being present at the feast, 
sanctioned the marriage? 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON VII. 

A presbyter ought not to be present at the marriage of digamists. For when that one(1) implores favour, who 
will deem him worthy of favour. 

HEFELE. 

The meaning of the canon is as follows: "If the digamist, after contracting his second marriage, comes to the 
priest to be told the punishment he has to undergo, how stands the priest himself who for the sake of the 
feast has become his accomplice in the offence?" 

VAN ESPEN. 

The present canon again shews that although the Church never disapproved of, nor reputed second or still 
later marriages illicit, nevertheless the Fathers enjoined a penance upon digamists and those repeating 
marriage, because by this iteration they shewed their incontinence. As he that contracted a second 
marriage did not sin properly speaking, and committed no fault worthy of punishment, therefore whatever 
was amiss was believed to be paid off by a lighter penance, and Zonaras supposes that the canons 
inflicted a mulct upon digamists, for saith he, "Digamists are not allowed for one year to receive the Holy 
Gifts." 

Zonaras seems to indicate that the discipline of the canon was not in force in his time, for he says, "Although 
this is found in our writings, yet we ourselves have seen the Patriarch and many Metropolitans present at the 
feast for the second nuptials of the Emperor." 

CANON VIM. 

IF the wife of a layman has committed adultery and been clearly convicted, such [a husband] cannot enter 
the ministry; and if she commit adultery after his ordination, he must put her away; but if he retain her, he can 
have no part in the ministry committed to him. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON VIM. 

A layman whose wife is an adulteress cannot be a clergyman, and a cleric who keeps an adulteress shall 
be expelled. 

VAN ESPEN. 

Although the Eastern Church allows the clergy to have wives, even priests, and permits to them the use of 
marriage after ordination, nevertheless it requires of them the highest conjugal continency, as is seen by the 
present canon. For here it is evident that the Fathers wished even the smallest possible kind of incontinence 
to be absent from men dedicated to holiness. 
This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. xxxiv., c. xi. 

CANON IX. 

A PRESBYTER who has been promoted after having committed carnal sin, and who shall confess that he 
had sinned before his ordination, shall not make the oblation, though he may remain in his other functions on 
account of his zeal in other respects; for the majority have affirmed that ordination blots out other kinds of 
sins. But if he do not confess and cannot be openly convicted, the decision shall depend upon himself. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON IX. 

If a presbyter confess that he has sinned, (1) let him abstain from the oblation, and from it only. For certain 
sins orders remit. If he neither confess nor is convicted, let him have power over himself. 

VAN ESPEN. 

Therefore if he who before his ordination had committed a sin of the flesh with a woman, confess it after 

ordination, when he is already a priest, he cannot perform the priestly office, he can neither offer nor 

consecrate the oblations, even though after his ordination he has preserved uprightness of living and been 

careful to exercise virtue; as the words "zeal in other respects" ("studious of good") Zonaras rightly 

interprets. 

And since here the consideration is of a sin committed before ordination, and also concerning a presbyter 

who after his ordination was of spotless life, and careful to exercise virtue, the Fathers rightly wished that he 
should not, against his will, be deposed from the priestly office. 

It is certainly curious that this canon speaks of ordination as in the opinion of most persons taking away all 
sins except consummated carnal offences. And it will be noted that the <greek>afienai</greek> must mean 
more than that they are forgiven by ordination, for they had been forgiven long ago by God upon true 
contrition, but that they were made to be non-existent, as if they had never been, so that flier were no 
hinderance to the exercise of the spiritual office. I offer no explanation of the difficulty and only venture to 
doubt the satisfactory character of any of the explanations given by the commentators. Moreover it is hard to 
grasp the logical connexion of the clauses, and what this "blotting out" of <greek>ta</greek> 
<greek>loipa</greek> has to do with the matter I entirely fail to see. The <greek>kai</greek> after 
<greek>polloi</greek> may possibly suggest that something has dropped out. 

This canon and the following are together in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa 
xv., Quaest. viii., c. i. 

CANON X. 

LIKEWISE, if a deacon have fallen into the same sin, let him have the rank of a minister. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON X. 

A deacon found in the same crime shall remain a minister (<greek>uphreths</greek>). 

HEFELE. 

By ministers (<greek>uphretai</greek>) are meant inferior officers of the Church-the so-called minor orders, 
often including the subdeacons. 

This canon is in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa xv., Quaest. viii., united with 
canon ix., and in the following curious form: "Similiter et diaconus, si in eodem culpae genere fuerit involutus, 
sese a ministerio cohibebit." 

CANON XI. 

LET not a presbyter be ordained before he is thirty years of age, even though he be in all respects a worthy 
man, but let him be made to wait. For our Lord Jesus Christ was baptized and began to teach in his thirtieth 
year. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XI. 

Unless he be xxx. years of age none shall be presbyter, even should he be worthy, following the example of 
the baptism of our Saviour. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. Ixxviii., c. iv. 

GRATIAN. 

(Ut supra, Nota.) 

This is the law, and we do not read that Christ, or John the Baptist, or Ezechiel, or some other of the Prophets 

prophesied or preached before that age. But Jeremiah and Daniel we read received the spirit of prophecy 

before they had arrived even at youth, and David and Solomon are found to have been anointed in their 

youth, also John the Evangelist, while still a youth, was chosen by the Lord for an Apostle, and we find that 

with the rest he was sent forth to preach: Paul also, as we know, while still a young man was called by the 

Lord, and was sent out to preach. The Church in like manner, when necessity compels, is wont to ordain 

some under thirty years of age. 

For this reason Pope Zacharias in his Letter to Boniface the Bishop, number vi., which begins "Benedictus 

Deus" says, 

C. v. In case of necessity presbyters may be ordained at xxv. years of age. 

If men thirty years old cannot be found, and necessity so demand, Levites and priests may be ordained 
from twenty-five years of age upwards. 

VAN ESPEN. 

The power of dispensing was committed to the bishop, and at length it was so frequently exercised that in 
the space of one century [i.e. by the end ofthexiith century] the law became abrogated, which was brought 
about by necessity, so that it passed into law that a presbyter could be ordained at twenty-five. And from this 
it may appear how true it is that there is no surer way of destroying discipline and abrogating law than the 
allowing of dispensations and relaxations. Vide Thomassinus, De Disc. Eccles., Pars. IV., Lib. I., cap. 46. 

CANON XII. 

IF any one be baptized when he is ill, forasmuch as his [profession of] faith was not voluntary, but of 
necessity [i.e. though fear of death] he cannot be promoted to the presbyterate, unless on account of his 
subsequent [display of] zeal and faith, and because of a lack of men. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XII. 

One baptized on account of sickness is not to be made presbyter, unless in reward for a contest which he 
afterwards sustains and on account of scarcity of men. 

The word used in the Greek for "baptized" is "illuminated" (<greek>Fwtisqh</greek>), a very common 
expression among the ancients. 

ARISTENUS. 

He that is baptised by reason of illness, and, therefore come to his illumination not freely but of necessity, 
shall not be admitted to the priesthood unless both these conditions concur, that there are few suitable men 
to be found and that he has endured a hard conflict after his baptism. 

With this interpretation agree also Zonaras and Balsamon, the latter expressly saying, "If one of these 
conditions is lacking, the canon must be observed." Not only has Isidore therefore missed the meaning by 
changing the copulative into the disjunctive conjunction (as Van Espen points out) but Beveridge has fallen 
into the same error, not indeed in the canon itself, but in translating the Ancient Epitome. 
Zonaras explains that the reason for this prohibition was the well-known fact that in those ages baptism was 
put off so as the longer to be free from the restraints which baptism was considered to impose. From this 
interpretation only Aubespine dissents, and Hefele points out how entirely without reason. 
This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum., Pars. I., Dist. Ivii., c. i. 

CANON XIII. 

COUNTRY presbyters may not make the oblation in the church of the city when the bishop or presbyters of 
the city are present; nor may they give the Bread or the Cup with prayer. If, however, they be absent, and he 
[i.e., a country presbyter] alone be called to prayer, he may give them. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANONS XIII. AND XIV. 

A country presbyter shall not offer in the city temple, unless the bishop and the whole body of the presbyters 

are away. But if wanted he can do so white they are away. 

The chorepiscopi can offer as fellow ministers, as they hold the place of the Seventy. 

Routh reads the last clause in the plural, in this agreeing with Dionysius Exiguus and Isidore. In many MSS. 
this canon is united with the following and the whole number given as 14. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Pars I., Diet, xcv., c. xii. And the Roman correctors have 
added the following notes. 

ROMAN CORRECTORS. 

(Gratian ut supra.) 

"Nor to give the sacrificed bread and to hand the chalice;" otherwise it is read "sanctified" [sanctificatum for 

sacrificatum]. The Greek of the council is <greek>arton</greek> <greek>didonai</greek> 

<greek>en</greek> <greek>eukh</greek> but Balsamon has <greek>arton</greek> 

<greek>eukhs</greek>, that is, "the bread of the mystic prayer." 

Instead of "let them only who are called for giving the prayer, etc.," read <greek>kai</greek> 

<greek>eis</greek> <greek>artonn</greek> <greek>klhqh</greek> <greek>monos</greek> 

<greek>didwsin</greek>, that is: "and only he that shall have been called to the mystic prayer, shall 

distribute." 

CANON XIV. 

THE chorepiscopi, however, are indeed after the pattern of the Seventy; and as fellow-servants, on account 
of their devotion to the poor, they have the honour of making the oblation. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XIV. 

[Vide ante, as in many MSS. the two canons are united in the Ancient Epitome.] 

VAN ESPEN. 

The reference to the Seventy seems to intimate that the Synod did not hold the chorepiscopi to be true 
bishops, as such were always reputed and called successors, not of the Seventy disciples but successors 
of the Twelve Apostles. It is also clear that their chief ministry was thoUght to be the care of the poor. 

Zonaras and Balsamon would seem to agree in this with Van Espen. See on the whole subject the Excursus 
on the Chorepiscopi. 

CANON XV. 

THE deacons ought to be seven in number, according to the canon, even if the city be great. Of this you will 
be persuaded from the Book of the Acts. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XV. 

Seven Deacons according to the Acts of the Apostles should be appointed for each great city. This canon 
was observed in Rome and it was not until the xith century that the number of the Seven Cardinal Deacons 
was changed to fourteen. That Gratian received it into the Decretum (Pars. I., Dist. XCIII., c. xij.) is good 
evidence that he considered it part of the Roman discipline. Eusebius(1) gives a letter of Pope Cornelius, 
written about the middle of the third century, which says that at that time there were at Rome forty-four priests, 
seven deacons, and seven subdeacons; and that the number of those in inferior orders was very great. 
Thomassinus says that, "no doubt in this the Roman Church intended to imitate the Apostles who only 
ordained seven deacons. But the other Churches did not keep themselves so scrupulously to that 
number."(2) 

In the acts of the Council of Chalcedon it is noted that the Church of Edessa had fifteen priests and thirty-eight 
deacons. (3) And Justinian, we know, appointed one hundred deacons for the Church of Constantinople. Van 
Espen well points out that while this canon refers to a previous law on the subject, neither the Council itself, 
nor the Greek commentators Balsamon or Zonaras give the least hint as to what that Canon was. 
The Fathers of Neocaesarea base their limiting of the number of deacons to seven in one city upon the 
authority of Holy Scripture, but the sixteenth canon of the Quinisext Council expressly says that in doing so 
they showed they referred to ministers of alms, not to ministers at the divine mysteries, and that St. Stephen 
and the rest were not deacons at all in this latter sense. The reader is referred to this canon, where to defend 

the practice of Constantinople the meaning of the canon we are considering is entirely misrepresented. 

THE COUNCIL OF GANGRA, HISTORICAL NOTE, 
YNODICAL LETTER & CANONS 

si 

THE COUNCIL OF GANGRA. 
A.D. 325-4181. 

Emperor.-CONSTANTINE. 

Elenchus. 

Historical Introduction. Synodal Letter. Canons with the Ancient Epitome and Notes. 

HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION. 

With regard to the Synod of Gangra we know little beside what we learn from its own synodal letter. Three 
great questions naturally arise with regard to it. 

1 . What was its date? 

2. Who was the Eustathius it condemned? 

3. Who was its presiding officer? 

I shall briefly give the reader the salient points with regard to each of these matters. 

1 . With regard to the date, there can be no doubt that it was after Nice and before the First Council of 
Constantinople, that is between 325 and 381 . Socrates(1) seems to place it about 365; but Sozomen(2) 
some twenty years earlier. On the other hand, Remi Ceillier(3) inconsistently with his other statements, 
seems to argue from St. Basil's letters that the true date is later than 376. Still another theory has been urged 
by the Ballerini, resting on the supposition that the Eusebius who presided was Eusebius of Caesarea, and 
they therefore fix the date between 362 and 370. With this Mr. Ffoulkes agrees, and fixes the date, (4) with 
Pagi, at 358, and is bold enough to add, "and this was unquestionably the year of the Council." But in the old 
collections of canons almost without exception, the canons of Gangra precede those of Antioch, and 
Blondel and Tillemont(5) have sustained this, which perhaps I may call the traditional date. 

2. There does not seem to be any reasonable ground to doubt that the person condemned, Eustathius by 
name, was the famous bishop of Sebaste. This may be gathered from both Sozomen(6) and Socrates, (7) 
and is confirmed incidentally by one of St. Basil's epistles, (8) Moreover, Eustathius's See of Sebaste is in 
Armenia, and it is to the bishops of Armenia that the Synod addresses its letter. It would seem in view of all 
this that Bp. Hefele's words are not too severe when he writes, "Under such circumstances the statement of 
Baronius, Du Pin, and others (supported by no single ancient testimony) that another Eustathius, or possibly 
the monk Eutactus, is here meant, deserves no serious consideration, though Tillemont did not express 
himself as opposed to it"(9) 

The story that after his condemnation by the Synod of Gangra Eustathius gave up wearing his peculiar garb 
and other eccentricities, Sozomen only gives as a report.(10) 

3. As to who was the president, it seems tolerably certain that his name was Eusebius-if Sozomen(1 1) 
indeed means it was "Eusebius of Constantinople," it is a blunder, yet he had the name right. In the heading 
of the Synodal letter Eusebius is first named, and as Gangra and Armenia were within the jurisdiction of 
Caesarea, it certainly would seem natural to suppose that the Eusebius named was the Metropolitan of that 
province, but it must be remembered that Eusebius of Cappadocia was not made bishop until 362, four 
years after Mr. Ffoulkes makes him preside at Gangra. The names of thirteen bishops are given in the 
Greek text. 

The Latin translations add other names, such as that of Hosius of Cordova, and some Latin writers have 
asserted that he presided as legate latere from the pope, e.g., Baronius(12) and Binius.(13) Hefele denies 
this and says: "At the time of the Synod of Gangra Hosius was without doubt dead. "(1) But such has not 
been the opinion of the learned, and Cave(2) is of opinion that Hosius's episcopate covered seventy years 
ending with 361 , and (resting on the same opinion) Pagi thinks Hosius may have attended the Synod in 358 
on his way back to Spain, an opinion with which, as I have said, Mr. Ffoulkes agrees. It seems also clear that 
by the beginning of the sixth century the Synod of Gangra was looked upon at Rome as having been held 
under papal authority; Pope Symmachus expressly saying so to the Roman Synod of 504. (Vide Notes on 

Canons vii. and viii.) 

It remains only further to remark that the Libellus Synodicus mentions a certain Dius as president of the 

Synod. The Ballarini(3) suggest that it should be <greek>bios</greek> an abbreviation of Eusebius. Mr. 

Ffoulkes suggests that Dius is "probably Dianius, the predecessor of Eusebius." Lightfoot(4) fixes the 

episcopate of Eusebius Pumphili as between 31 3 and 337; and states that that of Eusebius of Caesarea in 

Cappadocia did not begin until 362, so that the enormous chronological difficulties will be evident to the 

reader. 

As all the proposed new dates involve more or less contradiction, I have given the canons their usual 

position between Neocaesarea and Antioch, and have left the date undetermined. 

SYNODICAL LETTER OF THE COUNCIL OF GANGRA. 

EUSEBIUS, AEIian, Eugenius, Olympius, Bithynicus, Gregory, Philetus, Pappus, Eulalius, Hypatius, 
Proaeresius, Basil and Bassus,(1) assembled in the holy Synod at Gangra, to our most honoured lords and 
fellow-ministers in Armenia wish health in the Lord. 

FORASMUCH as the most Holy Synod of Bishops, assembled on account of certain necessary matters of 
ecclesiastical business in the Church at Gangra, on inquiring also into the matters which concern Eustathius, 
found that many things had been unlawfully done by these very men who are partisans of Eustathius, it was 
compelled to make definitions, which it has hastened to make known to all, for the removal of whatever has 
by him been done amiss. For, from their utter abhorrence of marriage, and from their adoption of the 
proposition that no one living in a state of marriage has any hope towards God, many misguided married 
women have forsaken their husbands, and husbands their wives: then, afterwards, not being able to contain, 
they have fallen into adultery; and so, through such a principle as this, have come to shame. They were 
found, moreover, fomenting separations from the houses of God and of the Church; treating the Church and 
its members with disdain, and establishing separate meetings and assemblies, and different doctrines and 
other things in opposition to the Churches and those things which are done in the Church; wearing strange 
apparel, to the destruction of the common custom of dress; making distributions, among themselves and 
their adherents as saints, of the first-fruits of the Church, which have, from the first, been given to the Church; 
slaves also leaving their masters, and, on account of their own strange apparel, acting insolently towards 
their masters; women, too, disregarding decent custom, and, instead of womanly apparel, wearing men's 
clothes, thinking to be justified because of these; while many of them, under a pretext of piety, cut off the 
growth of hair, which is natural to woman; [and these persons were found] fasting on the Lord's Day, 
despising the sacredness of that free day, but disdaining and eating on the fasts appointed in the Church; 
and certain of them abhor the eating of flesh; neither do they tolerate prayers in the houses of married 
persons, but, on the contrary, despise such prayers when they are made, and often refuse to partake when 
Oblations are offered in the houses of married persons; contemning married presbyters, and refusing to 
touch their ministrations; condemning the services in honour of the Martyrs(2) and those who gather or 
minister therein, and the rich also who do not alienate all their wealth, as having nothing to hope from God; 
and many other things that no one could recount. For every one of them, when he forsook the canon of the 
Church, adopted laws that tended as it were to isolation; for neither was there any common judgment among 
all of them; but whatever any one conceived, that he propounded, to the scandal of the Church, and to his 
own destruction. 

Wherefore, the Holy Synod present in Gangra was compelled, on these accounts, to condemn them, and to 
set forth definitions declaring them to be cast out of the Church; but that, if they should repent and 
anathematize every one of these false doctrines, then they should be capable of restoration. And therefore 
the Holy Synod has particularly set forth everything which they ought to anathematize before they are 
received. And if any one will not submit to the said decrees, he shall be anathematized as a heretic, and 
excommunicated, and cast out of the Church; and it will behove the bishops to observe a like rule in respect 
of all who may be found with them. 

THE CANONS OF THE HOLY FATHERS ASSEMBLED AT GANGRA, WHICH WERE SET 
FORTH AFTER THE COUNCIL OF NICE.(1) 

CANON I. 

IF any one shall condemn marriage, or abominate and condemn a woman who is a believer and devout, 
and sleeps with her own husband, as though she could not enter the Kingdom [of heaven] let him be 
anathema. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON I. 

Anathema to him who disregards legitimate marriage. 

When one considers how deeply the early church was impressed with those passages of Holy Scripture 
which she understood to set forth the superiority of the virgin over the married estate, it ceases to be any 
source of astonishment that some should have run into the error of condemning marriage as sinful. The 
saying of our Blessed Lord with reference to those who had become "eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's 
sake, "(2) and those words of St. Paul "He that giveth his virgin in marriage doeth well, but he that giveth her 
not in marriage doeth better,"(3) together with the striking passage in the Revelation of those that were "not 
defiled with women for they are virgins, "(4) were considered as settling the matter for the new dispensation. 
The earliest writers are filled with the praises of virginity. Its superiority underlies the allegories of the 
Hermes Pastor; (5) St. Justin Martyr speaks of "many men and women of sixty and seventy years of age who 
from their childhood have been the disciples of Christ, and have kept themselves un corrupted, "(6) and from 
that time on there is an ever-swelling tide of praise; the reader must be referred to SS. Cyprian, Athanasius, 
Cyril of Jerusalem, Jerome, Augustine, etc., etc. In fact the Council of Trent (it cannot be denied) only gave 
expression to the view of all Christian antiquity both East and West, when it condemned those who denied 
that "it is more blessed to remain virgin or celibate than to be joined in marriage. "(7) 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Distinc. xxx., c. xii. (Isidore's 
version), and again Dist. xxxi., c. viii. (Dionysius's version). Gratian, however, supposes that the canon is 
directed against the Manichaeans and refers to the marriage of priests, but in both matters he is mistaken, 
as the Roman Correctors and Van Espen point out. 

CANON II. 

IF any one shall condemn him who eats flesh, which is without blood and has not been offered to idols nor 
strangled, and is faithful and devout, as though the man were without hope [of salvation] because of his 
eating, let him be anathema. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON II. 

Anathema also to him who condemns the eating of flesh, except that of a suffocated animal or that offered to 
idols. 

HEFELE. 

This canon also, like the preceding one, is not directed against the Gnostics and Manicheans, but against 
an unenlightened hyper-asceticism, which certainly approaches the Ghostic-Manichean error as to matter 
being Satanic. We further see that, at the time of the Synod of Gangra, the rule of the Apostolic Synod with 
regard to blood and things strangled was still in force. With the Greeks, indeed, it continued always in force 
as their Euchologies still show. Balsamon also, the well-known commentator on the canons of the Middle 
Ages, in his commentary on the sixty-third Apostolic Canon, expressly blames the Latins because they had 
ceased to observe this command. What the Latin Church, however, thought on this subject about the year 
400, is shown by St. Augustine in his work Contra Faustum, where he states that the Apostles had given this 
command in order to unite the heathens and Jews in the one ark of Noah; but that then, when the barrier 
between Jewish and heathen converts had fallen, this command concerning things strangled and blood 
had lost its meaning, and was only observed by few. But still, as late as the eighth century, Pope Gregory 
the Third (731) forbade the eating of blood or things strangled under threat of a penance of forty days. 

No one will pretend that the disciplinary enactments of any council, even though it be one of the undisputed 
Ecumenical Synods, can be of greater and more unchanging force than the decree of that first council, held 
by the Holy Apostles at Jerusalem, and the fact that its decree has been obsolete for centuries in the West 
is proof that even Ecumenical canons may be of only temporary utility and may be repealed by disuser, like 
other laws. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. XXX., c. xiii. 

CANON III. 

IF any one shall teach a slave, under pretext of piety, to despise his master and to run away from his 
service, and not to serve his own master with good-will and all honour, let him be anathema. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON III. 

Anathema to him who persuades a slave to leave his master under pretence of religion. 

VAN ESPEN. 

This canon is framed in accordance with the doctrine of the Apostle, in I. Timothy, chapter six, verse 1 . "Let 
as many servants as are under the yoke count their own masters worthy of all honour, that the name of God 
and his doctrine be not blasphemed." And again the same Apostle teaches his disciple Titus that he should 
"exhort servants to be obedient unto their own masters, and to please them well in all things; not answering 
again; not purloining, but shewing all good fidelity; that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour in all 
things." (Titus ii. 9 and 10.) 

These texts are likewise cited by Balsamon and Zonaras. 

This Canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars. II., Causa XVII., Q. IV., c. xxxvij. in 
the version of Isidore, and again in c. xxxviij. from the collections of Martin Bracarensis (so says Van Espen) 
and assigned to a council of Pope Martin, Canon xlvii. 

CANON IV. 

IF any one shall maintain, concerning a married presbyter, that is not lawful to partake of the oblation when 
he offers it, let him be anathema. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON IV. 

Anathema to him who hesitates to receive communion from presbyters joined in matrimony. 

HEFELE. 

As is well known, the ancient Church, as now the Greek Church, allowed those clergy who married before 
their ordination to continue to live in matrimony. Compare what was said above in the history of the Council 
of Nicaea, in connection with Paphnutius, concerning the celibacy and marriage of priests in the ancient 
Church. Accordingly this canon speaks of those clergy who have wives and live in wedlock; and Baronius, 
Binius, and Mitter-Muller gave themselves useless trouble in trying to interpret it as only protecting those 
clergy who, though married, have since their ordination ceased to cohabit with their wives. 
The so-called Codex Ecclesioe Romanoe published by Quesnel, which, however, as was shown by the 
Ballerini,(1) is of Gallican and not Roman origin, has not this canon, and consequently it only mentions 
nineteen canons of Gangra. 

CANON V. 

IF any one shall teach that the house of God and the assemblies held therein are to be despised, let him be 
anathema. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON V. 

Whoso styles the house of God contemptible, let him be anathema. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. xxx., ox. The 
commentators find nothing to say upon the canon, and in fact the despising of the worship of God's true 
church is and always has been so common a sin, that it hardly calls for comment; no one will forget that the 
Prophet Malachi complains how in his days there were those who deemed "the table of the Lord 
contemptible" and said of his worship "what a weariness is it." (Mai. i., 7 and 13.) 

CANON VI. 

IF any one shall hold private assemblies outside of the Church, and, despising the canons, shall presume to 
perform ecclesiastical acts, the presbyter with the consent of the bishop refusing his permission, let him be 
anathema. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON VI. 

Whoso privately gathers a religious meeting let him be anathema. 

HEFELE. 

Both these canons, [V. and VI.] forbid the existence of conventicles, and conventicle services. It already 
appears from the second article of the Synodal Letter of Gangra, that the Eustathians, through spiritual pride, 
separated themselves from the rest of the congregation, as being the pure and holy, avoided the public 
worship, and held private services of their own. The ninth, tenth, and eleventh articles of the Synodal Letter 
give us to understand that the Eustathians especially avoided the public services, when married clergy 
officiated. We might possibly conclude, from the words of the sixth canon: <greek>mh</greek> 
<greek>sunontos</greek> <greek>tou</greek> <greek>presbuperou</greek> <greek>kata</greek> 
<greek>gnwmhn</greek> <greek>tou</greek> <greek>episkopou</greek>, that no priest performed any 
part in their private services; but it is more probable that the Eustathians, who did not reject the priesthood 
as such, but only abhorred the married clergy, had their own unmarried clergy, and that these officiated at 
their separate services. And the above-mentioned words of the canon do not the least contradict this 
supposition, for the very addition of the words <greek>kata</greek> <greek>gnwmhn</greek> 
<greek>tou</greek> <greek>episkopou</greek> indicate that the sectarian priests who performed the 
services of the Eustathians had received no permission to do so from the bishop of the place. Thus did the 
Greek commentators, Balsamon, etc., and likewise Van Espen, interpret this canon. 

The meaning of this canon is very obscure. The Latin reads non conveniente presbytero, de episcopi 
sententia; and Lambert translates "without the presence of a priest, with consent of the bishop." Hammond 
differs from this and renders thus, "without the concurrence of the presbyter and the consent of the bishop." I 
have translated literally and left the obscurity of the original. 

CANON VII. 

IF any one shall presume to take the fruits offered to the Church, or to give them out of the Church, without the 
consent of the bishop, or of the person charged with such things, and shall refuse to act according to his 
judgment, let him be anathema. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON VII. 

Whoso performs church acts contrary to the will of a bishop or of a presbyter, let him be anathema. 

CANON VIM. 

IF anyone, except the bishop or the person appointed for the stewardship of benefactions, shall either give 
or receive the revenue, let both the giver and the receiver be anathema. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON VIM. 

Whoso gives or receives offered fruits, except the bishop and the economist appointed to disburse 
charities, both he that gives, and he that receives shall be anathema. 

POPE SYMMACHUS. 

(In his Address to the Synod of Rome 504. Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, torn, iv., col. 1373.) 

In the canons framed by Apostolic authority [i.e., by the authority of the Apostolic See of Rome, cf. Ffoulkes, 
Smith and Cheetham, Diet. Christ. Antiq., art. Gangra] we find it written as follows concerning the offerings of 
fruits which are due to the clergy of the church, and concerning those things which are offered for the use of 
the poor; "If anyone shall presume, etc." [Canon VII.] And again at the same council, "If anyone except the 
bishop, etc." [Canon VIII.] And truly it is a crime and a great sacrilege for those whose duty it is chiefly to 
guard it, that is for Christians and God-fearing men and above all for princes and rulers of this world, to 
transfer and convert to other uses the wealth which has been bestowed or left by will to the venerable 
Church for the remedy of their sins, or for the health and repose of their souls. 

Moreover, whosoever shall have no care for these, and contrary to these canons, shall seek for, accept, or 
hold, or shall unjustly defend and retain the treasures given to the Church unless he quickly repent himself 
shall be stricken with that anathema with which an angry God smites souls; and to him that accepts, or gives, 
or possesses let there be anathema, and the constant accompaniment of the appointed penalty. For he can 
have no defence to offer before the tribunal of Christ, who nefariously without any regard to religion has 
scattered the substance left by pious souls for the poor. 

CANON IX. 

IF any one shall remain virgin, or observe continence, abstaining from marriage because he abhors it, and 
not on account of the beauty and holiness of virginity itself, let him be anathema. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON IX. 

Whoso preserves virginity not on account of its beauty but because he abhors marriage, let him be 
anathema. 

The lesson taught by this canon and that which follows is that the practice of even the highest Christian 
virtues, such as the preservation of virginity, if it does not spring from a worthy motive is only deserving of 
execration. 

ZONARAS. 

Virginity is most beautiful of all, and continence is likewise beautiful, but only if we follow them for their own 
sake and because of the sanctification which comes from them. But should anyone embrace virginity, 
because he detests marriage as impure, and keep himself chaste, and abstains from commerce with 
women and marriage, because he thinks that they are in themselves wicked, he is subjected by this canon 
to the penalty of anathema. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. xxx., c. v., and again Dist. 
xxxi., c. ix. 

CANON X. 

IF any one of those who are living a virgin life for the Lord's sake shall treat arrogantly the married, let him be 
anathema. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON X. 

Whoso treats arrogantly those joined in matrimony, let him be anathema. 

On this point the fathers had spoken long before, I cite two as examples. 

ST. CLEMENT. 

(Epist. I., 38, Lightfoot's translation.) 

So in our case let the whole body be saved in Christ Jesus, and let each man be subject unto his neighbour, 
according as also he was appointed with his special grace. Let not the strong neglect the weak; and let the 
weak respect the strong. Let the rich rain-later aid to the poor and let the poor give; thanks to God, because 
he hath given him one through whom his wants may be supplied. Let the wise display his wisdom, not in 
words, but in good works. He that is lowly in mind, let him not bear testimony to himself, but leave testimony 
to be borne to him by his neighbour. He that is pure in the flesh, let him be so,(1) and not boast, knowing that 
it is Another who bestoweth his continence upon him. Let us consider, brethren, of what matter we were 
made; who and what manner of beings we were, when we came into the world; from what a sepulchre and 
what darkness he that moulded and created us brought us into his world, having prepared his benefits 
aforehand ere ever we were born. Seeing therefore that we have all these things from him, we ought in all 
things to give thanks to him, to whom be the glory for ever and ever. Amen. 

ST. IGNATIUS. 

(Epist. ad Polyc. 5, Lightfoot's translation.) 

Flee evil arts, or rather hold thou discourse about these, Tell my sisters to love the Lord and to be content 
with their husbands in flesh and in spirit. In like manner also charge my brothers in the name of Jesus Christ 
to love their wives, as the Lord loved the Church. If anyone is able to abide in chastity to the honour of the 
flesh of the Lord, let him so abide without boasting. If he boast, he is lost; and if it be known beyond the 
bishop, he is polluted. It becometh men and women, too, when they marry to unite themselves with the 
consent of the bishop, that the marriage may be after the Lord and not after concupiscence. Let all things be 
done to the honour of God. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. XXX., c. iv. 

CANON XI. 

IF anyone shall despise those who out of faith make love-feasts and invite the brethren in honour of the Lord, 
and is not willing to accept these invitations because he despises what is done, let him be anathema. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XI. 

Whoso spurns those who invite to the agape, and who when invited will not communicate with these, let him 

be anathema. 

There are few subjects upon which there has been more difference of opinion than upon the history and 

significance of the Agape or Love-feasts of the Early Church. To cite here any writers would only mislead 

the reader, I shall therefore merely state the main outline of the discussion and leave every man to study the 

matter for himself. 

All agree that these feasts are referred to by St. Jude in his Epistle, and, although Dean Plumptre has 

denied it (Smith and Cheetham, Diet., Christ. Antiq., S.V. Agapae), most writers add St. Paul in the First 

Epistle to the Corinthians xi. Estius (in loc.) argues with great cogency that the expression "Lord's Supper" in 

Holy Scripture never means the Holy Eucharist, but the love-feast, and in this view he has been followed by 

many moderns, but the prevalent opinion has been the opposite. 

There is also much discussion as to the order in which the Agapae and the celebrations of the Holy 

Sacrament were related, some holding that the love-feast preceded others that it followed the Divine 

Mysteries. There seems no doubt that in early times the two became separated, the Holy Sacrament being 

celebrated in the morning and the Agapae in the evening. 

All agree that these feasts were at first copies of the religious feasts common to the Jews and to the heathen 

world, and that soon abuses of one sort or another came in, so that they fell into ill repute and were finally 

prohibited at the Council in Trullo. This canon of Gangra is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's 

Decretum, Pars I., Dist. xlii., c. i. 

Van Espen is of opinion that the agapae of our canon have no real connexion with the religious feasts of 

earlier days, but were merely meals provided by the rich for the poor, and with this view Hefele agrees. But 

the matter is by no means plain. In fact at every point we are met with difficulties and uncertainties. 

There would seem to be little doubt that the "pain beni" of the French Church, and the "Antidoron" of the 

Eastern Church are remains of the ancient Agapae. 

The meaning, however, of this canon is plain enough, to wit, people must not despise, out of a false 

asceticism, feasts made for the poor by those of the faithful who are rich and liberal. (1) 

CANON XII. 

IF any one, under pretence of asceticism, should wear a periboloeum and, as if this gave him 
righteousness, shall despise those who with piety wear the berus and use other common and customary 
dress, let him be anathema. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XII. 

Whoso despises those who wear beruses, let him be anathema. 

HEFELE. 

The <greek>bhroi</greek> (lacernoe) were the common upper garments worn by men over the tunic; but 
the <greek>peribolaia</greek> were rough mantles worn by philosophers to show their contempt for all 
luxury. Socrates (H. E., ii. 43) and the Synodal Letter of Gangra in its third article say that Eustathius of 
Sebaste wore the philosopher's mantle. But this canon in no way absolutely rejects a special dress for 
monks, for it is not the distinctive dress but the proud and superstitious over-estimation of its worth which the 
Synod here blames. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. XXX., c. XV. 

CANON XIII. 

IF any woman, under pretence of asceticism, shall change her apparel and, instead of a woman's 
accustomed clothing, shall put on that of a man, let her be anathema. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XIII. 

Whatever women wear men's clothes, anathema to them. 

HEFELE. 

The synodal letter in its sixth article also speaks of this. Exchange of dress, or the adoption by one sex of 
the dress of the other, was forbidden in the Pentateuch (Deut. xxii., 5), and was therefore most strictly 
interdicted by the whole ancient Church. Such change of attire was formerly adopted mainly for theatrical 
purposes, or from effeminacy, wantonness, the furtherance of unchastity, or the like. The Eustathians, from 
quite opposite and hyper-ascetical reasons, had recommended women to assume male, that is probably 
monk's attire, in order to show that for them, as the holy ones, there was no longer any distinction of sex; but 
the Church, also from ascetical reasons, forbade this change of attire, especially when joined to superstition 
and puritanical pride. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. xxx., c. vi. 

CANON XIV. 

IF any woman shall forsake her husband, and resolve to depart from him because she abhors marriage, let 
her be anathema. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XIV. 

Women who keep away from their husbands because they abominate marriage, anathema to them. 

HEFELE. 

This canon cannot in any way be employed in opposition to the practice of the Catholic Church. For though 
the Church allows one of a married couple, with the consent of the other, to give up matrimonial intercourse, 
and to enter the clerical order or the cloister, still this is not, as is the case with the Eustathians, the result of a 
false dogmatic theory, but takes place with a full recognition of the sanctity of marriage. 

VAN ESPEN. 

It would seem that the Eustathians chiefly disapproved of the use of marriage, and under pretext of 
preserving continence induced married women to abstain from its use as from something unlawful, and to 
leave their husbands, separating from them so far as the bed was concerned; and so the Greek interpreters 
understand this canon; for the Eustathians were never accused of persuading anyone to dissolve a 
marriage a vinculo. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist, xxx., c. Hi., but in Isidore's 
version, which misses the sense by implying that a divorce a vinculo is intended. The Roman Correctors do 
not note this error. 

CANON XV. 

IF anyone shall forsake his own children and shall not nurture them, nor so far as in him lies, rear them in 
becoming piety, but shall neglect them, under pretence of asceticism, let him be anathema. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XV. 

Whosoever they be that desert their children and do not instruct them in the fear of God let them be 
anathema. 

VAN ESPEN. 

The fathers of this Synod here teach that it is the office and duty of parents to provide for the bodily care of 
their children, and also, as far as in them lies, to mould them to the practice of piety. And this care for their 
children is to be preferred by parents to any private exercises of religion. In this connexion should be read 
the letter of St. Francis de Sales. (Ep. xxxii, Lib. 4.) 

It may perhaps be noted that this canon has not infrequently been violated by those who are accepted as 
Saints in the Church. 

This canon is found, in Isidore's version, in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. xxx., 
c. xiv. 

CANON XVI. 

IF, under any pretence of piety, any children shall forsake their parents, particularly [if the parents are] 
believers, and shall withhold becoming reverence from their parents, on the plea that they honour piety 
more than them, let them be anathema. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME or CANON XVI. 

If children leave their parents who are of the faithful let them be anathema. 

Zonaras notes that the use of the word "particularly" shews that the obligation is universal. The 
commentators all refer here to St. Matthew xv., where our Lord speaks of the subterfuge by which the Jews 
under pretext of piety defrauded their parents and made the law of God of none effect. 

VAN ESPEN. 

Of the last clause this is the meaning; that according to the Eustathians "piety towards God" or "divine 
worship," or rather its pretence, should be preferred to the honour and reverence due to parents. 

This canon, in Isidore's version, is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. xxx., 
c.i. The Roman correctors advertize the reader that the version of Dionysius Exiguus "is much nearer to the 
original Greek, although not altogether so." 

CANON XVII. 

IF any woman from pretended asceticism shall cut off her hair, which God gave her as the reminder of her 
subjection, thus annulling as it were the ordinance of subjection, let her be anathema. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XVII. 

Whatever women shave their hair off, pretending to do so out of reverence for God, let them be anathema. 

HEFELE. 

The apostle Paul, in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, xi. 10, represents the long hair of women, which is 
given them as a natural veil, as a token of their subjection to man. We learn from the Synod of Gangra, that 
as many Eustathian women renounced this subjection, and left their husbands, so, as this canon says, they 
also did away with their long hair, which was the outward token of this subjection. An old proverb says: duo 
si faciunt idem, non est idem. In the Catholic Church also, when women and girls enter the cloister, they have 
their hair cut off, but from quite other reasons than those of the Eustathian women. The former give up their 
hair, because it has gradually become the custom to consider the long hair of women as a special beauty, 
as their greatest ornament; but the Eustathians, like the ancient Church in general, regarded long hair as the 
token of subjection to the husband, and, because they renounced marriage and forsook their husbands, 
they cut it off. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. xxx., c. ij. 

CANON XVIII. 

IF any one, under pretence of asceticism, shall fast on Sunday, let him be anathema. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XVIII. 

Whoso fasts on the Lord's day or on the Sabbath let him be anathema. 

ZONARAS. 

Eustathius appointed the Lord's day as a fast, whereas, because Christ rose from the grave and delivered 
human nature from sin on that day, we should spend it in offering joyous thanks to God. But fasting carries 
with it the idea of grief and sorrow. For this reason those who fast on Sunday are subjected to the 
punishment of anathema. 

BALSAMON. 

By many canons we are warned against fasting or grieving on the festal and joyous Lord's day, in 
remembrance of the resurrection of the Lord; but that we should celebrate it and offer thanks to God, that we 
be raised from the fall of sin. But this canon smites the Eustathians with anathema because they taught that 
the Lord's days should be fasted. Canon LXIV. of the Apostolic Canons cuts off such of the laity as shall so 
fast, and deposes such of the clergy. See also Canon LV. of the Council in Trullo. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. xxx., c. vij. 

CANON XIX. 

IF any of the ascetics, without bodily necessity, shall behave with insolence and disregard the fasts 
commonly prescribed and observed by the Church, because of his perfect understanding in the matter, let 
him be anathema. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME or CANON XIX. 

Whoso neglects the fasts of the Church, let him be anathema. 

I have followed Hefele's translation of the last clause, with which Van Espen seems to agree, as well as 
Zonaras. But Hardouin and Mansi take an entirely different view and translate "if the Eustathian deliberately 
rejects the Church fasts." Zonoras and Balsamon both refer to the LXIXth of the Apostolical Canons as being 
the law the Eustathians violated. Balsamon suggests that the Eustathians shared the error of the Bogomiles 
on the subject of fasting, but I see no reason to think that this was the case, Eustathius's action seems rather 
to be attributable to pride, and a desire to be different and original, "I thank thee that I am not as other men 
are," (as Van Espen points out). All that Socrates says (H. E. II., xliii.) is that "he commanded that the 
prescribed fasts should be neglected, and that the Lord's days should be fasted." 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. xxx., c. viii., in an imperfect 
translation but not that of either Isidore or Dionysius. 

CANON XX. 

IF any one shall, from a presumptuous disposition, condemn and abhor the assemblies [in honour] of the 
martyrs, or the services performed there, and the commemoration of them, let him be anathema. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XX. 

Whoever thinks lightly of the meetings in honour of the holy martyrs, let him be anathema. 

HEFELE. 

Van Espen is of opinion that the Eustathians had generally rejected the common service as only fit for the 
less perfect, and that the martyr chapels are only mentioned here, because in old times service was usually 
held there. According to this view, no especial weight need be attached to the expression. But this canon 
plainly speaks of a disrespect shown by the Eustathians to the martyrs. Compare the twelfth article of the 
Synodal Letter. Fuchs thought that, as the Eustathians resembled the Aerians, who rejected the service for 
the dead, the same views might probably be ascribed to the Eustathians. But, in the first place, the Aerians 
are to be regarded rather as opposed than related in opinion to the Eustathians, being lax in contrast to 
these ultra-rigorists. Besides which, Epiphanius only says that they rejected prayer for the salvation of the 
souls of the departed, but not that they did not honour the martyrs; and there is surely a great difference 
between a feast in honour of a saint, and a requiem for the good of a departed soul. Why, however, the 
Eustathians rejected the veneration of martyrs is nowhere stated; perhaps because they considered 
themselves as saints, <greek>kaW</greek> <greek>exokhn</greek>, exalted above the martyrs, who were 
for the most part only ordinary Christians, and many of whom had lived in marriage, while according to 
Eustathian views no married person could be saved, or consequently could be an object of veneration. 

Lastly, it must be observed that the first meaning of <greek>sunaxis</greek>, is an assembly for divine 
service, or the service itself; but here it seems to be taken to mean <greek>sunagwgh</greek> the place of 
worship, so that the <greek>sunaxeis</greek> <greek>twn</greek> <greek>marturwn</greek> seems to be 
identical with martyria, and different from the <greek>leitourgiai</greek> held in them, of which the latter 
words of the canon speak. 

EPILOGUE. 

THESE things we write, not to cut off those who wish to lead in the Church of God an ascetic life, according to 
the Scriptures; but those who carry the pretence of asceticism to superciliousness; both exalting themselves 
above those who live more simply, and introducing novelties contrary to the Scriptures and the 
ecclesiastical Canons. We do, assuredly, admire virginity accompanied by humility; and we have regard 
for continence, accompanied by godliness and gravity; and we praise the leaving of worldly occupations, 
[when it is made] with lowliness of mind; [but at the same time] we honour the holy companionship of 
marriage, and we do not contemn wealth enjoyed with uprightness and beneficence; and we commend 
plainness and frugality in apparel, [which is worn] only from attention, [and that] not over-fastidious, to the 
body; but dissolute and effeminate excess in dress we eschew; and we reverence the houses of God and 
embrace the assemblies held therein as holy and helpful, not confining religion within the houses, but 
reverencing every place built in the name of God; and we approve of gathering together in the Church itself 
for the common profit; and we bless the exceeding charities done by the brethren to the poor, according to 
the traditions of the Church; and, to sum up in a word, we wish that all things which have been delivered by 
the Holy Scriptures and the Apostolical traditions, may be observed in the Church. 

NOTES. 

This is lacking in the ancient epitome; and while it occurs after Canon XX. in the versions of Dionysius 
Exiguus and of Isidore Mercator, it is not numbered as a canon. Moreover in John of Antioch's Collection 
and in Photius's Nomocanon, the number of canons is said to be 20. Only the Greek Scholiasts number it as 
Canon XXI., but its genuineness is unquestioned. 

It is curiously enough found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, divided into two canons! Gratian's Decretum, Pars 
I., Dist. XXX., c. xvj., and Dist. xli., c. v. 

VAN ESPEN. 

The Fathers of Gangra recognize not only the Holy Scriptures, but also the Apostolical traditions for the rule 
of morals. 

From this [canon] it is by no means doubtful that the fathers of this Synod considered that the Eustathians 
had violated some already existing ecclesiastical canons. Beveridge is of opinion that these are those 
commonly called the Canons of the Apostles (Synod. I. 5). Nor is this unlikely to be true, for there can be no 
doubt that the doctrines of the Eustathians condemned by this synod are directly opposed to those very 
"Canons of the Apostles"; and no small argument is drawn for the authority and antiquity of the Canons of the 
Apostles from the large number of Eustathian teachings found to be therein condemned, as Beveridge has 
pointed out and as can easily be seen by comparing the two. 

THE SYNOD OF ANTIOCH IN ENCAENIIS, SYNODICAL 
LETTER & CANONS 

THE SYNOD OF ANTIOCH IN ENCAENIIS. 
A.D. 341. 

Elenchus. 

The Synodal Letter. The Canons, with the Ancient Epitome and Notes. 

THE SYNODAL LETTER. 

(Found in Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. II., col. 559. It really is no part the canons, but I have placed it 
here, because, as Labbe notes, "it is usually prefixed to the canons in the Greek.") 

The holy and most peaceful Synod which has been gathered together in Antioch from the provinces of 
Coele-Syria, Phoenicia, Palestine, Arabia, Mesopotamia, Cilicia, and lsauria;(1) to our like-minded and holy 
fellow Ministers in every Province, health in the Lord. 

The grace and truth of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ hath regarded the holy Church of the Antiochians, 
and, by joining it together with unity of mind and concord and the Spirit of Peace, hath likewise bettered 
many other things; and in them all this betterment is wrought by the assistance of the holy and peace-giving 
Spirit. Wherefore, that which after much examination and investigation, was unanimously agreed upon by us 
bishops, who coming out of various Provinces have met together in Antioch, we have now brought to your 
knowledge; trusting in the grace of Christ and in the Holy Spirit of Peace, that ye also will agree with us and 
stand by us as far as in you lies, striving with us in prayers, and being even more united with us, following the 
Holy Spirit, uniting in our definitions, and decreeing the same things as we; ye, in the concord which 
proceedeth of the Holy Spirit, sealing and confirming what has been determined. 
Now the Canons of the Church which have been settled are hereto appended. 

THE CANONS OF THE BLESSED AND HOLY FATHERS ASSEMBLED AT ANTIOCH IN 
SYRIA. (1) 

CANON I. 

WHOSOEVER, shall presume to set aside the decree of the holy and great Synod which was assembled at 
Nice in the presence of the pious Emperor Constantine, beloved of God, concerning the holy and salutary 
feast of Easter; if they shall obstinately persist in opposing what was [then] rightly ordained, let them be 
excommunicated and cast out of the Church; this is said concerning the laity. But if any one of those who 
preside in the Church, whether he be bishop, presbyter, or deacon, shall presume, after this decree, to 
exercise his own private judgment to the subversion of the people and to the disturbance of the churches, 
by observing Easter [at the same time] with the Jews, the holy Synod decrees that he shall thenceforth be 
an alien from the Church, as one who not only heaps sins upon himself, but who is also the cause of 
destruction and subversion to many; and it deposes not only such persons themselves from their ministry, 
but those also who after their deposition shall presume to communicate with them. And the deposed shall 
be deprived even of that external honour, of which the holy Canon and God's priesthood partake. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON I. 

Whoso endeavours to change the lawful tradition of Easter, if he be a layman let him be excommunicated, 
but if a cleric let him be cast out of the Church. 

The connexion between these canons of Antioch and the Apostolical Canons is so evident and so intimate 

that I shall note it, in each case, for the convenience of the student. 

Zonaras and Balsamon both point out that from this first canon it is evident that the Council of Nice did take 

action upon the Paschal question, and in a form well known to the Church. 

VAN ESPEN. 

From this canon it appears that the fathers did not deem laymen deserving of excommunication who merely 

broke the decrees, but only those who "obstinately persist in opposing the decrees sanctioned and 

received by the Church; for by their refusal to obey they are attempting to overturn." And this being the case, 

why should such not be repelled or cast forth from the Church as rebels? 

Finally this Canon proves that not only bishops and presbyters, but also deacons were reckoned among 

them who, "preside in the Church." An argument in favour of the opinion that the deacons of that time were 

entrusted with hierarchical functions. 

It is curious that as a matter of fact the entire clergy and people of the West fell under the anathema of this 

canon in 1825, when they observed Easter on the same day as the Jews. This was owing to the adoption of 

the Gregorian calendar, and this misfortune while that calendar is followed it is almost impossible to 

prevent.(2) 

Compare Apostolic Canons; Canon VII. 

CANON II. 

ALL who enter the church of God and hear the Holy Scriptures, but do not communicate with the people in 
prayers, or who turn away, by reason of some disorder, from the holy partaking of the Eucharist, are to be 
cast out of the Church, until, after they shall have made confession, and having brought forth the fruits of 
penance, and made earnest entreaty, they shall have obtained forgiveness; and it is unlawful to 
communicate with excommunicated persons, or to assemble in private houses and pray with those who do 
not pray in the Church; or to receive in one Church those who do not assemble with another Church. And, if 
any one of the bishops, presbyters, or deacons, or any one in the Canon shall be found communicating with 
excommunicated persons, let him also be excommunicated, as one who brings confusion on the order of 
the Church. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON II. 

Whoso comes to church, and attentively hears the holy Scriptures, and then despises, goes forth from, and 
turns his back upon the Communion, let him be cast out, until after having brought forth fruits of penance, he 
shall be indulged. And who-so communicates with one excommunicated, shall be excommunicated, and 
whoso prays with him who prays not with the Church is guilty, and even whoso receives him who does not 
attend the services of the Church is not without guilt. 

BALSAMON. 

In the Eighth and Ninth canons of the Apostles it is set forth how those are to be punished who will not wait for 
the prayers, and the holy Communion: So, too, in the Tenth canon provision is made with respect to those 
who communicate with the excommunicated. In pursuance of this the present canon provides that they are to 
be cut off who come to church and do not wait for the prayer, and through disorder 
[?<greek>ataxian</greek>(1) will not receive the holy Communion; for such are to be cast out until with 
confession they shew forth worthy penance. 

ZONARAS. 

In this canon the Fathers refer to such as go to church but will not tarry to the prayer nor receive holy 
Communion, held back by some perversity or license, that is to say without any just cause, but petulantly, 
and by reason of some disorder <greek>ataxian</greek>; these are forbidden to be expelled from the 
Church, that is to say cut off from the congregation of the faithful. But the Fathers call it a turning away from, 
not a hatred of the divine Communion, which holds them back from communion; a certain kind of flight from it, 
brought about perchance by reverence and lowliness of mind. Those who object to communicate by 
reason of hatred or disgust, such must be punished not with mere separation, but by an altogether absolute 
excommunication, and be cursed with anathema. 

It need hardly be remarked that this canon has no reference to such of the faithful as tarry to the end of the 
service and yet do not partake of the holy sacrament, being held back by some good reason, recognized 
by the Church as such. It will be remembered that the highest grade of Penitents did this habitually, and that it 
was looked upon as a great privilege to be allowed to be present when the Divine Mysteries were 
performed, even though those assisting as spectators might not be partakers of them. What this canon 
condemns is leaving the Church before the service of the Holy Eucharist is done; this much is clear, the 
difficulty is to understand just why these particular people, against whom the canon is directed, did so. This 
canon should be compared with the Apostolic canons viii., ix., x., xj. xij. and xiij. 

CANON III. 

IF any presbyter or deacon, or any one whatever belonging to the priesthood, shall forsake his own parish, 
and shall depart, and, having wholly changed his residence, shall set himself to remain for a long time in 
another parish, let him no longer officiate; especially if his own bishop shall summon and urge him to return 
to his own parish and he shah disobey. And if he persist in his disorder, let him be wholly deposed from his 
ministry, so that no further room be left for his restoration. And if another bishop shall receive a man 
deposed for this cause, let him be punished by the Common Synod as one who nullifies the ecclesiastical 
laws. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON III. 

If any cleric leaves his own parish and goes off to another, travelling here and there, and stays for a long 
time in that other, let him not offer the sacrifice (<greek>leitourgeitw</greek>), especially if he do not return 
when called by his own bishop. But if he perseveres in his insolence let him be deposed, neither afterwards 
let him have any flower to return. And if any bishop shall receive him thus deposed, he shall be punished by 
the Common Synod for breach of the ecclesiastical laws. 

Compare with Canons of the Apostles xv. and xvi. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa VII., Quaest. I., Can. 
xxiv.(1) 

CANON IV. 

IF any bishop who has been deposed by a synod, or any presbyter or deacon who has been deposed by 
his bishop shall presume to execute any part of the ministry, whether it be a bishop according to his former 
custom, or a presbyter, or a deacon, he shall no longer have any prospect of restoration in another Synod; 
nor any opportunity of making his defence; but they who communicate with him shall all be cast out of the 
Church, and particularly if they have presumed to communicate with the persons aforementioned, knowing 
the sentence pronounced against them. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON IV. 

If a bishop deposed by a synod shall dare to celebrate the liturgy, let him have no chance of return. 

This canon derives its chief interest from the fact that it is usually considered to have been adopted at the 
instigation of the party opposed to St. Athanasius and that afterwards it was used against St. Chrysostom. 
But while such may have been the secret reason why some voted for it and others prized it, it must be 
remembered that its provision is identical with that of the Apostolic Canons, and that it was read at the 
Council of Chalcedon as Canon eighty-three. Remi Ceillier (Histoire GenHistoire Gnoeral des Autheurs, p. 
659) tries to prove that this is not the canon which St. Chrysostom and his friends rejected, but Hefele thinks 
his position "altogether untenable" (Hist, of the Councils, Vol. II., p. (62, n. 1), and refers to Tillemont 
(Memories, p. 329, Sur les Arians, and Fuchs' Bib. der Kirchenversammlungen, P. II., p. 59.(2)) 

Compare Apostolic Canon xxviij. 

This canon is found twice in the Juris Corpus Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa XL, Quaest. III., 
Can. vj., and Can. vij. in the version of Martin Bracarensis. This version is very interesting as expanding the 
phrase "to execute any part of the ministry" into "to make the oblation, or to perform the morning or evening 
sacrifice as though he were in office just as before, etc." 

CANON V. 

IF any presbyter or deacon, despising this own bishop, has separated himself from the Church, and 
gathered a private assembly, and set up an altar; and if, when summoned by Iris bishop, he shall refuse to 
be persuaded and will not obey, even though he summon him a first and a second time, let such an one be 
wholly deposed and have no further remedy, neither be capable of regaining his rank. And if he persist in 
troubling and disturbing the Church, let him be corrected, as a seditious person, by the civil power. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON V. 

Any presbyter or deacon who spurns his bishop, and withdraws from him, and sets up another altar, if after 
being thrice called by the bishop, he shall persist in his arrogancy, let him be deposed and be deprived of 
all hope of restoration. 

It will be noted that the Ancient Epitome mentions three warnings, and the canon only two. The epitome in 
this evidently follows the Apostolical Canon, number thirty-one. It is somewhat curious that Aristenus in 
commenting on this canon does not note the discrepancy. 

VAN ESPEN. 

This canon, together with the preceding was read from the Code of Canons at the Council of Chalcedon, at 
the Fourth Session in connexion with the ease of Carosus and Dorothoeus, and of other monks who 
adhered to them. And a sentence in accordance with them was conceived in these words against those 
who would not obey the Council in the condemnation of Eutyches, "Let them know that they together with the 
monks who are with them, are deprived of grade, and of all dignity, and of communion, as well as he, so that 
they cease to preside over their monasteries: and if they attempt to escape, this holy and universal great 
council decrees the same punishment shall attach to them, that is to say the external authority, according to 
the divine and holy laws of the Fathers, shall carry out the sentence passed against the contumacious." 
This canon shews that monks and clerics who were rebellious were sometimes coerced by the Secular 
Power, when the ecclesiastical power was not sufficient to coerce them, and hence it was that the secular 
arm was called in. 

Compare with this Apostolic Canon XXXI. 

The last clause of this canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II. Causa XL, 
Quaest VIM. Can. vii. (The Latin however for "by the civil power" is, as is pointed out by the Roman 
Correctors, per forasticam potestatem or per forasticam potestatem. 

CANON VI. 

IF any one has been excommunicated by his own bishop, let him not be received by others until he has 
either been restored by his own bishop, or until, when a synod is held, he shall have appeared and made 
his defence, and, having convinced the synod, shall have received a different sentence. And let this decree 
apply to the laity, and to presbyters and deacons, and all who are enrolled in the clergy-list. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON VI. 

Compare Apostolic Canons numbers XII. and XXXII. 

The sentence of the greater synod upon a clerk excommunicated by his bishop, whether of acquittal or 

condemnation, shall stand. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa XL, Quaest. Ill, Can. ij. 

CANON VII. 

No stranger shall be received without letters pacifical. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON VII. 

A traveller having no letter pacific with him is... 

Compare the Apostolic Canon number XXXIII For a discussion of the Letters styled pacifici, see notes on 
next canon. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. IxxL, c. ix. in Isidore's 
version. The Roman Corectors the Apostolic note that Dionysius must have had a different reading from the 
Greek we know. 

CANON VIM. 

LET not country presbyters give letters canonical, or let them send such letters only to the neighbouring 
bishops. But the chorepiscopi of good report may give letters pacifical. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON VIM. 

A country presbyter is not to give canonical letters, or[at most> only to a neighbouring bishop. 

These "letters canonical" were called in the West letters "formatoe," and no greater proof of the great 
influence they had in the early days of the Church in binding the faithful together can be found than the fact 
that Julian the Apostate made an attempt to introduce something similar among the pagans of his empire. 
"Commendatory letters" (<greek>epistolai</greek> <greek>sustatikai</greek>) are spoken of by St. Paul in 
2 Cor. iii. 1, and the reader will find some interesting remarks on this and cognate subjects in J. J. Blunt's, 
The Christian Church during the first three Centuries (Chapter II). 

By means of these letters even the lay people found hospitality and care in every part of the world, and it 
was thrown up against the Donatists as a mark of their being schismatics that their canonical letters were 
good only among themselves. 

Pseudo-Isidore informs us that it was stated at the Council of Chalcedon by Atticus, bishop of 
Constantinople, that it was agreed at the Council of Nice that all such letters should be marked II. Y. A. II. (i.e. 
Father, Son, Holy Spirit), and it is asserted (Herzog, Real-Encyk., s. v. Literae Format, Real-Encyk., s. v. 
Literae Formatae) that this form is found in German documents of the sixth century. 

As will be seen among the Canons of Chalcedon, the old name, Letters Commendatory, is continued, but in 
this canon and in the 41st of Laodicea the expression "Canonical Letters" is used. In the West, at least, 
these letters received the episcopal seal of the diocese to avoid all possibility of imposture. Dean Plumptre 
(whom I am following very closely in this note) believes the earliest evidence of this use of the diocesan 
seal is in Augustine (Epist. lix. al. ccxvij.)He also refers to Ducange, s. v. Formatae. 
As these letters admitted their bearers to communion they were sometimes called "Communion letters" 
(<greek>koinwnikai</greek>), and are so described by St. Cyril of Alexandria; and by the Council of Elvira 
(canon xxv.), and by St. Augustine (Epist. xliii. al. clxii). 

The "Letters Pacifical" appear to have been of an eleemosynary character, so that the bearers of them 
obtained bodily help. Chalcedon in its eleventh canon ordains these "Letters pacifical" shall be given to the 
poor, whether they be clerics or laics. The same expression is used in the preceding canon of the synod. 
A later form of ecclesiastical letter is that with which we are so familiar, the "letter dimissory." This expression 
first occurs in Carom XVII. of the Council in Trullo. On this expression Suicer (Thesaurus, s. v. 
<greek>apolutikh</greek>) draws from the context the conclusion that "letters dimissory" were given only for 
permanent change of ecclesiastical residence, while, "letters commendatory" were given to those whose 

absence from their diocese was. only temporary. 

CANON IX. 

IT behoves the bishops in every province to acknowledge the bishop who presides in the metropolis, and 
who has to take thought for the whole province; because all men of business come together from every 
quarter to the metropolis. Wherefore it is decreed that he have precedence in rank, and that the other 
bishops do nothing extraordinary without him, (according to the ancient canon which prevailed from [the 
times of] our Fathers) or such things only as pertain to their own particular parishes and the districts subject 
to them. For each bishop has authority over his own parish, both to manage it with the piety which is 
incumbent on every one, and to make provision for the whole district which is dependent on his city; to 
ordain prebysters and deacons; and to settle everything with judgment. But let him undertake nothing further 
without the bishop of the metropolis; neither the latter without the consent of the others. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON IX. 

Bishops should be bound to opinion of the metropolitan, and nothing should they do without his knowledge 
except only such things as have reference to the diocese of each, and let them ordain men free from 
blame. 

VAN ESPEN. 

From this canon we see that causes of more importance and greater moment are to be considered in the 

Provincial Synod which consisted of the metropolitan and the other bishops of the province. 

By the "ancient canon" of which mention is here made, there can scarcely be a doubt is intended the xxxiv. 

of the Canons of the Apostles, since in it are read the same provisions (and almost in the same words) as 

here are set forth somewhat more at length; nor is there any other canon in which these, provisions are found 

earlier in date than this synod, wherefore from this is deduced a strong argument for the integrity of the 

Canons of the Apostles. 

The wording of this canon should be compared with the famous sentence so often quoted of St. Irenseus. 

"Ad hanc enim ecclesiam [i.e. of Rome] propter potentiorem principalitatem necesse eat omnem convenire 

ecclesiam, hoc est, cos qui aunt undique fideles, in qua sempter ab his, qui aunt undique, conservata eat 

eaque est ab Apestolis traditio." 

Is it not likely that in the lost Greek original the words translated convenire ad were 

(<greek>suntrekein</greek> <greek>en</greek>? Vide on the meaning of cone venire ad, F. W. Puller, The 

Primitive Saints and the See of Rome, pp. 32 et seqq. 

Compare Apostolic Canon XXXIV. 

CANON X. 

THE Holy Synod decrees that persons in villages and districts, or those who are called chorepiscopi, even 
though they may have received ordination to the Episcopate, shall regard their own limits and manage the 
churches subject to them, and be content with the care and administration of these; but they may ordain 
readers, sub-deacons and exorcists, and shall be content with promoting these, but shall not presume to 
ordain either a presbyter or a deacon, without the consent of bishop of the city to which he and his district are 
subject. And if he shall dare to transgress [these] decrees, he shall be deposed from tile rank which he 
enjoys. And a chorepiscopus is to be appointed by the bishop of the city to which he is subject. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON X 

A chorepiscopus makes Exorcists, Lectors, Sub-deacons and Singers, but not a presbyter or a deacon 

without the bishop of the city. Who dares to transgress this law let him be deposed. The bishop of the city 

makes the chorpiscopus. 

For the Minor Orders in the Early Church see the Excursus on the subject appended to Canon XXIV. of 

Laodicea. 

"Ordination to the episcopate." In translating thus I have followed both Dionysius and Isidore, the former of 
whom translates "although they had received the imposition of tim hand of the bishop and had been 
consecreted bishops;" and the latter "although they had received from bishops the imposition of the hand, 
and had been consecrated bishops.": 

VAN ESPEN. 

There can be no doubt that the Chorepiscopi, the authority of whom is limited by tiffs canon, are supposed to 
be endowed with the episcopal character. Among the learned there is a controversy as to whether 
Chorepiscopi were true bishops by virtue of the ordination to that office, and endowed with the episcopal 
character or were only bishops when accidentally so. But whatever may be the merits of this controversy, 
there can be no doubt from the context of this canon that the Fathers of Antioch took it for granted that the 
chorepiscopi were time bishops by virtue of their ordination, but it is also evident that they were subject to 
the bishop of the greater city. It must also be noted that these chorepiscopi were not instituted by the canons 
of the Councils of Ancyra. Neocaesarea, or even of Nice, for these speak of them and make their decrees 
as concerning something already existing. 

And from the very limitations of this canon it is by no means obscure that the fathers of Antioch supposed 
these chorepiscopi to be real bishops, for otherwise even with the license of the bishop of the city they could 
not ordain presbyters or deacons. 

CANON XI. 

IF any bishop, or presbyter, or any one whatever of the canon shall presume to betake himself to the 
Emperor without the consent and letters of the bishop of the province, and particularly of the bishop of the 
metropolis, such a one shall be publicly deposed and cast out, not only from communion, but also from the 
rank which he happens to have; inasmuch as he dares to trouble the ears of our Emperor beloved of God, 
contrary to the law of the Church. But, if necessary business shall, require any one to go to the Emperor, let 
him do it with the advice and consent of the metropolitan and other bishops in the province, and let him 
undertake his journey with letters from them. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON 

A bishop or presbyter who (of his own motion and not at the bidding of the Metropolitan of the province goes 
to the Emperor shall be deprived both of communion and dignity. 

This canon is one of those magnificent efforts which the early church made to check the already growing 
inclination to what we have in later times learned to call Erastianism. Not only did the State, as soon as it 
became Christian, interfere in spiritual matters at its own motion, but there were found bishops and others of 
the clergy who not being able to attain their ends otherwise, appealed to the civil power, usually to the 
Emperor himself, and thus the whole discipline of the Church was threatened, and the authority of spiritual 
synods set aside. How unsuccessful the Church often was in this struggle is only too evident from the 
remarks of the Greek commentator Balsamon on this 
very canon. 

HEFELE. 

Kellner (Das Buss, und Strafversahren, p. 61) remarks with reference to this, that deposition is here treated 
as a heavier punishment than exclusion from communion, and therefore the latter cannot mean actual 
excommunication but only suspension. 

CANON XII. 

IF any presbyter or deacon deposed by his own bishop, or any bishop deposed by a synod, shall dare to 
trouble the ears of the Emperor, when it is his duty to submit his case to a greater synod of bishops, and to 
refer to more bishops the things which he thinks right, and to abide by the examination and decision made 
by them; if, despising these, he shall trouble the Emperor, he shall be entitled to no pardon, neither shall he 
have an opportunity of defence, nor any hope of future restoration. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XII. 

One deposed, if he shall have troubled the Emperor, shall seek the greater synod, and submit to its decree. 
But if he again misbehave himself, he shall not have any chance of restoration. 

It is usually supposed that this canon, as well as the fourth, and the fourteenth and fifteenth, was directed 
against St. Athanasius, and it was used against St. Chrysostom by his enemies. Vide Socrates, 
Ecclesiastical History, Book II., Chapter viii., and Sozomen's Ecclesiastical History, Book III., chapter v.; 
also ibid. Book VII., chapter xx. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa XXI., Quest. V., Can. ij., 
in Isidore's Version. 

CANON XIII. 

No bishop shall presume to pass from one province to another, and ordain persons to the dignity of the 
ministry in the Church, not even should he have others with him, unless he should go at the written invitation 
of the metropolitan and bishops into whose country he goes. But if he should, without invitation, proceed 
irregularly to the ordination of any, or to the regulation of ecclesiastical affairs which do not concern him, the 
things done by him are null, and he himself shall suffer the due punishment of his irregularity and his 
unreasonable undertaking, by being forthwith deposed by the holy Synod. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XIII. 

If without invitation a bishop shall go into another province, and shall ordain, and administer affairs, what he 
does shall be void and he himself The Roman Correctors are not satisfied with shall be deposed. 

Compare with this Apostolic Canon xxxv.; also canon xxii. of this same synod. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa ix., Quaest. II., Can. vj. 
in the Versio Prisca. The Roman Correctors are not satisfied with it, however, nor with any version and give 
the Greek text, to which they add an accurate translation. 

CANON XIV. 

IF a bishop shall be tried on any accusations, and it should then happen that the bishops of the province 
disagree concerning him, some pronouncing the accused innocent, and others guilty; for the settlement of 
all disputes, the holy Synod decrees that the metropolitan call on some others belonging to the 
neighbouring province, who shall add their judgment and resolve the dispute, and thus, with those of the 
province, confirm what is determined. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XIV. 

If the bishops of the province disagree among themselves as to an accused bishop, that the controversy 
may be certainly settled, let other neighbouring bishops be called in. 

ZONARAS. 

When any bishop shall have been condemned with unanimous consent by all the bishops of the province, 
the condemnation cannot be called into doubt, as this synod has set forth in its fourth canon. But if all the 
bishops are not of the same mind, but some contend that he should be condemned and others the contrary, 
then other bishops may by called in by the metropolitan from the neighbouring provinces, and when their 
votes are added to one or other of the parties among the bishops, then controversy should be brought to a 
close. This also is the law of the Synod of Sardica, canons iii. and v. 

ARISTENUS. 

Every bishop accused of crimes should be judged by his own synod, but if the bishops of the province 
differ, some saying that he is innocent and some that he is guilty, the metropolitan can call other bishops 
from a neighbouring province that they may solve the controversy agitated by the bishops. 
This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa vi., Quaest. iv., can. j. 
The Roman Correctors note that the Latin translation implies that the neighbouring metropolitan is to be 
invited and say, "But, in truth, it hardly seems fitting that one metropolitan should come at the call of another, 
and that there should be two metropolitans in one synod." 

CANON XV. 

IF any bishop, lying under any accusation, shall be judged by all the bishops in the province, and all shall 
unanimously deliver the same verdict concerning him, he shah not be again judged by others, but the 
unanimous sentence of the bishops of the province shall stand firm. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XV. 

If all the bishops of a province agree with regard to a bishop already sentenced, a new trial shall not be 
granted him. 

VAN ESPEN. 

By the phrase "by others "must be understood bishops called from a neighbouring province, of which 
mention is made in the previous canon, where in the case of an agreement among the bishops, the synod 
did not wish to be called in, even if it were demanded by the condemned bishop. This canon, therefore, is a 
supplement as it were to the preceding. And for this reason in the Breviarium and in Cresconius's Collection 
of Canons they are placed under a common title, cap. 144, "Concerning the difference of opinion which 
happens in the judgment of bishops, or when a bishop is cut off by all the bishops of his province." 
From these canons it is manifest that at first the causes of bishops were agitated and decided in provincial 
synods, and this discipline continued for many centuries, and was little by little departed from in the Vlllth 
and IXth centuries. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa VI., Quaest. IV., Can. v. 
Gratian adds a note which Van Espen remarks smacks of his own date rather than of that of the Synod of 
Antioch. 

CANON XVI. 

IF any bishop without a see shall throw himself upon a vacant church and seize its throne, without a full 
synod, he shall be cast out, even if all the people over whom he has usurped jurisdiction should choose 
him. And that shall be [accounted] a full synod, in which the metropolitan is present. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XVI. 

Whoever without the full synod and without the 

Metropolitan Council, shall go over to a vacant church, even if he has no position, he shall be ejected. 

BEVERIDGE. 

This, together with the following canon, was recited by Bishop Leontius in the Council of Chalcedon, from the 
book of the canons, in which this is called the 95th and the following the 96th, according to the order 
observed in that book of the canons. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. XCII., Can. viii. in Isidore's 
version, and the Roman Correctors note its departure from the original. 

CANON XVII. 

IF any one having received the ordination of a bishop, and having been appointed to preside over a 
people, shall not accept his ministry, and will not be persuaded to proceed to the Church entrusted to him, 
he shall be excommunicated until he, being constrained, accept it, or until a full synod of the bishops of the 
province shall have determined concerning, him. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XVII. 

Whoso has received orders and abandoned them let him be excommunicated, until he shall have repented 
and been received. 

ZONARAS. 

If any one called to the rule of the people refuse to undertake that office and ministry, let him be removed 
from communion, that is separated, until he accept the position. But should he persist in his refusal, he can 
by no means be absolved from his separation, unless perchance the full synod shall take some action in 
his case. For it is possible that he may assign reasonable causes why he should be excused from 
accepting the prelature offered him, reasons which would meet with the approbation of the synod. 
Balsamon explains the canon in the same sense and adds that by "ordination" here is intended ordination 
proper, not merely election, as some have held. 
Compare with this Apostolic Canon XXXVI. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. XCII., C. vii. The Roman 
Correctors note that Dionysius's version is nearer the Greek. 

CANON XVIII. 

IF any bishop ordained to a parish shall not proceed to the parish to which he has been ordained, not 
through any fault of his own, but either because of the rejection of the people, or for any other reason not 
arising from himself, let him enjoy his rank and ministry; only he shall not disturb the affairs of the Church 
which he joins; and he shall abide by whatever the full synod of the province shall determine, after judging 
the ease. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XVIII. 

Let a bishop ordained but not received by his city have his part of the honour, and offer the liturgy only, 
waiting for the synod of the province to give judgment. 

BALSAMON. 

In canon xvij. the fathers punished him who when ordained could not be persuaded to go to the church to 
which he was assigned. In the present canon they grant pardon to him who is willing to take the charge of the 
diocese, for which he was consecrated, but is prevented from doing so by the impudence of the people or 
else by the incursions of the infidel; and therefore they allow him to enjoy, in whatever province he may 
happen to be, the honour due his rank, viz., his throne, his title, and the exercise of the episcopal office, with 
the knowledge and consent of the bishop of the diocese. He must not, however, meddle will, the affairs of 
the church of which he is a guest, that is to say he must not teach, nor ordain, nor perform any episcopal act 
without the consent of the bishop of the diocese; but he must observe quiet, until he learns what he ought to 
do by the determination of the full Synod. 

Aristenus explains that by keeping quiet is intended that he should not "use any military help or other 
power." 

This canon is found twice in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. xcii., c. iv. and v.; in 
the versions of Martin Bracarensis and of Dionysius. 

CANON XIX. 

A BISHOP shall not be ordained without a synod and the presence of the metropolitan of the province. And 
when he is present, it is by all means better that all his brethren in the ministry of the Province should 
assemble together with him; and these the metropolitan ought to invite by letter. And it were better that all 
should meet; but if this be difficult, it is indispensable that a majority should either be present or take part by 
letter in the election, and that thus the appointment should be made in the presence, or with the consent, of 
the majority; but if it should be done contrary to these decrees, the ordination shall be of no force. And if the 
appointment shall be made according to the prescribed canon, and any should object through natural love 
of contradiction, the decision of the majority shall prevail. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XIX. 

If there be no synod and metropolitan, let there be no bishop. If on account of some difficulty all do not meet 
together, at least let the greater number, or let them give their assent by letter. But if after the affair is all 
settled a few are contentious, let the vote of the majority stand firm. 

ZONARAS. 

In the first place it must be noted that by "ordination" in this place is meant election, and the laying on of the 
bishop's hand. 

BALSAMON. 

The method of choosing a bishop is laid down in the canons of Nice, number iv., but the present canon 
adds the provision that an election which takes place in violation of the provisions of this decree is null and 
invalid: and that when those who are electing are divided in opinion as to whom to choose, the votes of the 
majority shall prevail. But when you hear this canon saying that there should be no election without the 
presence of the Metropolitan, you must not say that he ought to be present at an election (for this was 
prohibited, as is found written in other canons) but rather say that his presence here is a permission or 
persuasion, without which no election could take place. 

Compare Apostolic Canon number j. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. LXV., can. iij. Gratian has 
chosen Isidore's version, and the Roman Correctors point out that Dionysius' is preferable. 

CANON XX. 

WITH a view to the good of the Church and the settlement of disputes, it is decreed to be well that synods of 
the bishops, (of which the metropolitan shall give notice to the provincials), should be held in every province 
twice a year, one after the third week of the feast of Easter, so that the synod may be ended in the fourth 
week of the Pentecost; and the second on the ides of October which is the tenth [or fifteenth] day of the 
month Hyperberetaeus; so that presbyters and deacons, and all who think themselves unjustly dealt with, 
may resort to these synods and obtain the judgment of the synod. But it shall be unlawful for any to hold 
synods by themselves without those who are entrusted with the Metropolitan Sees. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XX. 

On account of ecclesiastical necessities the synod in every province shall meet twice a year, in the fourth 
week of Pentecost and on the tenth day of Hyperbereoeus. 

SCHELESTRATIUS (cit. Van Espen). 

The time fixed by the Council of Nice before Lent for the meeting of the synod was not received in the East, 
and the bishops kept on in the old custom of celebrating the council in the fourth week after Easter, for the 
time before Lent often presented the greatest difficulties for those in the far separated cities to come to the 
provincial metropolis. 

VAN ESPEN. 

In this canon the decree of Nice in canon v. is renewed, but with this difference that the Nicene synod orders 

one synod to be held before Lent, but this synod that it should be held the fourth week after Easter. 

It will be remembered that the whole period of the great fifty days from Easter to Whitsunday was known as 

"Pentecost." 

Compare with this Apostolic Canon number XXXVII. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. XVIII., c. xv., attributed to a 
council held by Pope Martin. The Roman Correctors point out that this "Pope Martin" was a bishop of Braga 
(Bracarensis) from whose collection of the decrees of the Greek synods Gratian often quotes; the 
Correctors also note, "For bishops in old times were usually called Popes" (Antiquitus enim episcopi 
Papoe dicebantur). 

CANON XXI. 

A BISHOP may not be translated from one parish to another, either intruding himself of his own suggestion, 
or under compulsion by the people, or by constraint of the bishops; but he shall remain in the Church to 
which he was allotted by God from the beginning, and shall not be translated from it, according to the decree 
formerly passed on the subject. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXI. 

A bishop even if compelled by the people, and compelled by the bishops, must not be translated to another 
diocese. 

See the treatment of the translation of bishops in the Excursus to canon xv. of Nice. Compare this canon with 
Apostolical Canon number xiv. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa VII., Quaest. I., can. 
xxv., from Isidore's version. 

CANON XXII. 

LET not a bishop go to a strange city, which is not subject to himself, nor into a district which does not belong 
to him, either to ordain any one, or to appoint presbyters or deacons to places within the jurisdiction of 
another bishop, unless with the consent of the proper bishop of the place. And if any one shall presume to 
do any such thing, the ordination shall be void, and he himself shall be punished by the synod. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXII. 

A bishop shall not go from city to city ordaining people, except by the will of the bishop of the city: otherwise 
the ordination shall be without force, and he himself exposed to censure. 

If we do not draw a rash conclusion, we should say that the interference of bishops in dioceses not their own, 
must have been very frequent in early days. This one synod enacted two canons (number XIII. and this 
present canon) on the subject. The same prohibition is found in canons XIV. and XXXV. of the Apostolic 
canons, in canon XV. of Nice, canon ij. of I. Constantinople and in many others. On account of the similarity of 
this canon to canon xiii. some have supposed it to be spurious, the enactment of some other synod, and this 
was the opinion of Godefrides Hermantius (Vita S. Athanasii, Lib. IV., cap. xij.) as well as of Alexander 
Natalis (Hist. Sec, IV., Dissert, xxv.). Van Espen, however, is of opinion that the two canons do not cover 
exactly the same ground, for he says Canon XIII. requires letters both from the Metropolitan and from the 
other bishops of the province, while this canon XXII. requires only the consent of the diocesan. He 
concludes that Canon XIII. refers to a diocese sede vacante, when the Metropolitan with the other bishops 
took care of the widowed church, but that Canon XXII. refers to a diocese with its own bishop, whose will is all 
that is needed for the performance of episcopal acts by another bishop. And this distinction Schelestratius 

makes still more evident by his discussion of the matter in his scholion on Canon XIII. 

Compare with this canon of the Apostolic Canons number XXXV. also number XIV. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa IX., Quaest. II., can. vij., 

but in a form differing far from the Greek original, as the Roman Correctors point out; and even Gratian's 

present text is not as he wrote it, but amended. 

CANON XXIII. 

IT shall not be lawful for a bishop, even at the close of life, to appoint another as successor to himself; and if 
any such thing should be done, the appointment shall be void. But the ecclesiastical law must be observed, 
that a bishop must not be appointed otherwise than by a synod and with tile judgment of the bishops, who 
have the authority to promote tile man who is worthy, after the falling asleep of him who has ceased from his 
labours. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXIII. 

A dying bishop shall not appoint another bishop. But when he is dead a worthy successor shall be provided 
by a synod of those who have this power. 

Nothing could be more important than the provision of this canon. It is evidently intended to prevent 
nepotism in every form, and to leave the appointment to the vacant see absolutely to the free choice of the 
Metropolitan and his synod. The history of the Church, and its present practice, is a curious commentary 
upon the ancient legislation, and the appointment of coadjutor bishops cure jure successionis, so common 
in later days, seems to be a somewhat ingenious way of escaping the force of the canon. Van Espen, 
however, reminds his readers of the most interesting case of St. Augustine of Hippo (which he himself 
narrates in his Epistle CCXIII.) of how he was chosen by his predecessor as bishop of Hippo, both he and 
the then bishop being ignorant of the fact that it was prohibited by the canons. And how when in his old age 
the people wished him to have one chosen bishop to help him till his death and to succeed him afterwards, 
he declined saying: "What was worthy of blame in my own case, shall not be a blot likewise upon my son." 
He did not hesitate to say who he thought most worthy to succeed him, but he added, "he shall be a 
presbyter, as he is, and when God so wills he shall be a bishop." Van Espen adds; "All this should be read 
carefully that thence may be learned how St. Augustine set an example to bishops and pastors of taking all 
the pains possible that after their deaths true pastors, and not thieves and wolves, should enter into their 
flocks, who in a short time would destroy all they had accomplished by so much labour in so long a time." 
(Cf. Eusebius. H. E., Lib. VI., cap. xj. and car. xxxij.) 

Compare Apostolic Canon number LXXVI. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa VIII., Quaest. I., can. III., 
in Dionysius's version, and again Canon IV. in that of Martin Bracarensis. 

CANON XXIV. 

IT is right that what belongs to the Church be preserved with all care to the Church, with a good conscience 
and faith in God, the inspector and judge of all. And these things ought to be administered under the 
judgment and authority of the bishop, who is entrusted with the whole people and with the souls of the 
congregation. But it should be manifest what is church property, with the knowledge of the presbyters and 
deacons about him; so that these may know assuredly what things belong to the Church, and that nothing be 
concealed from them, in order that, when the bishop may happen to depart this life, the property belonging 
to the Church being well known, may not be embezzled nor lost, and in order that the private property of the 
bishop may not be disturbed on a pretence that it is part of the ecclesiastical goods. For it is just and 
well-pleasing to God and man that the private property of the bishop be bequeathed to whomsoever he will, 
but that for the Church be kept whatever belongs to the Church; so that neither the Church may suffer loss, nor 
the bishop be injured under pretext of the Church's interest, nor those who belong to him fall into lawsuits, 
and himself, after his death, be brought under reproach. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXIV. 

All the clergy should be cognizant of ecclesiastical matters; so that when the bishop dies the Church may 
preserve her own goods; but what belongs to the bishop shall be disposed of according to his directions. 

VAN ESPEN. 

This canon shews the early discipline according to which the presbyters and deacons of the episcopal city, 

who were said to be "about him" or to pertain to his chair, represented the senate of the church, who together 

with the bishop administered the church affairs, and, when the see was vacant, had the charge of it. All this 

Martin of Braga sets forth more clearly in his version, and I have treated of the matter at large in my work on 

Ecclesiastical Law, Pars I., Tit. viii., cap. i., where I have shewn that the Cathedral chapter succeeded to this 

senate of presbyters and deacons. 

Compare with this canon Apostolical Canon XL. 

This canon in a somewhat changed form is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., 

Causa XII., Quaest. I., can. xx., and attributed to "Pope Martin's Council"; also compare with this the ensuing 

canon, number XXI. 

CANON XXV. 

LET the bishop have power over the funds of the Church, so as to dispense them with all piety and in the 
fear of God to all who need. And if there be occasion, let him take what he requires for his own necessary 
uses and those of his brethren sojourning with him, so that they may in no way lack, according to the divine 
Apostle, who says, "Having food and raiment, let us therewith be content." And if he shall not be content with 
these, but shall apply the funds to his own private uses, and not manage the revenues of the Church, or the 
rent of the farms, with the consent of the presbyters and deacons, but shall give the authority to his own 
domestics and kinsmen, or brothers, or sons, so that the accounts of the Church are secretly injured, he 
himself shall submit to an investigation by the synod of the province. But if, on the other hand, the bishop or 
his presbyters shall be defamed as appropriating to themselves what belongs to the Church, (whether from 
lands or any other ecclesiastical resources), so that the poor are oppressed, and accusation and infamy 
are brought upon the account and on those who so administer it, let them also be subject to correction, the 
holy synod determining what is right. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXV. 

The bishop shall have power over ecclesiastical goods. But should he not be content with those things 
which are sufficient for him but shall alienate the goods and revenues of the church, without the advice of the 
clergy, penalties shall be I exacted from him in the presence of the synod. But if he has converted to his own 
uses what was given for the poor, of this also let him give an explanation to the synod. 

Compare with this canon Apostolic Canon number XLI. 

This Canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa XII., Quaest I., can. 
XXIII. and with this should be compared canon XXII. immediately preceding. 

At the end of this canon in Labbe's version of Dionysius we find these words added. "And thirty bishops 
signed who were gathered together at this Synod." Isidore Mercator has a still fuller text, viz.: "I, Eusebius, 
being present subscribe to all things constituted by this holy Synod. Theodore, Nicetas, Macedonius, 
Anatolius, Tarcodimantus, AEthe-reus, Narcissus, Eustachius, Hesychius, Mauricius, Paulus, and the rest, 
thirty bishops agreed and signed." Van Espen after noting that this addition is not found in the Greek, nor in 
Martin Bracarensis, adds "there is little probability that this clause is of the same antiquity as the canons." 

SYNOD OF LAODICEA, HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION & 
CANONS 

SYNOD OF LAODICEA. 
A.D. 343-381. 

Elenchus. 

Historical Introduction. 

The Canons with the Ancient Epitome and Notes. 

Excursus to Canon XVIII., On the Choir Offices of the Early Church. 

Excursus to Canon XIX., On the Worship of the Early Church. 

Excursus to Canon XXII., On the Vestments of the Early Church. 

Excursus to Canon XXIV., On the Minor Orders in the Early Church. 

HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION. 

The Laodicea at which the Synod met is Laodicea in Phrygia Pacatiana, also called Laodicea ad Lycum, 
and to be carefully distinguished from the Laodicea in Syria. This much is certain, but as to the exact date of 
the Synod there is much discussion. Peter de Marca fixed it at the year 365, but Pagi in his Critica on 
Baronius's Annals(1) seems to have overthrown the arguments upon which de Marca rested, and agrees 
with Gothofred in placing it circa 363. At first sight it would seem that the Seventh Canon gave a clue which 
would settle the date, inasmuch as the Photinians are mentioned, and Bishop Photinus began to be 
prominent in the middle of the fourth century and was anathematized by the Eusebians in a synod at Antioch 
in 344, and by the orthodox at Milan in 345; and finally, after several other condemnations, he died in 
banishment in 366. But it is not quite certain whether the word "Photinians "is not an interpolation. Something 
with regard to the date may perhaps be drawn from the word <greek>Pakatianhs</greek> as descriptive of 
Phrygia, for it is probable that this division was not yet made at the time of the Sardican Council in 343. 
Hefele concludes that "Under such circumstances, it is best, with Remi Ceillier, Tillemont, and others, to 
place the meeting of the synod of Laodicea generally somewhere between the years 343 and 381 , i.e., 
between the Sardican and the Second Ecumenical Council-and to give up the attempt to discover a more 
exact date."(2) 

But since the traditional position of the canons of this Council is after those of Antioch and immediately 
before those of First Constantinople, I have followed this order. Such is their position in "very many old 
collections of the Councils which have had their origin since the sixth or even in the fifth century," says 
Hefele. It is true that Matthew Blastares places these canons after those of Sardica, but the Quinisext Synod 
in its Second Canon and Pope Leo IV., according to the Corpus Juris Canonici,(3) give them the position 
which they hold in this volume. 

THE CANONS OF THE SYNOD HELD IN THE CITY OF LAODICEA, IN PHRYGIA 
PACATIANA, IN WHICH MANY BLESSED FATHERS FROM DIVERS PROVINCES OF ASIA 
WERE GATHERED TOGETHER. (1) 

The holy synod which assembled at Laodicea in Phrygia Pacatiana, from divers regions of Asia; set forth 
the ecclesiastical definitions which are hereunder annexed. 

NOTE. 

This brief preface, by some ancient collector, is found in the printed editions of Zonaras and of Balsamon 
and also in the Amerbachian manuscript. 

CANON I. 

IT is right, according to the ecclesiastical Canon, that the Communion should by indulgence be given to 

those who have freely and lawfully joined in second marriages, not having previously made a secret 
marriage; after a short space, which is to be spent by them in prayer and fasting. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON I. 

A digamist not secretly married, after devoting himself for a short time to praying shall be held blameless 
afterwards. 

VAN ESPEN. 

Many synods imposed a penance upon digamists, although the Church never condemned second 
marriages. 

On this whole subject of second marriages see notes on Canon VIII. of Nice, on Canons III. and VII. of 
Neocaesarea, and on Canon XIX. of Ancyra. In treating of this canon Hefele does little but follow Van Espen, 
who accepts Bishop Beveridge's conclusions in opposition to Justellus and refers to him, as follows, "See 
this observation of Justellus' refuted more at length by William Beveridge in his notes on this canon," and 
Bp. Beveridge adopted and defended the exposition of the Greek commentators, viz.: there is some fault 
and some punishment, they are to be held back from communion for "a short space," but after that, it is 
according to the law of the Church that they should be admitted to communion. The phrase "not having 
previously made a secret marriage" means that there must not have been intercourse with the woman 
before the second marriage was "lawfully" contracted, for if so the punishment would have been for 
fornication, and neither light nor for "a short space." The person referred to in the canon is a real digamist 
and not a bigamist, this is proved by the word "lawfully" which could not be used of , the second marriage of 
a man who already had a living wife. 

CANON II. 

THEY who have sinned in divers particulars, if they have persevered in the prayer of confession and 
penance, and are wholly converted from their faults, shall be received again to communion, through the 
mercy and goodness of God, after a time of penance appointed to them, in proportion to the nature of their 
offence. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON II. 

Those who have fallen unto various faults and have confessed them with compunction, and done the 
penance suitable to them, shall be favourably received. 

HEFELE. 

Van Espen and others were of opinion that this canon treated only of those who had themselves been guilty 
of various criminal acts, and it has been asked whether any one guilty not only of one gross sin, but of 
several of various kinds, might also be again received into communion. It seems to me, however, that this 
canon with the words, "those who have sinned in divers particulars," simply means that "sinners of various 
kinds shall be treated exactly in proportion to the extent of their fall." That the question is not necessarily of 
different sins committed by the same person appears from the words, "in proportion to the nature of their 
offence," as the singular, not the plural, is here used. 

But Van Espen, with Aubespine, is clearly right in not referring the words, "if they persevere in confession 
and repentance," to sacramental confession, to which the expression, "persevere" would not be well suited. 
Here is evidently meant the oft-repeated contrite confession before God and the congregation in prayer of 
sins committed, which preceded sacramental confession and absolution. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa XXVI., Quest, vii., can. 
iv. 

CANON III. 

HE who has been recently baptized ought not to be promoted to the sacerdotal order. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON III. 

A neophite is not ordainable. 

This rule is laid down in the Second Nicene canon. Balsamon also compares Apostolic Canon Ixxx. 

BALSAMON. 

Notwithstanding this provision, that great light, Nectarius, just separated from the flock of the catechumens, 
when he had washed away the sins of his life in the divine font, now pure himself, he put on the most pure 
dignity of the episcopate, and at the same time became bishop of the Imperial City, and president of the 
Second Holy Ecumenical Synod. 

CANON IV. 

THEY who are of the sacerdotal order ought not to lend and receive usury, nor what is called hemioliae. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON IV. 

A priest is not to receive usury nor hemiolioe. 

The same rule is laid down in the seventeenth Canon of Nice. For a treatment of the whole subject of usury 

see excursus to that canon. 

Dionysius Exiguus and Isidore have numbered this canon v., and our fifth they have as iv. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. XLVI., can. ix. 

CANON V. 

ORDINATIONS are not to be held in the presence of hearers. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON V. 

Ordinations are not to be performed in the presence of hearers. 

BALSAMON. 

This canon calls elections "laying on of hands," and says that since in elections unworthy things are often 
said with regard to those who are elected, therefore they should not take place in the presence of any that 
might happen to come to hear. 

Zonaras also agrees that election is here intended, but Aristenus dissents and makes the reference to 
ordinations properly so-called, as follows: 

ARISTENUS. 

The prayers of ordination are not to be said out loud so that they may be heard by the people. 

CANON VI. 

IT is not permitted to heretics to enter the house of God while they continue in heresy. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON VI. 

The holy place is forbidden to heretics. 

ARISTENUS. 

Heretics are not to be permitted to enter the house of God, and yet Basil the Great, before this canon was 
set forth, admitted Valens to the perfecting of the faithful [i.e., to the witnessing the celebration of the Divine 
Mysteries]. 

VAN ESPEN. 

A heretic who pertinaciously rejects the doctrine of the Church is rightly not allowed to enter the house of 
God, in which his doctrine is set forth, so long as he continues in his heresy. For this reason when Timothy, 
Archbishop of Alexandria, was consulted concerning the admission of heretics to church, answered in the 
IXth Canon of his Canonical Epistle, that unless they were ready to promise to do penance and to abandon 
their heresy, they could in no way be admitted to the prayers of tile faithful. 
Contrast with this Canon Ixxxiv., of the so-called IVth Council of Carthage, A.D. 398. 

CANON VII. 

PERSONS converted from heresies, that is, of the Novatians, Photinians, and Quartodecimans, whether 
they were catechumens or communicants among them, shall not be received until they shall have 
anathematized every heresy, and particularly that in which they were held; and afterwards those who among 
them were called communicants, having thoroughly learned the symbols of the faith, and having been 
anointed with the holy chrism, shall so communicate in the holy Mysteries. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON VII. 

Novatians and Photinians, and Quartodecimans, unless they anathemathize their own and other heresies, 
are not to be received. When they have been anointed, after their abjuration, let them communicate. 
I have allowed the word "Photinians" to stand in the text although whether it is not an interpolation is by no 
means certain. They certainly were heretical on the doctrine of the Holy Trinity, and therefore differed from 
the other dissidents mentioned in the canon, all of whom were orthodox on this matter. It is also worthy of 
note that the word is not found in Ferrandus's Condensation (Breviatio Canonum, n. 177) nor in Isidore's 
version. Moreover there is a Latin codex in Lucca, and also one in Paris (as is noted by Mansi, v. 585; ij. 591) 
in which it is lacking. It was rejected by Baronius, Binius, and Remi Ceillier. 

The word "Catechumens" is wanting in many Greek MSS. but found in Balsamon, moreover, Dionysius and 
Isidore had it in their texts. 

This canon possesses a great interest and value to the student from a different point of view. Its provisions, 
both doctrinal and disciplinary, are in contrariety with the provisions of the council held at Carthage in the 
time of St. Cyprian, and yet both these canons, contradictory as they are, are accepted by the Council in 
Trullo and are given such ecumenical authority as canons on discipline ever can possess, by the Seventh 
Ecumenical. This is not the only matter in which the various conciliar actions adopted and ratified do not 
agree inter se, and from this consideration it would seem evident that it was not intended that to each 
particular of each canon of each local synod adopted, the express sanction of the Universal Church was 
given, but that they were received in block as legislation well calculated for the good of the Church. And that 
this must have been the understanding at tile time is evinced by the fact that while the Trullan canons 
condemned a number of Western customs and usages, as I shall have occasion to point out in its proper 
place, no objection was made by the Roman legates to the canon of the Seventh Ecumenical which 
received them as authoritative. 

CANON VIM. 

PERSONS converted from the heresy of those who are called Phrygians, even should they be among 
those reputed by their as clergymen, and even should they be called the very chiefest, are with all care to 
be both instructed and baptized by the bishops and presbyters of the Church. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON VIM. 

When Phrygians return they are to be baptized anew, even if among them they were reckoned clergymen. 

HEFELE. 

This synod here declares the baptism of the Montanists invalid, while in the preceding canon it recognised 
as valid the baptism of the Novatians and Quartodecimans. From this, it would appear that the Montanists 
were suspected of heresy with regard to the doctrine of the Trinity. Some other authorities of the ancient 
Church, however, judged differently, and for a long time it was a question in the Church whether to consider 
the baptism of the Montanists valid or not. Dionysius the Great of Alexandria was in favour of its validity: but 
this Synod and the Second General Council rejected it as invalid, not to mention the Synod of Iconium (235), 
which declared all heretical baptism invalid. This uncertainty of the ancient Church is accounted for thus: (a) 
On one side the Montanists, and especially Tertullian, asserted that they held the same faith and 
sacraments, especially the same baptism (eadem lavacri sacramenta) as tile Catholics. St. Epiphanius 
concurred in this, and testified that the Montanists taught the same regarding the Father, the Son, and the 
Holy Ghost, as did the Catholic Church, (b) Other Fathers, however, thought less favourably of them, and for 
this reason, that the Montanists often expressed themselves so ambiguously, that they might, nay, must be 
said completely to identify the Holy Ghost with Montanus. Thus Tertullian in quoting expressions of 
Montanus, actually says: "the Paraclete speaks"; and therefore Firmilian, Cyril of Jerusalem, Basil the Great, 
and other Fathers, did in fact, reproach the Montanists with this identification, and consequently held their 
baptism to be invalid, (c) Basil the Great goes to the greatest length in this direction in maintaining that the 
Montanists had baptized in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of Montanus and Priscilla. But it is very 
probable, as Tillemont conjectured, that Basil only founded these strange stories of their manner of 
baptizing upon his assumption that they identified Montanus with the Holy Ghost; and, as Baronius 
maintains, it is equally "probable that the Montanists did not alter the form of baptism. But, even admitting all 
this, their ambiguous expressions concerning Montanus and the Holy Ghost would alone have rendered it 
advisable to declare their baptism invalid, (d) Besides this, a considerable number of Montanists, namely, 
the school of AEschines, fell into Sabellianism, and thus their baptism was decidedly invalid. (Vide Article in 
Wetzer and Welte Kirchenlexicon s. v. Montanus; by myself [i.e. Hefele] ). 

In conclusion, it must be observed that Balsamon and Zonaras rightly understood the words in our text, 
"even though they be called the very chiefest," "though they be held in the highest esteem," to refer to the 
most distinguished clergy and teachers of the Montanists. 

CANON IX. 

THE members of the Church are not allowed to meet in the cemeteries, nor attend the so-called martyries of 
any of the heretics, for prayer or service; but such as so do, if they be communicants, shall be 
excommunicated for a time; but if they repent and confess that they have sinned they shall be received. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON IX. 

Whoso prayeth in the cemeteries and martyries of heretics is to be excommunicated. 

ZONARAS. 

By the word "service" (<greek>qerapeias</greek>) in this canon is to be understood the healing of 
sickness. The canon wishes that the faithful should under no pretence betake themselves to the prayers of 
heretical pseudo-martyrs nor pay them honour in the hope of obtaining the healing of sickness or the cure of 
their various temptations. And if any do so, they are to be cut off, that is for a time forbidden communion (and 
this refers to the faithful who are only laymen), but when they have done penance and made confession of 
their fault, the canon orders that they are to be received back again. 

BALSAMON. 

As canon vi. forbids heretics to enter the house of God, so this canon forbids the faithful to go to the 
cemeteries of heretics, which are called by them "Martyries." ... For in the days of the persecution, certain of 
the heretics, calling themselves Christians, suffered even to death, and hence those who shared their 
opinions called them "martyrs." 

VAN ESPEN. 

As Catholics had their martyrs, so too had the heretics, and especially the Montanists or Phrygians, who 

greatly boasted of them. 

Apollinaris writes of these as may be seen in Eusebius (H. E., Lib. v., cap. xvj.) 

The places or cemeteries in which rested the bodies of those they boasted of as martyrs, they styled 

"Martyries" (martyria) as similar places among Catholics were wont to be called by the same name, from 

the bones of the martyrs that rested there. 

From the Greek text, as also from Isidore's version it is clear that this canon refers to all the faithful generally, 

and that "the members of the Church" (Lat. Ecclesiastici, the word Dionysius uses) must be taken in this wide 

signification. 

CANON X. 

THE members of the Church shall not indiscriminately marry their children to heretics. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON X. 

Thou shalt not marry a heretic. 

FUCHS. 

(Bib. der Kirchenvers., pt. ii., p. 324.) "Indiscriminately" means not that they might be given in marriage to 
some heretics and not to others; but that it should not be considered a matter of indifference whether they 
were married to heretics or orthodox. 

Zonaras and Balsamon, led astray by the similar canon enacted at Chalcedon (number xiv.), suppose this 
restriction only to apply to the children of the clergy, but Van Espen has shewn that the rule is of general 
application. He adds, however, the following: 

VAN ESPEN. 

Since by the custom of the Greeks, ecclesiastics are allowed to have wives, there is no doubt that the 
marriage of their children with heretics would be indecent in a very special degree, although there are many 
things which go to shew that marriage with heretics was universally deemed a thing to be avoided by 
Catholics, and was rightly forbidden. 

CANON XI. 

PRESBYTIDES, as they are called, or female presidents, are not to be appointed in the Church. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XI. 

Widows called presidents shall not be appointed in churches. 

BALSAMON. 

In old days certain venerable women (<greek>presbutides</greek>) sat in Catholic churches, and took 
care that the other women kept good and modest order. But from their habit of using improperly that which 
was proper, either through their arrogancy or through their base self-seeking, scandal arose. Therefore the 
Fathers prohibited the existence in the Church thereafter of any more such women as are called presbytides 
or presidents. And that no one may object that in the monasteries of women one woman must preside over 

the rest, it should be remembered that the renunciation which they make of themselves to God and the 
tonsure brings it to pass that they are thought of as one body though many; and all things which are theirs, 
relate only to the salvation of the soul. But for woman to teach in a Catholic Church, where a multitude of men 
is gathered together, and women of different opinions, is, in the highest degree, indecorous and pernicious. 

HEFELE. 

It is doubtful what was here intended, and this canon has received very different interpretations. In the first 
place, what is the meaning of the words <greek>presbutides</greek> and <greek>prokaqhmenai</greek> 
("presbytides" and female presidents)? I think the first light is thrown on the subject by Epiphanius, who in his 
treatise against the Collyridians (Hoer., Ixxix. 4) says that "women had never been allowed to offer sacrifice, 
as the Collyridians presumed to do, but were only allowed to minister. Therefore there were only 
deaconesses in the Church, and even if the oldest among them were called 'presbytides,' this term must be 
clearly distinguished from presbyteresses. The latter would mean priestesses (<greek>ierissas</greek>), 
but 'presbytides' only designated their age, as seniors." According to this, the canon appears to treat of the 
superior deaconesses who were the overseers (<greek>prokaqhmenai</greek>) of the other 
deaconesses; and the further words of the text may then probably mean that in future no more such superior 
deaconesses or eldresses were to be appointed, probably because they had often outstepped their 
authority. 

Neander, Fuchs, and others, however, think it more probable that the terms in question are in this canon to 
be taken as simply meaning deaconesses, for even in the church they had been wont to preside over the 
female portion of the congregation (whence their name of "presidents"); and, according to St. Paul's rule, 
only widows over sixty years of age were to be chosen for this office (hence called "presbytides"). We may 
add, that this direction of the apostle was not very strictly adhered to subsequently, but still it was repeatedly 
enjoined that only eider persons should be chosen as deaconesses. Thus, for instance, the Council of 
Chalcedon, in its fifteenth canon, required that deaconesses should be at least forty years of age, while the 
Emperor Theodosius even prescribed the age of sixty. 

Supposing now that this canon simply treats of deaconesses, a fresh doubt arises as to how the last 
words-"they are not to be appointed in tim Church" are to be understood. For it may mean that "from 
henceforth no more deaconesses shall be appointed;" or, that "in future they shall no more be solemnly 
ordained in the church." The first interpretation would, however, contradict the fact that the Greek Church had 
deaconesses long after the Synod of Laodicea. For instance, in 692 the Synod in Trullo (Can. xiv.) ordered 
that "no one under forty years of age should be ordained deaconess." Consequently the, second 
interpretation, "they shall not he solemnly ordained in the church," seems a better one, and Neander 
decidedly prefers it. It is certainly true that several later synods distinctly forbade the old practice of 
conferring a sort of ordination upon deaconesses, as, for instance, the first Synod of Orange (Arausicanum I. 
of 441 , Can. xxvj.) in the words-diaconoe omnimodis non ordinandoe; also the Synod at Epaon in 51 7 (Can. 
xxj.), and the second Synod at Orleans in 533 (Can. xviij.); but in the Greek Church at least, an ordination, a 
<greek>keirotoneisqai</greek>, took place as late as the Council in Trullo (Can. xiv.). But this Canon of 
Laodicea does not speak of solemn dedication, and certainly not of ordination, but only of 
<greek>kaqistasqai</greek>. These reasons induce us to return to the first interpretation of this canon, and 
to understand it as forbidding from that time forward the appointment of any more chief deaconesses or 
"presbytides." 

Zonaras and Balsamon give yet another explanation. In their opinion, these "presbytides" were not chief 
deaconesses, but aged women in general (ex populo), to whom was given the supervision of the females, 
in church. The Synod of Laodicea, however, did away with this arrangement, probably because they had 
misused their office for purposes of pride, or money-making, bribery, etc. 
Compare with the foregoing the Excursus on Deaconesses, appended to Canon XIX. of Nice. 
This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. XXXII., c. xix, in Isidore's 
version; but Van Espen remarks that the Roman Correctors have pointed out that it departs widely from the 
Greek original. The Roman Correctors further say "The note of Balsamon on this point, should be seen;" 
and with this interpretation Morinus also agrees in his work on Holy Orders (De Ordinationibus, Pars III., 
Exercit. x., cap. iij., n. 3). 

CANON XII. 

BISHOPS are to be appointed to the ecclesiastical government by the judgment of the metropolitans and 
neighbouring bishops, after having been long proved both in the foundation of their faith and in the 
conversation of an honest life. 

NOTE. 

ANCIENT EPITOME or CANON XII. 

Whoever is most approved in faith and life and most learned, he is fit to be chosen bishop. 
The first part of this canon is in conformity with the provision in the IV. canon of Nice. 

CANON XIII. 

THE election of those who are to be appointed to the: priesthood is not to be committed to the multitude. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XIII. 

Whose is chosen by seculars is ineligible. 

BALSAMON. 

From this canon it is evident that in ancient times not only bishops but also priests were voted for by the 
multitude of the people. This is here forbidden. 

ARISTENUS. 

Bishops are elected by metropolitans and other bishops. If anyone in this manner shall not have been 

promoted to the Episcopate, but shall have been chosen by the multitude, he is not to be admitted nor 

elected. 

[It is clear from this that by "the Priesthood" Aristenus understands the episcopate, and I think rightly:] 

VAN ESPEN. 

The word in the Greek to which "multitude" corresponds (<greek>oklos</greek>) properly signifies a 

tumult.(1) 

What the fathers intend to forbid are tumultuous elections, that is, that no attention is to be paid to riotous 

demonstrations on the part of the people, when with acclamations they are demanding the ordination of 

anyone, with an appearance of sedition. Such a state of affairs St. Augustine admirably describes in his 

Epistola ad Albinam (Epist. cxxvi., Tom. II, col. 548, Ed. Gaume). 

And it is manifest that by this canon the people were not excluded from all share in the election of bishops 

and priests from what St. Gregory Nazianzen says, in Epistola ad Coesarienses, with regard to the election 

of St. Basil. From this what could be more evident than that after this canon was put out the people in the 

East still had their part in the election of a bishop? This also is clear from Justinian's "Novels" (Novelloe, 

cxxiij., e.j. and cxxxvij., c. ij.) 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. Ixiii., can. vj„ but in proof 

of the proposition that laymen were hereby forbidden to have any share in elections. Van Espen notes that 

Isidore's version favours Gratian's misunderstanding, and says that "no doubt that this version did much to 

exclude the people from the election of bishops." 

CANON XIV. 

THE holy things are not to be sent into other dioceses at the feast of Easter by way of eulogiae. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XIV. 

It is not right to send the holy gifts to another parish. 

HEFELE. 

It was a custom in the ancient Church, not indeed to consecrate, but to bless such of the several breads of 

the same form laid on the altar as were not needed for the communion, and to employ them, partly for the 
maintenance of the clergy, and partly for distributing to those of the faithful who did not communicate at the 
Mass. The breads thus blessed were called eulogioe. Another very ancient custom was, that bishops as a 
sign of Church fellowship, should send the consecrated bread to one another. That the Roman Popes of the 
first and second centuries did so, Irenaeus testifies in his letter to Pope Victor in Eusebius. In course of time, 
however, instead of the consecrated bread, only bread which had been blessed, or eulogioe, were sent 
abroad. For instance, Paulinus and Augustine sent one another these eulogioe. But at Easter the older 
custom still prevailed; and to invest the matter with more solemnity, instead of the eulogioe, the consecrated 
bread, i.e., the Eucharist, was sent out. The Synod of Laodicea forbids this, probably out of reverence to the 
holy Sacrament. 

Binterim (Denkwurdegkeiten, vol. IV., P. iij., p. 535.) gives another explanation. He starts from the fact that, 
with the Greeks as well as the Latins, the wafer intended for communion is generally called sancta or 
<greek>agia</greek> even before the consecration. This is not only perfectly true, but a well-known fact; 
only it must not be forgotten that these wafers or oblations were only called sancta by anticipation, and 
because of the sanctificatio to which they were destined. Binterim then states that by <greek>agia</greek> 
in the canon is to be understood not the breads already consecrated, but those still unconsecrated. He 
further conjectures that these unconsecrated breads were often sent about instead of the eulogioe, and that 
the Synod of Laodicea had forbidden this, not during the whole year, but only at Easter. He cannot, however, 
give any reason, and his statement is the more doubtful, as he cannot prove that these unconsecrated 
communion breads really used before to be sent about as eulogioe. 

In connection with this, however, he adds another hypothesis. It is known that the Greeks only consecrate a 
square piece of the little loaf intended for communion, which is first cut out with the so-called holy spear. The 
remainder of the small loaf is divided into little pieces, which remain on or near the altar during Mass, after 
which they are distributed to the non-communicants. These remains of the small loaf intended for 
consecration are called <greek>antidwra</greek> and Binterim's second conjecture is, that these 
<greek>antidwra</greek> might perhaps have been sent as eulogioe and may be the 
<greek>agia</greek> of this canon. But he is unable to prove that these <greek>antidwra</greek> were 
sent about, and is, moreover, obliged to confess that they are nowhere called eulogioe, while this canon 
certainly speaks of eulogioe. To this must be added that, as with regard to the unconsecrated wafer, so we 
see no sufficient cause why the Synod should have forbidden these <greek>antidwra</greek> being sent. 

CANON XV. 

No others shall sing in the Church, save only the canonical singers, who go up into the ambo and sing from 
a book. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XV. 

No one should ascend the ambon unless he is tonsured. 

HEFELE. 

The only question [presented by this canon] is whether this synod forbade the laity to take any part in the 
Church music, as Binius and others have understood the words of the text, or whether it only intended to 
forbid those who were not cantors taking the lead. Van Espen and Neander in particular were in favour of 
the latter meaning, pointing to the fact that certainly in the Greek Church after the Synod of Laodicea the 
people were accustomed to join in the singing, as Chrysostom and Basil the Great sufficiently testify. 
Bingham propounded a peculiar opinion, namely, that this Synod did indeed forbid the laity, to sing in the 
church, or even to join in the singing, but this only temporarily, for certain reasons. I have no doubt, however, 
that Van Espen and Neander take the truer view. 

CANON XVI. 

THE Gospels are to be read on the Sabbath [i.e. Saturday], with the other Scriptures. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XVI. 

The Gospel, the Epistle [<greek>apostolos</greek>] and the other Scriptures are to be read on the 
Sabbath. 

BALSAMON. 

Before the arrangement of the Ecclesiastical Psalmody was settled, neither the Gospel nor the other 
Scriptures were accustomed to be read on the Sabbath. But out of regard to the canons which forbade 
fasting or kneeling on the Sabbath, there were no services, so that there might be as much feasting as 
possible. This the fathers prohibit, and decree that on the Sabbath the whole ecclesiastical office shall be 
said. 

Neander (Kirchengesch., 2d ed., vol. iij., p. 565 et seq.) suggests in addition to the interpretation just given 
another, viz.: that it was the custom in many parts of the ancient Church to keep every Saturday as a feast in 
commemoration of the Creation. Neander also suggests that possibly some Judaizers read on the Sabbath 
only the Old Testament; he, however, himself remarks that in this case <greek>euaggekia</greek> and 
<greek>eterwn</greek> <greek>graqpn</greek>would require the article. 

VAN ESPEN. 

Among the Greeks the Sabbath was kept exactly as the Lord's day except so far as the cessation of work 

was concerned, wherefore the Council wishes that, as on Sundays, after the other lessons there should 

follow the Gospel. 

For it is evident that by the intention of the Church the whole Divine Office was designed for the edification 

and instruction of the people, and especially was this the case on feast days, when the people were apt to 

be present in large numbers. 

Here we may note the origin of our present [Western] discipline, by which on Sundays and feast days the 

Gospel is wont to be read with the other Scriptures in the canonical hours, while such is not the case on ferial 

days, or in the order for ferias and "simples. "(1) 

CANON XVII. 

THE Psalms are not to be joined together in the congregations, but a lesson shall intervene after every 
psalm. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XVII. 

In time of service lessons shall be interspersed with the Psalms. 

ARISTENUS. 

It was well to separate the Psalms by lessons when the congregation was gathered in church, and not to 
keep them continuously singing unbroken psalmody, lest those who had assembled might become 
careless through weariness. 

ZONARAS. 

This was an ancient custom which has been laid aside since the new order of ecclesiastical matters has 
been instituted. (2) 

VAN ESPEN. 

Here it may be remarked we find the real reason why in our present rite, the lections, verses, etc., of the 
nocturns are placed between the Psalms, so as to repel weariness. 

CANON XVIII. 

THE same Service of prayers is to be said always both at hones and at vespers. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XVIII. 

The same prayers shall be said at nones vespers. 

HEFELE. 

Some feasts ended at the ninth hour, others only in the evening, and both alike with prayer. The Synod here 
wills that in both eases the same prayers should be used. Thus does Van Espen explain the words of the 
text, and I think rightly. But the Greek commentator understands the Synod to order that the same prayers 
should be used in all places, thus excluding all individual caprice. According to this, the rule of conformity 
would refer to places; while, according to Van Espen, the hones and vespers were to be the same. If, 
however, this interpretation were correct, the Synod would not have only spoken of the prayers at hones and 
vespers, but would have said in general, "all dioceses shall use the same form of prayer." 

EXCURSUS ON THE CHOIR OFFICES OF THE EARLY CHURCH. 

Nothing is more marked in the lives of the early followers of Christ than the abiding sense which they had of 
the Divine Presence. Prayer was not to them an occasional exercise but an unceasing practice. If then the 
Psalmist sang in the old dispensation "Seven times a day do I praise thee" (Ps. cxix. 164), we may be quite 
certain that the Christians would never fall behind the Jewish example. We know that among the Jews there 
were the "Hours of Prayer," and nothing would be, a priori, more likely than that with new and deeper 
significance these should pass over into the Christian Church. I need not pause here to remind the reader of 
the observance of "the hour of prayer" which is mentioned in the New Testament, and shall pass on to my 
more immediate subject. 

Most liturgiologists have been agreed that the "Choir Offices" of the Christian Church, that is to say the 
recitation of the Psalms of David, with lessons from other parts of Holy Scripture and collects, (1) was an 
actual continuation of the Jewish worship, the melodies even of the Psalms being carried over and modified 
through the ages into the plain song of today. For this view of the Jewish origin of the Canonical Hours there 
is so much to be said that one hesitates to accept a rival theory, recently set forth with much skill and 
learning, by a French priest, who had the inestimable happiness of sitting at the feet of De Rossi. M. Pierre 
Battifol(2) is of opinion that tim Canonical Hours in no way come from the Jewish Hours of Prayer but are the 
outgrowth of the Saturday Vigil service, which was wholly of Christian origin, and which he tells us was 
divided into three parts, j., the evening service, or lucernarium, which was the service of Vespers; ij., the 
midnight service, the origin of the Nocturns or Martins; iij., the service at daybreak, the origin of Lauds. Soon 
vigils were kept for all the martyr commemorations; and by the time of Tertullian, if not before, Wednesdays 
and Fridays had their vigils. With the growth of monasticism they became daily. This Mr. Battifol thinks was 
introduced into Antioch about A.D. 350, and soon spread all over the East. The "little hours," that is Terce, 
Sext, and None, he thinks were monastic in origin and that Prime and Compline were transferred from the 
dormitory to the church, just as the martyrology was transferred from the refectory. 
Such is the new theory, which, even if rejected, at least is valuable in drawing attention to the great 
importance of the vigil-service in the Early Church, an importance still attaching to it in Russia on the night of 
Easter Even. 

Of the twilight service we have a most exquisite remains in the hymn to be sung at the lighting of the lamps. 
This is one of the few Psalmi idiotici which has survived the condemnation of such compositions by the 
early councils, in fact the only two others are the Gloria in Excelsis and the Te Deum. The hymn at the 
lighting of the lamps is as follows: 

"O gladsome light 
Of the Father Immortal, 
And of the celestial 
Sacred and blessed 
Jesus, our Saviour! 

"Now to the sunset 
Again hast thou brought us; 
And seeing the evening 
Twilight, we bless thee, 

Praise thee, adore thee ! 

"Father omnipotent! 
Son, the Life-giver! 
Spirit, the Comforter! 
Worthy at all times 
Of worship and wonder!"(1) 

Dr. Battifol's new theory was promptly attacked by P. Suibbert Baumer, a learned German Benedictine who 
had already written several magazine articles on the subject before Battifol's book had appeared. 
The title of Baumer's book is Geschichte des Breviers, Versuch einer quellenmassigen Darstellung der 
Entiivicklung des altkirchen und des romeschen Officiums bis auf unsere Ttage. (Freibug in Briesgau, 1895.) 
The following(2) may be taken as a fair resume of the position taken in this work and most ably defended, a 
position which (if I may be allowed to express an opinion) is more likely to prevail as being most in 
accordance with the previous researches of the learned. 

"The early Christians separated from the Synagogues about A.D. 65; that is, about the same time as the first 
Epistle to Timothy was written, and at this moment of separation from the Synagogue the Apostles had 
already established, besides the liturgy, at least one, probably two, canonical hours of prayer, Martins and 
Evensong, Besides what we should call sermons, the service of these hours was made up of psalms, 
readings from Holy Scripture, and extempore prayers. A few pages on (p. 42) Baumer allows that even if this 
service had been daily in Jerusalem the Apostles' times, yet it had become limited to Sundays in the 
sub-Apostolic times, when persecution would not allow the Apostolic custom of daily morning and evening 
public prayer. Yet the practice of private prayer at the third, sixth, and ninth hours continued, based upon an 
Apostolic tradition; and thus, when the tyranny of persecution was overpast, the idea of public prayer at 
these hours was saved and the practice carried on." 

The student should by no means omit to read Dom Prosper Gueranger's Institutions Liturgiques, which while 
written in a bitter and most partisan spirit, is yet a work of the most profound learning. Above all anyone 
professing any familiarity with the literature on the subject must have mastered Cardinal Bona's invaluable 
De Divina Psalmodia, a mine of wisdom and a wonder of research. 

CANON XIX. 

AFTER the sermons of the Bishops, the prayer for the catechumens is to be made first by itself; and after the 
catechumens have gone out, the prayer for those who are under penance; and, after these have passed 
under the hand [of the Bishop] and departed, there should then be offered the three prayers of the faithful, 
the first to be said entirely in silence, the second and third aloud, and then the [kiss of] peace is to be given. 
And, after the presbyters have given the [kiss of] peace to the Bishop, then the laity are to give it [to one 
another], and so the Holy Oblation is to be completed. And it is lawful to the priesthood alone to go to the 
Altar and [there] communicate. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XIX. 

After the prayers of the catechumens shall be said those of the Penitents, and afterwards those of the faithful. 
And after the peace, or brace, has been given, the offering shall be made. Only priests shall enter the 
sanctuary and maize there their communion. 

The Greek commentators throw but little if any light upon this canon. A question has been raised as to who 
said the prayers mentioned. Van Espen, following Isidore's translation "they also pray who are doing 
penance," thinks the prayer of the penitents, said by themselves, is intended, and not the prayer said by the 
Bishop. But Hefele, following Dionysius's version-"the prayers over the catechumens," "over those who are 
doing penance"-thinks that the liturgical prayers are intended, which after the sermon were wont to be said 
"over" the different classes. Dionysius does not say "over" the faithful, but describes them as "the prayers of 
the faithful," which Hefele thinks means that the faithful joined in reciting them. 

EXCURSUS ON THE WORSHIP OF THE EARLY CHURCH. 

(Percival, H. R.: Johnson's Universal Cyclopoedia, Vol. V., s. v. Liturgies.) 

St. Paul is by some learned writers supposed to have quoted in several places the already existing liturgy, 
especially in I. Cor. ij. 9.,(1) and there can be no doubt that the Lord's prayer was used and certain other 
formulas which are referred to by St. Luke in the Acts of the Apostles(2) as "the Apostles' prayers." How 
early these forms were committed to writing has been much disputed among the learned, and it would be 
rash to attempt to rule this question. Pierre Le Brun(3) presents most strongly the denial of their having been 
written during the first three centuries, and Probst(4) argues against this opinion. While it does not seem 
possible to prove that before the fourth century the liturgical books were written out in full, owing no doubt to 
the influence of the disciplina arcani, it seems to be true that much earlier than this there was a definite and 
fixed order in the celebration of divine worship and in the administration of the sacraments. The famous 
passage in St Justin Martyr(5) seems to point to the existence of such a form in his day, shewing how even 
then the service for the Holy Eucharist began with the Epistle and Gospel. St. Augustine and St. Chrysostom 
bear witness to the same thing. (6) 

Within, comparatively speaking, a few years, a good deal of information with regard to the worship of the 
early Church has been given us by the discovery of the <greek>Didakh</greek>, and of the fragments the 
Germans describe as the K. O., and by the publication of M. Gamurrini's transcript of the Peregrinatio 
Silvice.(7) 

From all these it is thought that liturgical information of the greatest value can be obtained. Moreover the first 
two are thought to throw much light upon the age and construction of the Apostolical Constitutions. Without in 
any way committing myself to the views I now proceed to quote, I lay then before the reader as the results of 
the most advanced criticism in the matter. 

(Duchesne. Origines du Culte Chretien, p. 54 et seq.) 

All known liturgies may be reduced to four principal types-the Syrian, the Alexandrian, the Roman, and the 
Gallican. In the fourth century there certainly existed these four types at the least, for the Syrian had already 
given rise to several sub-types which were clearly marked. 
The most ancient documents of the Syrian Liturgy are: 

1 . The Catechetical Lectures of St, Cyril of Jerusalem, delivered about the year 347. 

2. The Apostolic Constitutions (Bk. II., 57, and Bk. VIII., 5-15). 

3. The homilies of St. John Chrysostom. 

St. John Chrysostom often quotes lines of thought and even prayers taken from the liturgy. Bingham(1) was 
the first to have the idea of gathering together and putting ill order these scattered references. This work has 
been recently taken in hand afresh by Mr. Hammond. (2) From this one can find much interesting 
corroborative evidence, but the orator does not give anywhere a systematic description of the liturgy, in the 
order of its rites and prayers. 

The Catechetical Lectures of St. Cyril are really a commentary upon the ceremonies of the mass, made to 
the neophytes after their initiation. The preacher does not treat of the missa catechumenorum because his 
hearers had so long been familiar with it; he presupposes the bread and wine to have been brought to and 
placed upon the altar, and begins at the moment when the bishop prepares himself to celebrate the Holy 
Mysteries by washing his hands. 

In the Apostolic Constitutions a distinction must be drawn between Book II. and Book VIII. The first is very 
sketchy; it only contains a description of the rites without the words used, the other gives at length all the 
formulas of the prayers, but only from the end of the Gospel. 

We know now that the Apostolical Constitutions in the present state of the Greek text represent a melting 
down and fusing together of two analogous books-the Didaskale of the Apostles, of which only a Syriac 
version is extant; and the Didake of the Apostles, recently discovered by the metropolitan, Philotheus 
Bryennius. The first of these two books has served as a basis for the, first six books of the Apostolical 
Constitutions. The second, much spread out, has become the seventh book of the same collection. The 
eighth book is more homogeneous. It must have been added to the seven others by the author of the 
recension of the Didaskale and of the Didake. This author is the same as he who made the interpolations in 
the seven authentic letters of St. Ignatius, and added to them six others of his own manufacture. He lived at 
Antioch in Syria, or else in the ecclesiastical region of which that city was the centre. He wrote about the 
middle of the fourth century, at the very high tide of the Subordination theology, which finds expression more 
than once in his different compositions. He is the author of the description of the liturgy, which is found in 
Book II.; in fact, that whole passage is lacking in the Syriac Ddaskale. Was it also he who composed the 
liturgy of the Vlllth book? This is open to doubt, for there are certain differences between this liturgy and that 
ofthelldbook.(3) 
I shall now describe the religious service such as these documents suppose, noting, where necessary, their 

divergences. 

The congregation is gathered together, the men on one side the women on the other, the clergy in the 

apsidal chancel. The readings immediately begin; they are interrupted by chants. A reader ascends the 

ambo, which stood in the middle of the church, between the clergy and the people, and read two lessons; 

then another goes up in his place to sing a psalm. This he executes as a solo, but the congregation join in 

the last modulations of the chant and continue them. This is what is called the "Response" (psalmus 

responsorius), which must be distinguished carefully from the "Antiphon," which was a psalm executed 

alternately by two choirs. At this early date the antiphon did not exist, only the response was known. There 

must have been a considerable number of readings, but we are not told how many. The series ended with a 

lection from the Gospel, which is made not by a reader but by a priest or deacon. The congregation stands 

during this lesson. 

When the lessons and psalmodies are done, the priests take the word, each in his turn, and after them the 

bishop. The homily is always preceded by a salutation to the people, to which they answer, "And with thy 

spirit." 

After the sermon the sending out of the different categories of persons who should not assist at the holy 

Mysteries takes place. First of all the catechumens. Upon the invitation of the deacon they make a prayer in 

silence while the congregation prays for them. The deacon gives the outline of this prayer by detailing the 

intentions and the things to be prayed for. The faithful answer, and especially the children, by the 

supplication Kyrie eleison. Then the catechumens rise up, and the deacon asks them to join with him in the 

prayer which he pronounces; next he makes them bow before the bishop to receive his benediction, after 

which he sends them home. 

The same form is used for the energumens, for the competentes, i.e., for the catechumens who are 

preparing to receive baptism, and last of all for the penitents. 

When there remain in the church only the faithful communicants, these fall to prayer; and prostrate toward the 

East they listen while the deacon says the litany-"Forthe peace and good estate of the world; for the holy 

Catholic and Apostolic Church; for bishops, priests; for the Church's benefactors; for the neophytes; for the 

sick; for travellers; for little children; for those who are erring," etc. And to all these petitions is added Kyrie 

eleison. The litany ends with this special form "Save us, and raise us up, O God, for thy mercy's sake." Then 

the voice of the bishop rises in the silence-he pronounces a solemn prayer of a grave and majestic style. 

Here ends the first part of the liturgy; that part which the Church had taken from the old use of the 

synagogues. The second part, the Christian liturgy, properly so-called, begins by the salutation of the 

bishop, followed by the response of the people. Then, at a sign given by a deacon, the clergy receive the 

kiss of peace from the bishop, and the faithful give it to each other, men to men, women to women. 

Then the deacons and the other lower ministers divide themselves between watching and serving at the 

altar. The one division go through the congregation, keeping all in their proper place, and the little children 

on the outskirts of the sacred enclosure, and watching the door that no profane person may enter the church. 

The others bring and set upon the altar the breads and the chalices prepared for the Sacred Banquet; two 

of them wave fans backwards and forwards to protect the holy offerings from insects. The bishop washes 

his hands and vests himself in festal habit; the priests range themselves around him, and all together they 

approach the altar. This is a solemn moment. After private prayer the bishop makes the sign of the cross 

upon his brow and begins, 

"The grace of God Almighty, and the love of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the communion of the Holy Ghost be 

with you always! 

"And with thy spirit. 

"Lift up your hearts. 

"We lift them up unto the Lord. 

"Let us give thanks unto our Lord. 

"It is meet and right so to do. 

"It is very meet," etc. 

And the eucharistic prayer goes on ... concluding at last with a return to the mysterious Sanctuary where God 

abides in the midst of spirits, where the Cherubims and the Seraphims eternally make heaven ring with the 

trisagion. 

Here the whole multitude of the people lift up their voices and joining their song with that of the choir of 

Angels, sing, "Holy, Holy, Holy," etc. 

When the hymn is done and silence returns, the bishop continues the interrupted eucharistic prayer. 

"Thou truly art holy," etc., and goes on to commemorate the work of Redemption, the Incarnation of the 

Word, his mortal life, his passion; now the officiant keeps close to the Gospel account of the last supper; the 

mysterious words pronounced at first by Jesus on the night before his death are heard over the holy table. 

Then, taking his inspiration from the last words, "Do this in remembrance of me," the bishop develops the 

idea, recalling the Passion of the Son of God, his death, his resurrection, his ascension, the hope of his 

glorious return, and declaring that it is in order to observe this precept and make this memorial that the 

congregation offers to God this eucharistic bread and wine. Finally he prays the Lord to turn upon the 

Oblation a favourable regard, and to send down upon it the power of his Holy Spirit, to make it the. Body and 

Blood of Christ, the spiritual food of his faithful, and the pledge of their immortality. 

Thus ends the eucharistic prayer, properly so-called. The mystery is consummated. ... The bishop then 

directs the prayers ... and when this long prayer is finished by a doxology, all the congregation answer 

"Amen," and thus ratify his acts of thanks and intercession. 

After this is said "Our Father," accompanied by a short litany. ... The bishop then pronounces his 

benediction on the people. 

The deacon awakes the attention of the faithful and the bishop cries aloud, "Holy things for holy persons." 

And the people answer, "There is one only holy, one only Lord Jesus Christ, to the glory of God the Father," 

etc. 

No doubt at this moment took place the fraction of the bread, a ceremony which the documents of the fourth 

century do not mention in express terms. 

The communion then follows. The bishop receives first, then the priests, the deacons, the sub-deacons, the 

readers, the singers, the ascetics, the deaconesses, the virgins, the widows, the little children, and last of all 

the people. 

The bishop places the consecrated bread in the right hand, which is open, and supported by the left; the 

deacon holds the chalice-they drink out of it directly. To each communicant the bishop says, "The Body of 

Christ"; and the deacon says, "The Blood of Christ, the Cup of life," to which the answer is made, "Amen." 

During the communion the singers execute Psalm XXXIII. [XXXIV. Heb. numbering] Benedicam Dominum, in 

which the words "O, taste and see how gracious the Lord is," have a special suitability. 

When the communion is done, the deacon gives the sign for prayer, which the bishop offers in the name of 

all; then all bow to receive his blessing. Finally the deacon dismisses the congregation, saying, "Go in 

peace. "(1) 

CANON XX. 

IT is not right for a deacon to sit in the presence of a presbyter, unless he be bidden by the presbyter to sit 
down. Likewise the deacons shall have worship of the subdeacons and all the [inferior] clergy. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XX. 

A deacon shall not sit down unless bidden. 

This is another canon to curb the ambition of Levites who wish to take upon themselves the honours of the 
priesthood also. Spiritual Cores seem to have been common in early times among the deacons and this is 
but one of many canons on the subject. Compare Canon XVIII of the Council of Nice. Van Espen points out 
that in the Apostolic Constitutions (Lib. II., cap. Ivij), occurs the following passage, "Let the seat for the bishop 
be set in the midst, and on each side of him let the presbyters sit, and let the deacons stand, having their 
loins girded." 

VAN ESPEN. 

Here it should be noted, by the way, that in this canon there is presented a hierarchy consisting of bishops, 
presbyters, and deacons and other inferior ministers, each with their mutual subordination one to the other. 
This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. xciii., c. xv., in Dionysius's 
version. 

CANON XXI. 

THE subdeacons have no right to a place in the Diaconicum, nor to touch the Lord's vessels. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXI. 

A subdeacon shall not touch the vessels. 

The "Lord's vessels" are the chalice and what we call the sacred vessels. 

ARISTENUS. 

The ecclesiastical ministers shall not take into their hands the Lord's vessels, but they shall be carried to the 

Table by the priests or deacons. 

Both Balsamon and Zonaras agree that by <greek>uperetai</greek> is here meant subdeacons. 

HEFELE. 

It is doubtful whether by diaconicum is here meant the place where the deacons stood during service, or the 

diaconicum generally so called, which answers to our sacristy of the present day. In this diaconicum the 

sacred vessels and vestments were kept; and as the last part of the canon especially mentions these, I 

have no doubt that the diaconicum must mean the sacristy. For the rest, this canon is only the concrete 

expression of the rule, that the subdeacons shall not assume the functions of the deacons. 

With regard to the last words of this canon, Morinus and Van Espen are of opinion that the subdeacons were 

not altogether forbidden to touch the sacred vessels, for this had never been the case, but that it was 

intended that at the solemn entrance to the altar, peculiar to the Greek service, the sacred vessels which 

were then carried should not be borne by the subdeacons. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. xxiii., c. xxvj. 

CANON XXII. 

THE subdeacon has no right to wear an orarium [i.e., stole], nor to leave the doors. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXII. 

A subdeacon must not wear an orarium nor leave the doors. 
The "orarium" is what we call now the stole. 

In old times, so we are told by Zonaras and Balsamon, it was the place of the subdeacons to stand at the 
church doors and to bring in and take out the catechumens and the penitents at the proper points in the 
service. Zonaras remarks that no one need be surprised if this, like many other ancient customs, has been 
entirely changed and abandoned. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. xxxii., canon xxvij., but 
reads hostias instead of ostia, thus making the canon forbid the subdeacons to leave the Hosts; and to 
make this worse the ancient Glossator adds, "but the subdeacon should remain and consume them with the 
other ministers." The Roman Correctors indeed note the error but have not felt themselves at liberty to 
correct it on account of the authority of the gloss. Van Espen remarks "To-day if any Hosts remain which are 
not to be reserved, the celebrant consumes them himself, but perchance in the time the gloss was written, it 
was the custom that the subdeacons and other ministers of the altar were accustomed to do this, but 
whenever the ministers present gradually fell into the habit of not receiving the sacrament, this consumption 
of what remained devolved upon the celebrant. "(1) 

EXCURSUS ON THE VESTMENTS OF THE EARLY CHURCH. 

It would be out of place to enter into any specific treatment of the different vestments worn by the clergy in the 
performance of their various duties. For a full discussion of this whole matter I must refer my readers to the 
great writers on liturgical and kindred matters, especially to Cardinal Bona, De Rebus Liturgicis; Pugin, 
Ecclesiastical Glossary; Rock, Church of our Fathers; Hefele, Beitrage zu Kircheschichte, Archaologie und 
Liturgik (essay in Die Liturgschen Gervander, vol. ij. p. 184 sqq.). And I would take this opportunity of warning 
the student against the entirely unwarranted conclusions of Durandus's Rationale Divinorum Officiorum and 
of Marriott's Vestiarium Christianum. 

The manner in which the use of the stole is spoken of in this canon shews not only the great antiquity of that 
vestment but of other ecclesiastical vestments as well. Before, however, giving the details of our knowledge 
with regard to this particular vestment I shall need no apology for quoting a passage, very germane to the 
whole subject, from the pen of that most delightful writer Curzon, to whose care and erudition all scholars and 
students of manuscripts are so deeply indebted. 

(Robert Curzon, Armenia, p. 202.) 

Here I will remark that the sacred vestures of the Christian Church are the same, with very insignificant 
modifications, among every denomination of Christians in the world; that they have always been the same, 
and never were otherwise in any country, from the remotest times when we have any written accounts of 
them, or any mosaics, sculptures, or pictures to explain their forms. They are no more a Popish invention, or 
have anything more to do with the Roman Church, than any other usage which is common to all 
denominations of Christians. They are and always have been, of general and universal-that is, of 
Catholic-use; they have never been used for many centuries for ornament or dress by the laity, having 
been considered as set apart to be used only by priests in the church during the celebration of the worship 
of Almighty God. 

Thus far the very learned Curzon. As is natural the distinctive dress of the bishops is the first that we hear of, 
and that in connexion with St. John, who is said to have worn a golden mitre or fillet.(2) 

(Duchesne, Origines du Culte Chretien, p. 376 et sqq.) 

It was not the bishops alone who were distinguished by insignia from the other ecclesiastics. Priests and 
deacons had their distinctive insignia as well. There was, however, a difference between Rome and the rest 
of the world in this matter. At Rome it would seem that but little favour was extended at first to these marks of 
rank; the letter of Pope Celestine to the bishops shews this already. But what makes it evident still more 
clearly, is that the orarium of the priest and of the deacon, looked upon as a visible and distinctive mark of 
these orders, was unknown at Rome, at least down to the tenth century, while it had been adopted 
everywhere else. 

To be sure, the orarium is spoken of in the ordines of the ninth century; but from these it is also evident that 
this vestment was worn by acolytes and subdeacons, as well as by the superior clergy, and that its place 
was under the top vestment, whether dalmatic or chasuble, and not over it. But that orarium is nothing more 
than the ancient sweat-cloth (sudarium), the handkerchief, or cravat which has ended up by taking a special 
form and even by becoming an accessory of a ceremonial vestment: but it is net an insignia. I know no 
Roman representation of this earlier than the twelfth century. The priests and deacons who figure in the 
mosaics never display this detail of costume. 

But such is not the case elsewhere. Towards the end of the fourth century, the Council of Laodicea in 
Phrygia forbade inferior classes, subdeacons, readers, etc., to usurp the orarium. St. Isidore of Pelusium 
knew it as somewhat analogous to the episcopal pallium, except that it was of linen, while the pallium was of 
wool. The sermon on the Prodigal Son, sometimes attributed to St. John Chrysostom [Migne's Ed., vol. viij., 
520], uses the same term, <greek>oqonh</greek>; it adds that this piece of dress was worn over the left 
shoulder, and that as it swung back and forth it called to mind the wings of the angels. 
The deacons among the Greeks wear the stole in this fashion down to to-day, perfectly visible, over the top 
of the upper vestment, and fastened upon the left shoulder. Its ancient name (<greek>wrarion</greek>) still 
clings to it. As for the orarium of the priests it is worn, like the stole of Latin priests, round the neck, the two 
ends falling in front, almost to the feet. This is called the epitrachilion (<greek>epitrakhlion</greek>). 
These distinctions were also found in Spain and Gaul. The Council of Braga, in 561 , ordered that deacons 
should wear these oraria, not under the tunicle, which caused them to be confounded with the subdeacon, 
but over it, over the shoulder. The Council of Toledo, in 633, describes the orarium as the common mark of 
the three superior orders, bishops, priests, and deacons; and specifies that the deacon should wear his 
over his left shoulder, and that it should be white, without any mixture of colours or any gold embroidery. 
Another Council of Braga forbade priests to say mass without having a stole around their necks and 
crossed upon the breast, exactly as Latin priests wear it to-day. St. Germanus of Paris speaks of the 
insignia of a bishop and of a deacon; to the first he assigns the name of pallium, and says that it is worn 
around the neck, and falls down upon the breast where it ends with a fringe. As for the insignia of a deacon 
he calls it a stole (stola); and says that deacons wear it over the alb. This fashion of wearing the stole of the 
deacon spread during the middle ages over nearly the whole of Italy and to the very gates of Rome. And 
even at Rome the ancient usage seems to have been maintained with a compromise. They ended up by 
adopting the stole for deacons and by placing it over the left shoulder, but they covered it up with the 
dalmatic or the chasuble. 

The priest's stole was also accepted: and in the mosaics of Sta. Maria in Trastevere is seen a priest 
ornamented with this insignia. It is worthy of notice that the four popes who are represented in the same 
mosaic wear the pallium but no stole. The one seems to exclude the other. And as a matter of fact the 
ordines of the ninth century in describing the costume of the pope omit always the stole. One can readily 
understand that who bore one of these insignia should not wear the other. 

However, they ended by combining them, and at Revenue, where they always had a taste for decorations, 
bishop Ecclesius in the mosaics of San Vitale wears both the priest's stole and the Roman pallium. This, 
however, seems to be unique, and his successors have the pallium only. The two are found together again 
in the Sacramentary of Autun (Vide M. Lelisle's reproduction in the Gazette Archeologique, 1884, pi. 20), and 

on the paliotto of St. Ambrose of Milan; such seems to have been the usage of the Franks. 
In view of these facts one is led to the conclusion that all these insignia, called pallium, omophorion, orarium, 
stole, epitrachilion, have the same, origin. They are the marks of dignity, introduced into church usage 
during the fourth century, analogous to those which the Theodosian code orders for certain kinds of civil 
functionaries. For one reason or another the Roman Church refused to receive these marks, or rather 
confined itself to the papal pallium, which then took a wholly technical signification. But everywhere else, this 
mark of the then superior orders of the hierarchy was adopted, only varying slightly to mark the degree, the 
deacon wearing it over the left shoulder, the bishop and priest around the neck, the deacon over the tunicle 
which is his uppermost vestment, the priest under the chasuble; the bishop over his chasuble. *However, for 
this distinction between a bishop and priest we have very little evidence. The Canon of III Brags, already 
cited, which prescribes that priests shall wear the stole crossed over the breast, presupposes that it is worn 
under the chasuble, but the council understands that this method of wearing it pertains distinctively to priests, 
and that bishops have another method which they should observe; for the word sacerdotes, used by the 
council, includes bishops as well as priests. The rest of the Spanish ecclesiastical literature gives us no 
information upon tile point. In Gaul, St. Germanus of Paris (as we have seen) speaks of the episcopal 
pallium after having described the chasuble, which makes one believe that it was worn on top. I have 
already said that Bishop Ecclesius of Ravenna is represented with the stole pendant before, under the 
chasuble and at the same time with the pallium on top of it; and that this usage was adopted in France in the 
Carlovingian times. Greek bishops also wear at the same time the epitrachilion and the omophorion. This 
accumulation of insignia was forbidden in Spain in the seventh century (Vide IV Toledo, Canon XXXIX), and 
(as we have stated) the Pope abstained from it until about the twelfth century, contenting himself with the 
pallium without adding to it the stole.* 

The pallium, with the exception of the crosses which adorn its ends, was always white; so too was the 
deacon's stole and also that of the priest and bishop. The pallium was always and everywhere made of 
wool; in the East the deacon's stole was of linen; I cannot say of what material the priest's and deacon's 
stole was in the West. 

CANON XXIII. 

THE readers and singers have no right to wear an orarium, and to read or sing thus [habited]. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXIII. 

Cantors and rectors shall not wear the orarium. 

VAN ESPEN. 

Rightly Zonoras here remarks, "for the same reason (that they should not seem to wish to usurp a ministry 
not their own) it is not permitted to these to wear the stole, for readers are for the work of reading, and singers 
for singing," so each one should perform his own office. 
This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. xxiii., can. xxviij. 

CANON XXIV. 

No one of the priesthood, from presbyters to deacons, and so on in the ecclesiastical order to subdeacons, 
readers, singers, exorcists, door-keepers, or any of the class of the Ascetics, ought to enter a tavern. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXIV. 

No clergyman should enter a tavern. 

Compare this with Apostolic Canon LIV., which contains exceptions not here specified. 

This canon is contained in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. xliv. c. jj. 

EXCURSUS ON THE MINOR ORDERS OF THE EARLY CHURCH. 

(Lightfoot, Apostolic Fathers, Ignatius, Vol. I., p. 258.) 

Some of these lower orders, the subdeacons, readers, door-keepers, and exorcists, are mentioned in the 
celebrated letter of Cornelius bishop of Rome (A.D. 251) preserved by Eusebius (H.E., vi., 43), and the 
readers existed at least half a century earlier (Tertull. de Praescr., 41). In the Eastern Church, however, if we 
except the Apostolic Constitutions, of which the date and country are uncertain, the first reference to such 
offices is found in a canon of the Council of Antioch, A.D. 341 , where readers, subdeacons, and exorcists, 
are mentioned, this being apparently intended as an exhaustive enumeration of the ecclesiastical orders 
below the diaconate; and for the first mention of door-keepers in the East, we must go to the still later Council 
of Laodicea, about A.D. 363, (see III., p. 240, for the references, where also fuller information is given). But 
while most of these lower orders certainly existed in the West, and probably in the East, as early as the 
middle of the third century the case is different with the "singers" (<greek>yaltai</greek>) and the 
"labourers" (<greek>kopiatai</greek>). Setting aside the Apostolic Constitutions, the first notice of the 
"singers" occurs in the canons of the above-mentioned Council of Laodicea. This, however, may be 
accidental. The history of the word copiatai affords a more precise and conclusive indication of date. The 
term first occurs in a rescript of Constantius (A.D. 357), "clerici qui copiatai appellantur," and a little later (A.D. 
361), the same emperor speaks of them as "hi quos copiatas recens usus instituit nuncupari." 
(Adolf Harnack, in his little book ridiculously intituled in the English version Sources of the Apostolic Canons, 
page 85.) 

Exorcists and readers there had been in the Church from old times, subdeacons are not essentially strange, 
as they participate in a name (deacon) which dates from the earliest days of Christianity. But acolytes and 
door-keepers (<greek>pulwroi</greek>) are quite strange, are really novelties. And these acolytes even at 
the time of Cornelius stand at the head of the ordines minores: for that the subdeacons follow on the 
deacons is self-evident. Whence do they come? Now if they do not spring out of the Christian tradition, their 
origin must be explained from the Roman. It can in fact he shown there with desirable plainness. 
With regard to subdeacons the reader may also like to see some of Harnack's speculations. In the volume 
just quoted he writes as follows (p. 85 note): 

According to Cornelius and Cyprian subdeacons were mentioned in the thirtieth canon of the Synod of Elvira 
(about 305), so that the sub diaconate must then have been acknowledged as a fixed general institution in 
the whole west (see Dale, The Synod of Elvira, Lond., 1882). The same is seen in the "gesta apud 
Zenophilum." As the appointment of the lower orders took place at Rome between about the years 222-249, 
the announcement in the Liber Pontificalis (see Duchesne's edition, fasc. 2, 1885, p. 148) is not to be 
despised, as according to it Bishop Fabian appointed seven subdeacons: "Hie regiones dividit diaconibus 
et fecit vii. subdiaconos." The Codex Liberianus indeed (see Duchesne, fasc. 1, pp. 4 and 5; Lipsius, 
Chronologie d. rom Bischofe, p. 267), only contains the first half of the sentence, and what the Liber Pontif. 
has added of the account of the appointment of subdeacons (... qui vii notariis imminerent, ut gestas 
martyrum in integro fideliter colligerent) is, in spite of the explanation of Duchesne, not convincing. According 
to Probst and other Catholic scholars the subdiaconate existed in Rome a long time before Fabian (Kirchl. 
Disciplin, p. 109), but Hippolytus is against them. Besides, it should be observed that the officials first, even 
in Carthage, are called hypo-deacons, though the word subdiaconus was by degrees used in the West. 
This also points to a Roman origin of the office, for in the Roman church in the first part of the third century the 
Greek language was the prevailing one, but not at Carthage. 

But to return to the Acolythes, and door-keepers, whom Harnack thinks to be copies of the old Roman 
temple officers. He refers to Marquardt's explanation of the sacrificial system of the Romans, and gives the 
following resume (page 85 etseqq.): 

1 . The temples have only partially their own priests, but they all have a superintendent (oedituus-curator 
templi). These ceditui, who lived in the temple, fall again into two classes. At least "in the most important 
brotherhoods the chosen oedituus was not in a position to undertake in person the watching and cleaning of 
the sacellum. He charged therefore with this service a freedman or slave." "In this case the sacellum had 
two oeditui, the temple-keeper, originally called magister oedituus, and the temple-servant, who appears to 
be called the oedituus minister." "To both it is common that they live in the temple, although in small chapels 
the presence of the servant is sufficient. The temple-servant opens, shuts, and cleans the sacred place, and 
shows to strangers its curiosities, and allows, according to the rules of the temple, those persons to offer up 
prayers and sacrifices to whom this is permitted, while he sends away the others." 

2. "Besides the endowment, the colleges of priests were also supplied with a body of servants"-the under 
official-; "they were appointed to the priests, ... by all of whom they were used partly as letter-carriers 
(tabellarii), partly as scribes, partly as assistants at the sacrifices." Marquardt reckons, (page 218 and fol.) 
the various categories of them among the sacerdotes publici, lictores, pullarii, victimarii, tibicines, viatores, 
sixthly the calatores, in the priests' colleges free men or freedmen, not slaves, and in fact one for the 
personal service of each member. 

Here we have the forerunners of the Church door-keepers and acolytes. Thus says the fourth Council of 
Carthage, as far as refers to the former: "Ostiarius cure ordinatur, postquam ab archidiacono instructus fuerit, 

qualiter in dome dei debeat conversari, ad suggestionem archidiaconi, tradat ei episcopus claves 
ecclesiae de altari, dicens. Sic age, quasi redditurus deo rationem pro his rebus, quae hisce clavibus 
recluduntur." The ostiarius (<greek>pulwros</greek>) is thus the aedituus minister. He had to look after the 
opening and shutting of the doors, to watch over the coming in and going out of the faithful, to refuse 
entrance to suspicious persons, and, from the date of the more strict separation between the missa 
catechumenorum and the missa fidelium, to close the doors, after the dismissal of the catechumens, against 
those doing penance and unbelievers. He first became necessary when there were special church 
buildings (there were such even in the second century), and they like the temples, together with the 
ceremonial of divine service, had come to be considered as holy, that is, since about 225. The church 
acolytes are without difficulty to be recognised in the under officials of the priests, especially in the 
"calatores," the personal servants of the priests. According to Cyprian the acolytes and others are used by 
preference as tabellarii. According to Cornelius there were in Rome forty-two acolytes. As he gives the 
number of priests as forty-six, it may be concluded with something like certainty that the rule was that the 
number of the priests and of the acolytes should be equal, and that the little difference may have been 
caused by temporary vacancies. If this view is correct, the identity of the calator with the acolyte is strikingly 
proved. But the name "acolyte" plainly shows the acolyte was not, like the door-keeper, attached to a 
sacred thing, but to a sacred person. 

(Lightfoot. Apostolic Fathers. Ignatius, ad Antioch, xj., note. Vol. II., Sec. II., p. 240.) 

The acolytes were confined to the Western Church and so are not mentioned here. On the other hand the 
"deaconesses" seem to have been confined to the Eastern Church at this time. See also Apost. Const., Hi., 
11.;viii., 12;comp. viii., 19-28, 31; Apost. Can., 43; Cone. Laodio, Can. 24; Cone. Antioch, Can. 10. Of these 
lower orders the "subdeacons" are first mentioned in the middle of the third century, in the passage of 
Cornelius already quoted and in the contemporary letters of Cyprian. The "readers" occur as early as 
Tertullian de Proescr. 41 "hodie diaconus, qui eras lector," where the language shows that this was already 
a firmly established order in the Church. Of the "singers" the notices in the Apostolical Constitutions are 
probably the most ancient. The "door-keepers," like the sub-deacons, seem to be first mentioned in the 
letter of Cornelius. The <greek>kopiwntes</greek> first appear a full century later; see the next note. The 
"exorcists," as we have seen, are mentioned as a distinct order by Cornelius, while in Apost. Const., viii., 26, 
it is ordered that they shall not be ordained, because it is a spiritual function which comes direct from God 
and manifests itself by its results. The name and the function, however, appear much earlier in the Christian 
Church; e.g., Justin Mart., Apol. ii., 6 (p. 45). The forms <greek>eporkisths</greek> and 
<greek>exorkisths</greek>are convertible; e.g., Justin Mart., Dial., 85 (p. 311). The "confessors" hardly 
deserve to be reckoned a distinct order, though accidentally they are mentioned in proximity with the 
different grades of clergy in Apost. Const., viii., 12, already quoted. Perhaps the accidental connexion in this 
work has led to their confusion with the offices of the Christian ministry in our false Ignatius. In Apost. Const., 
viii., 23, they are treated in much the same way as the exorcists, being regarded as in some sense an order 
and yet not subject to ordination. Possibly, however, the word <greek>omologhtai</greek> has here a 
different sense, "chanters," as the corresponding Latin "confessores" seems sometimes to have, e.g., in the 
Sacramentary of Gregory "Oremus et pro omnibus episcopis, presbyteris, diaconibus, acolythis, exorcistis, 
lectoribus, ostiariis, confessoribus, virginibus, viduis, et pro omni populo sancto Dei;" see Ducange, Gloss. 
Lat., s. v. (1 1 . p. 530, Henschel). 

In a law of the year 357 (Cod. Theod., xiii., 1) mention is made of "clerici qui copiatae appellantur," and 
another law of the year 361 (Cod. Theod. xvi., 2, 15) runs "clerici vero vel his quos copiatas recens usus 
instituit nuncupari," etc. From these passages it is clear that the name <greek>kopiwntes</greek> was not in 
use much before the middle of the fourth century, though the office under its Latin name "fossores" or 
"fossarii" appears somewhat earlier. Even later Epiphanius (Expos. Fid., 21) writes as if the word still 
needed some explanation. In accordance with these facts, Zahn (I. v., A. p. 129), correctly argues with regard 
to our Ignatian writer, urging that on the one hand he would not have ascribed such language to Ignatius if 
the word had been quite recent, while on the other hand his using the participle (<greek>tous</greek> 
<greek>kopiwntas</greek>) rather than the substantive indicates that it had not yet firmly established itself. 
For these "copiatae" see especially de Rossi, Roma Sotteranea, III., p. 533 sq., Gothofred on Cod. Theod., 
II., co, and for the Latin "fossores" Martigny, Diet, des Antiq. Chret. s.v. See also the inscriptions, C. I, G., 
9227, Bull, de Corr. Hellen., vii., p. 238, Journ. of Hellen. Stud., vi., p. 362. 

CANON XXV. 

A SUBDEACON must not give the Bread, nor bless the Cup, 
NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXV. 

A subdeacon may not give the bread and the cup. 

ARISTENUS. 

Subdeacons are not allowed to perform the work of presbyters and deacons. Wherefore they neither 
deliver the bread nor the cup to the people. 

HEFELE. 

According to the Apostolic Constitutions, the communion was administered in the following manner: the 
bishop gave to each the holy bread with the words: "the Body of the Lord," and the recipient said, "Amen." 
The deacon then gave the chalice with the words: "the Blood of Christ, the chalice of life," and the recipient 
again answered, "Amen." This giving of the chalice with the words: "the Blood of Christ," etc., is called in the 
canon of Laodicea a "blessing" (<greek>eulogein</greek>). The Greek commentator Aristenus in 
accordance with this, and quite rightly, gives the meaning of this canon. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Diet. XCIII., c. xix.; but reads 
"Deacons" instead of "Subdeacons." The Roman Correctors point out the error. 

CANON XXVI. 

THEY who have not been promoted [to that office] by the bishop, ought not to adjure, either in churches or in 
private houses. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXVI. 

No one shall adjure without the bishop's promotion to that office. 

BALSAMON. 

Some were in the habit of "adjuring," that is catechising the unbelievers, who had never received the 
imposition of the bishop's hands for that purpose; and when they were accused of doing so, contended that 
as they did not do it in church but only at home, they could not be considered as deserving of any 
punishment, For this reason the Fathers rule that even to "adjure" (<greek>eforkizen</greek>) is an 
ecclesiastical ministry, and must not be executed by anyone who shall not have been promoted thereto by 
a bishop. But the "Exorcist" must be excepted who has been promoted by a Chorepiscopus, for he can 
indeed properly catechize although not promoted by a bishop; for from Canon X. of Antioch we learn that 
even a Chorepiscopus can make an Exorcist. 

Zonaras notes that from this canon it appears that "Chorepiscopi are considered to be in the number of 
bishops." 

VAN ESPEN. 

"Promoted" (<greek>proakqentas</greek>) by the bishops, by which is signified a mere designation or 
appointment, in conformity with the Greek discipline which never counted exorcism among the orders, but 
among the simple ministries which were committed to certain persons by the bishops, as Morinus proves at 
length in his work on Orders (De Ordinationibus, Pars III., Ex. XIV., cap. ij.). 

Double is the power of devils over men, the one part internal the other external. The former is when they hold 
the soul captive by vice and sin. The latter when they disturb the exterior and interior senses and lead 
anyone on to fury. Those who are subject to the interior evils are the Catechumens and Penitents, and those 
who are subject to the exterior are the Energumens. Whoever are occupied with the freeing from the power 
of the devil of either of these kinds, by prayers, exhortations, and exorcisms, are said "to exorcize" them; 
which seems to be what Balsamon means when he says-"'exorcize' that is' to catechize the unbelievers.'" 
Vide this matter more at length in Ducange's Glossary (Gloss., s. v. Exorcizare). 
This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. LXIX. c. ij., Isidore's 
version. 

CANON XXVII. 

NEITHER they of the priesthood, nor clergymen, nor laymen, who are invited to a love feast, may take away 
their portions, for this is to cast reproach on the ecclesiastical order. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXVII. 

A clergyman invited to a love feast shall carry nothing away with him; for this would bring his order into 
shame. 

HEFELE. 

Van Espen translates: "no one holding any office in the Church, be he cleric or layman," and appeals to the 

fact that already in early times among the Greeks many held offices in the Church without being ordained, as 

do now our sacristans and acolytes. I do not think, however, with Van Espen, that by "they of the priesthood" 

is meant in general any one holding office in the Church, but only the higher ranks of the clergy, priests and 

deacons, as in the preceding twenty-fourth canon the presbyters and deacons alone are expressly 

numbered among the <greek>ieratikois</greek> and distinguished from the other (minor) clerics. And 

afterwards, in canon XXX., there is a similar mention of three different grades, <greek>ieratikoi</greek>, 

<greek>klhrikoi</greek>, and <greek>askhtai</greek>. 

The taking away of the remains of the agape is here forbidden, because, on the one hand, it showed 

covetousness, and, on the other, was perhaps considered a profanation. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. XLII., c. iij. 

CANON XXVIII. 

IT is not permitted to hold love feasts, as they are called, in the Lord's Houses, or Churches, nor to eat and 
to spread couches in the house of God. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON 

Beds shall not be set up in churches, nor shall love feasts be held there. 

HEFELE. 

Eusebius (H. E., Lib. IX., Cap. X.) employs the expression <greek>kuriaoa</greek> in the same sense as 
does this canon as identical with churches. The prohibition itself, however, here given, as well as the 
preceding canon, proves that as early as the time of the Synod of Laodicea, many irregularities had crept 
into the agape. For the rest, this Synod was not in a position permanently to banish the usage from the 
Church; for which reason the Trullan Synod in its seventy-fourth canon repeated this rule word for word. 
This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Disk XLII., c. iv. 

CANON XXIX. 

CHRISTIANS must not judaize by resting on the Sabbath, but must work on that day, rather honouring the 
Lord's Day; and, if they can, resting then as Christians. But if any shall be found to be judaizers, let them be 
anathema from Christ. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXIX. 

A Christian shall not stop work on the Sabbath, but on the Lords Day. 
BALSAMON. 

Here the Fathers order that no one of the faithful shall stop work on the Sabbath as do the Jews, but that they 
should honour the Lord's Day; on account of the Lord's resurrection, and that on that day they should abstain 
from manual labour and go to church. But thus abstaining from work on Sunday they do not lay down as a 
necessity, but they add, "if they can." For if through need or any other necessity any one worked on the 
Lord's day this was not reckoned against him. 

CANON XXX. 

NONE of the priesthood, nor clerics [of lower rank] nor ascetics, nor any Christian or layman, shall wash in a 
bath with women; for this is the greatest reproach among the heathen. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXX. 

It is an abomination to bathe with women. 

This canon was renewed by the Synod in Trullo, canon Ixxvij. 

Zonaras explains that the bathers were entirely nude and hence arose the objection which was also felt by 

the heathen. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. LXXXI, c. xxviij. 

CANON XXXI. 

IT is riot lawful to make marriages with all [sorts of] heretics, nor to give our sons and daughters to them; but 
rather to take of them, if they promise to become Christians. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXXI. 

It is not right to give children in marriage to heretics, but they should be received if they promise to become 
Christians. 

VAN ESPEN. 

By this canon the faithful are forbidden to contract marriage with heretics or to join their children in such; for, 
as both Balsamon and Zonaras remark, "they imbue them with their errors, and lead them to embrace their 
own perverse opinions." 

CANON XXXII. 

IT is unlawful to receive the eulogiae of heretics, for they are rather <greek>alogiai</greek> [i.e., fol-lies], 
than eulogiae [i.e., blessings]. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXXII. 

The blessings of heretics are cursings. 

To keep the Latin play upon the words the translator has used bene-dictiones and male-dictiones, but at the 

expense of the accuracy of translation. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars IL., Causa II., Quaest. I., Can. Ixvj. 

CANON XXXIII. 

No one shall join in prayers with heretics or schismatics. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXXIII. 

Thou shalt not pray with heretics or schismatics. 

VAN ESPEN. 

The underlying principle of this canon is the same as the last, for as the receiving of the Eulogiae which 
were sent by heretics as a the same communion, and therefore to be sign of communion, signified a 
communion avoided. This is also set forth in Apostolical with them in religious matters, so the sharing Canon 
number xlv. with them common prayer is a declaration 

CANON XXXIV. 

No Christian shall forsake the martyrs of Christ, and turn to false martyrs, that is, to those of the heretics, or 
those who formerly were heretics; for they are aliens from God. Let those, therefore, who go after them, be 
anathema. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXXIV. 

Whoso honours an heretical pseudo-martyr let him be anathema. 

HEFELE. 

This canon forbids the honouring of martyrs not belonging to the orthodox church. The number of Montanist 

martyrs of Phrygia was probably the occasion of this canon. 

The phrase which I have translated "to those who formerly were heretics" has caused great difficulty to all 

translators and scarcely two agree. Hammond reads "those who have been reputed to have been 

heretics;" and with him Fulton agrees, but wrongly (as I think) by omitting the "to." Lambert translates "to 

those who before were heretics" and correctly. With him agrees Van Espen, thus, vel eos qui prius heretici 

fuere. 

CANON XXXV. 

CHRISTIANS must not forsake the Church of God, and go away and invoke angels and gather assemblies, 
which things are forbidden. If, therefore, any one shall be found engaged in this covert idolatry, let him be 
anathema; for he has forsaken our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and has gone over to idolatry. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXXV. 

Whoso calls assemblies in opposition to those of the Church and names angels, is near to idolatry and let 
him be anathema. 

VAN ESPEN. 

Whatever the worship of angels condemned by this canon may have been, one thing is manifest, that it was 
a species of idolatry, and detracted from the worship due to Christ. 

Theodoret makes mention of this superstitious cult in his exposition of the Text of St. Paul, Col. ii., 18, and 
when writing of its condemnation by this synod he says, "they were leading to worship angels such as were 
defending the Law; for, said they, the Law was given through angels. And this vice lasted for a long time in 
Phrygia and Pisidia. Therefore it was that the synod which met at Laodicea in Phrygia, prohibited by a 
canon, that prayer should be offered to angels, and even to-day an oratory of St. Michael can be seen 
among them, and their neighhours." 

In the Capitular of Charlemagne, A.D 789 (cap. xvi.), it is said, "In that same council (Laodicea) it was 
ordered that angels should not be given unknown names, and that such should not be affixed to them, but 
that only they should be named by the names which we have by authority. These are Michael, Gabriel, 
Raphael." And then is subjoined the present canon. The canon forbids "to name" 
(<greek>onomazein</greek>) angels, and this was understood as meaning to give them names instead of 

to call upon them by name. 

Perchance the authors of the Capitular had in mind the Roman Council under Pope Zachary, A.D. 745, 

against Aidebert, who was found to invoke by name eight angels in his prayers. 

It should be noted that some Latin versions of great authority and antiquity read angulos for angelos. This 

would refer to doing these idolatrous rites in corners, hiddenly, secretly, occulte as in the Latin. But this 

reading, though so respectable in the Latin, has no Greek authority for it. 

This canon has often been used in controversy as condemning the cultus which the Catholic Church has 

always given to the angels, but those who would make such a use of this canon should explain how these 

interpretations can be consistent with the cultus of the Martyrs so evidently approved by the same council; 

and how this canon came to be accepted by the Fathers of the Second Council of Nice, if it condemned the 

then universal practice of the Church, East and West. Cf. Forbes, Considerationes Modestoe. 

CANON XXXVI. 

THEY who are of the priesthood, or of the clergy, shall not be magicians, enchanters, mathematicians, or 
astrologers; nor shall they make what are called amulets, which are chains for their own souls. And those 
who wear such, we command to be cast out of the Church. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME of CANON XXXVI. 

Whoso will be priest must not be a magician, nor one who uses incantations, or mathematical or 
astrological charms, nor a putter on of amulets. 

Some interesting and valuable information on charms will be found in Ducange (Glossarium, s. v. 
Phylacterea). 

BALSAMON. 

"Magicians" are those who for any purpose call Satan to their aid. "Enchantors" are those who sing charms 
or incantations, and through them draw demons to obey them. "Mathematicians" are they who hold the 
opinion that the celestial bodies rule the universe, and that all earthly things are ruled by their influence. 
"Astrologers" are they who divine by the stars through the agency of demons, and place their faith in them. 

VAN ESPEN. 

Zonaras also notes that the science of mathematics or astronomy is not at all hereby forbidden to the 
clergy, but the excess and abuse of that science, which even more easily may happen in the case of 
clergymen and consecrated persons than in that of laymen. 

CANON XXXVII. 

IT is not lawful to receive portions sent from the feasts of Jews or heretics, nor to feast together with them. 

CANON XXXVIII. 

IT is not lawful to receive unleavened bread from the Jews, nor to be partakers of their impiety. 

CANON XXXIX. 

IT is not lawful to feast together with the heathen, and to be partakers of their godlessness. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANONS XXXVII., XXXVIII, AND XXXIX. 

Thou shalt not keep feasts with Hebrews of heretics, nor receive festival offerings from them. 

BALSAMON. 

Read canon Ixx. and canon Ixxj. of the Holy Apostles, and Canon lx(1) of the Synod of Carthage. 

ARISTENUS. 

Light hath no communion with darkness. Therefore no Christian should celebrate a feast with heretics or 
Jews, neither should he receive anything connected with these feasts such as azymes and the like. 

CANON XL. 

BISHOPS called to a synod must not be guilty of contempt, but must attend, and either teach, or be taught, 
for the reformation of the Church and of others. And if such an one shall be guilty of contempt, he will 
condemn himself, unless he be detained by ill health. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XL. 

Whoso summoned to a synod shall spurn the invitation, unless hindered by the force of circumstances, shall 
not be free from blame. 

HEFELE. 

By <greek>anwmalia</greek>, illness is commonly understood, and Dionysius Exiguus and Isidore 
translated it, the former oegritudinem, and the latter infirmitatem. But Balsamon justly remarks that the term 
has a wider meaning, and, besides cases of illness includes other unavoidable hinderances or obstacles. 

This Canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. XVIII., c. v. 

CANON XLI. 

NONE of the priesthood nor of the clergy may go on a journey, without the bidding of the Bishop. 

CANON XLII. 

None of the priesthood nor of the clergy may travel without letters canonical. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANONS XLI. AND XLII. 

No clergyman shall undertake a journey without canonical letters or unless he is ordered to do so. 

VAN ESPEN 

(On Canon xli.) 

It is well known that according to the true discipline of the Church no one should be ordained unless he be 
attached to some church, which as an ecclesiastical soldier he shall fight for and preserve. As, then, a 
secular soldier cannot without his prefect's bidding leave his post and go to another, so the canons decree 
that no one in the ranks of the ecclesiastical military can travel about except at the bidding of the bishop who 
is in command of the army. A slight trace of this discipline is observed even to-day in the fact that priests of 
other dioceses are not allowed to celebrate unless they are provided with Canonical letters or testimonials 
from their own bishops. 

(On Canon xlii.) 

The whole subject of Commendatory and other letters is treated of in the note to Canon VIII. of the Council of 
Antioch. 

Canon xlj. is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars III., Dist. V., De Consecrat, can. 
xxxvj. 

Canon xlij. is appended to the preceding, but, curiously enough, limited to laymen, reading as follows: "a 
layman also without canonical letters," that is "formed letters," should not travel anywhere. The Roman 
Correctors remark that in the Greek order this last is canon xli., and the former part of Gratian's canon, canon 
xlij. of the Greek, but such is not the order of the Greek in Zonaras nor in Balsamon. The correctors add that 
in neither canon is there any mention made of laymen, nor in Dionysius's version; the Prisca, however, read 
for canon xlj., "It is not right for a minister of the altar, even for a layman, to travel, etc." 

CANON XLIII. 

THE subdeacons may not leave the doors to engage in the prayer, even for a short time. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XLIII. 

A subdeacon should not leave the gates, even for a short time, to pray. 

On this canon the commentators find nothing to say in addition to their remarks on Canons xxj., and xxij., 
except that the "prayer" is not their own private prayer, but the prayer of the Liturgy. It has struck me that 
possibly when them was no deacon to sing the litany outside the Holy Gates while the priest was going on 
with the holy action within, subdeacons may have left their places at the doors, assumed the deacon's stole 
and done his part of the office, and that it was to prevent this abuse that this canon was enacted, the "prayer" 
being the litany. But as this is purely my own suggestion it is probably valueless. 

CANON XLIV. 

Women may not go to the altar. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XLIV. 

The altar must not be approached by women. 

VAN ESPEN. 

The discipline of this canon was often renewed even in the Latin Church, and therefore Balsamon unjustly 
attacks the Latins when he says; "Among the Latins women go without any shame up to the altar whenever 
they wish," For the Latins have forbidden and do forbid this approach of women to the altar no less than the 
Greeks; and look upon the contrary custom as an abuse sprung of the insolence of the women and of the 
negligence of bishops and pastors. 

ZONARAS. 

If it is prohibited to laymen to enter the Sanctuary by the Ixixth canon of the Sixth synod [i.e. Quinisext], much 
more are women forbidden to do so who are unwillingly indeed, but yet truly, polluted by the monthly flux of 
blood. 

CANON XLV. 

[CANDIDATES] for baptism are not to be received after the second week in Lent. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XLV. 

After two weeks of Lent no one must be admitted for illumination, for all such should fast from its beginning. 

VAN ESPEN. 

To the understanding of this canon it must be remembered that such of the Gentiles as desired to become 

Catholics and to be baptized, at first were privately instructed by the catechists. After this, having acquired 

some knowledge of the Christian religion, they were admitted to the public instructions given by the bishop 

in church; and were therefore called Andientes and for the first time properly-speaking Catechumens. But 

when these catechumens had been kept in this rank a sufficient time and had been there tried, they were 

allowed to go up to the higher grade called Genuflectentes. 

And when their exercises had been completed in this order they were brought by the catechists who had 

had the charge of them, to the bishop, that on the Holy Sabbath [Easter Even] they might receive baptism, 

and the catechumens gave their names at the same time, so that they might be set down for baptism at the 

coming Holy Sabbath. 

Moreover we learn from St. Augustine (Serm. xiii., Ad Neophitos,) that the time for the giving in of the names 

was the beginning of Lent. 

This council therefore in this canon decrees that such as do not hand in their names at the beginning of Lent, 

but after two weeks are past, shall not be admitted to baptism on the next Holy Sabbath. 

CANON XLVI. 

THEY who are to be baptized must learn the faith [Creed] by heart, and recite it to the bishop, or to the 
presbyters, on the fifth day of the week. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME or CANON XLVI. 

Vide infra. 

HEFELE. 

It is doubtful whether by the Thursday of the text was meant only the Thursday of Holy Week, or every 
Thursday of the time during which the catechumens received instruction. The Greek commentators are in 
favour of the latter, but Dionysius Exiguus and Isidore, and after them Bingham, are, and probably rightly, in 
favour of the former meaning. This canon was repeated by the Trullan Synod in its seventy-eighth canon. 

CANON XLVII. 

THEY who are baptized in sickness and afterwards recover, must learn the Creed by heart and know that 
the Divine gifts have been vouchsafed them. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANONS XLVI. AND XLVII. 

Whoso is baptised by a bishop or presbyter let him recite the faith on the fifth feria of the week. Also anyone 
baptized clinically a short while afterwards. 

BALSAMON. 

Some unbelievers were baptized before they had been catechized, by reason of the urgency of the illness. 
Now some thought that as their baptism did not follow their being carechumens, they ought to be catechized 
and baptized over again. And in support of this opinion they urged Canon XII. of Neocaesarea, which does 
not permit one clinically baptized to become a priest rashly. For this reason it is that the Fathers decree that 
such an one shall not be baptized a second time, but as soon as he gets well he shall learn the faith and the 
mystery of baptism, and to appreciate the divine gifts he has received, viz., the confession of the one true 
God and the remission of sins which comes to us in holy baptism. 

CANON XLVIII. 

THEY who are baptized must after Baptism be anointed with the heavenly chrism, and be partakers of the 
Kingdom of Christ. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XLVIII. 

Those illuminated should after their baptism be anointed. 

VAN ESPEN. 

That this canon refers to the anointing with chrism on the forehead of the baptized, that is to say of the 
sacrament of confirmation, is the unanimous opinion of the Greek commentators, and Balsamon notes that 
this anointing is not simply styled "chrism "but "the heavenly chrism," viz.: "that which is sanctified by holy 
prayers and through the invocation of the Holy Spirit; and those who are anointed therewith, it sanctifies and 
makes partakers of the kingdom of heaven." 

AUBESPINE. 

(Lib. i., Observat. cap. xv.) 

Formerly no one was esteemed worthy of the name Christian or reckoned among the perfect who had not 
been confirmed and endowed with the gift of the Holy Ghost. 

The prayers for the consecration of the Holy Chrism according to the rites of the East and of the West should 
be carefully read by the student. Those of the East are found in the Euchologion, and those of the West in 
the Pontificale Romanum, De Officio in feria v. Coena Domini. 

CANON XLIX. 

DURING Lent the Bread must not be offered except on the Sabbath Day and on the Lord's Day only. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XLIX. 

In Lent the offering should be made only on the Sabbath and on the Lord's day. 

HEFELE. 

This canon, which was repeated by the Trullan Synod in its fifty-second canon, orders that on ordinary week 
days during Lent, only a Missa Proesanctificatorum should take place, as is still the custom with the Greeks 
on all days of penitence and mourning, when it appears to them unsuitable to have the full liturgy, and as 
Leo Allatius says, for this reason, that the consecration is a joyful act. A comparison of the above sixteenth 
canon, however, shows that Saturday was a special exception. 

To the Saturdays and Sundays mentioned by Hefele must be added the feast of the Annunciation, which is 
always solemnized with a full celebration of the Liturgy, even when it falls upon Good Friday. 

CANON L. 

THE fast must not be broken on the fifth day of the last week in Lent [i.e., on Maunday Thursday], and the 
whole of Lent be dishonoured; but it is necessary to fast during all the Lenten season by eating only dry 
meats. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON L. 

It is not right on the fifth feria of the last week of Lent to break the fast, and thus spoil the whole of Lent; but the 
whole of Lent should be kept with fasting on dry food. 

That long before the date of the Quinisext Synod the fasting reception of the Holy Eucharist was the 

universal law of the Church no one can doubt who has devoted the slightest study to the point. To produce 
the evidence here would be out of place, but the reader may be referred to the excellent presentation of it in 
Cardinal Bona's De Rebus Liturgicis. 
I shall here cite but one passage, from St. Augustine: 

"It is clear that when the disciples first received the body and blood of the Lord they had not been fasting. 
Must we then censure the Universal Church because the sacrament is everywhere partaken of by persons 
fasting? Nay, verily; for from that time it pleased the Holy Spirit to appoint, for the honour of so great a 
sacrament, that the body of the Lord should take the precedence of all other food entering the mouth of a 
Christian; and it is for this reason that the custom referred to is universally observed. For the fact that the Lord 
instituted the sacrament after other food had been partaken of does not prove that brethren should come 
together to partake of that sacrament after having dined or supped, or imitate those whom the Apostle 
reproved and corrected for not distinguishing between the Lord's Supper and an ordinary meal. The 
Saviour, indeed, in order to commend the depths of that mystery more affectingly to his disciples, was 
pleased to impress it on their hearts and memories by making its in stitution his last act before going from 
them to his passion. And, therefore, he did not prescribe the order in which it was to be observed, reserving 
this to be done by the Apestles, through whom he intended to arrange all things pertaining to the churches. 
Had he appointed that the sacrament should be always partaken of after other food, I believe that no one 
would have departed from that practice. But when the Apostle, speaking of this sacrament, says, 
'Wherefore, my brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one for another, and if any man hunger let him 
eat at home, that ye come not together unto condemnation,' he immediately adds, 'And the rest will I set in 
order when I come.' Whence we are given to understand that, since it was too much for him to prescribe 
completely in an epistle the method observed by the Universal Church throughout the world it was one of the 
things set in order by him in person; for we find its observance uniform amid all the variety of other 
customs. "(1) 

In fact the utter absurdity of the attempt to maintain the opposite cannot better be seen than in reading 
Kingdon's Fasting Communion, an example of special pleading and disingenuousness rarely equalled 
even in controversial theological literature. A brief but crushing refutation of the position taken by that writer 
will be found in an appendix to a pamphlet by H. P. Liddon, Evening Communions contrary to the Teaching 
and Practice of the Church in all Ages. 

But while this is true, it is also true that in some few places the custom had lingered on of making Maundy 
Thursday night an exception to this rule, and of having then a feast, in memory of our Lord's Last Supper, 
and after this having a celebration of the Divine Mysteries. This is the custom which is prohibited by this 
canon, but it is manifest both from the wording of the canon itself and from the remarks of the Greek 
commentators that the custom was condemned not because it necessitated an unfasting reception of the 
Holy Eucharist, but because it connoted a feast which was a breaking of the Lenten fast and a dishonour to 
the whole of the holy season. 

It is somewhat curious and a trifle amusing to read Zonaras gravely arguing the point as to whether the 
drinking of water is forbidden by this canon because it speaks of "dry meats," which he decides in the 
negative! 

BALSAMON. 

Those, therefore, who without being ill, fast on oil and shell-fish, do contrary to this law; and much more they 
who eat on the fourth and sixth ferias fish. 

CANON LI. 

The nativities of Martyrs are not to be celebrated in Lent, but commemorations of the holy Martyrs are to be 
made on the Sabbaths and Lord's days. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LI. 

Commemorations of Martyrs shall only be held on Lord's days and Sabbaths. 

By this canon all Saints-days are forbidden to be observed in Lent on the days on which they fall, but must 
be transferred to a Sabbath or else to the Sunday, when they can be kept with the festival service of the full 
liturgy and not with the penitential incompleteness of the Mass of the Presanctified. Compare canon xlix. of 
this Synod, and canon lij. of the Quinisext Council. 

BALSAMON. 

The whole of Lent is a time of grief for our sins, and the memories of the Saints are not kept except on the 
Sabbaths. 

Van Espen remarks how in old calendars there are but few Saints-days in those months in which Lent 
ordinarily falls, and that the multitude of days now kept by the Roman ordo are mostly of modern 
introduction. 

CANON Lll. 

MARRIAGES and birthday feasts are not to be celebrated in Lent. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON Lll. 

Marriage shall not be celebrated in Lent, nor birthdays. 

HEFELE. 

By "birthday feasts" in this canon the natalitia martyrum is not to be understood as in the preceding canon, 
but the birthday feasts of princes. This, as well as the preceding rule, was renewed in the sixth century by 
Bishop Martin of Bracara, now Braga, in Portugal. 

CANON LIU. 

CHRISTIANS, when they attend weddings, must not join in wanton dances, but modestly dine or breakfast, 
as is becoming to Christians. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LIN. 

It is unsuitable to dance or leap at weddings. 

VAN ESPEN. 

This canon does not call for explanation it for re reflexion, and greatly it is to be desired that it should be 
observed by Christians, and that through like improprieties, wedding-days, which should be days of holy joy 
and blessing, be not turned, even to the bride and groom themselves, into days of cursing. Moreover the 
Synod of Trent admonishes bishops (Sets, xxiv., De Reform. Mat., cap. x.) to take care that at weddings 
there be only that which is modest and proper. 

CANON LIV. 

MEMBERS of the priesthood and of the clergy must not witness the plays at weddings or banquets; but, 
before the players enter, they must rise and depart. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LIV. 

Priests and clerics should leave before the play. 

ARISTENUS. 

Christians are admonished to feast modestly when they go to weddings and not to dance nor 
<greek>ballizein</greek>, that is to clap their hands and make a noise with them. For this is unworthy of the 

Christian standing. But consecrated persons must not see the play at weddings, but before the thymelici 
begin, they must go out. 

Compare with this Canons XXIV. and LI., of the Synod in Trullo. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars III., De But Consecrat. Dist. v., 
can. xxxvij. 

CANON LV. 

NEITHER members of the priesthood nor of the clergy, nor yet laymen, may club together for drinking 
entertainments. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LV. 

Neither a layman nor a cleric shall celebrate a club feast. 

These meals, the expenses of which were defrayed by a number clubbing together and sharing the cost, 
were called "symbola" by Isidore, and by Melinus and Crabbe "comissalia," although the more ordinary 
form is "commensalia" or "comessalia." Cf. Ducange Gloss., s.v. Commensalia and Confertum. 
This Canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. XLIV., c. x. (Isidore's 
version), and c. xij., (Martin of Braga's version). 

CANON LVI. 

PRESBYTERS may not enter and take their seats in the bema before the entrance of the Bishop: but they 
must enter with the Bishop, unless he be at home sick, or absent. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LVI. 

A presbyter shall not enter the bema before the bishop, nor sit down. 

It is difficult to translate this canon without giving a false idea of its meaning. It does not determine the order 
of dignity in an ecclesiastical procession, but something entirely different, viz., it provides that when the 
bishop enters the sanctuary he should not be alone and walk into a place already occupied, but that he 
should have with him, as a guard of honour, the clergy. Whether these should walk before or after him would 
be a mere matter of local custom, the rule juniores priores did not universally prevail. 
This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. XCV., can. viij. 

CANON LVII. 

BISHOPS must not be appointed in villages or country districts, but visitors; and those who have been 
already appointed must do nothing without the consent of the bishop of the city. Presbyters, in like manner, 
must do nothing without the consent of the bishop. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LVII. 

A bishop shall not be established in a village or in the country, but a periodeutes. But should one be 

appointed he shall not perform any function without the bishop of the city. 

On the whole subject of Chorepiscopi seethe Excursus to Canon VIII. of Nice, in this volume. 

HEFELE. 

Compare the eighth and tenth canons of the Synod of Antioch of 341, the thirteenth of the Synod of Ancyra, 

and the second clause of the sixth canon of the Synod of Sardica. The above canon orders that from 
henceforth, in the place of the rural bishops, priests of higher rank shall act as visitors of the country 
dioceses and country clergy. Dionysius Exiguus, Isidore, the Greek commentators, Van Espen, Remi 
Ceillier, Neander, and others thus interpret this canon; but Herbst, in the Tubingen Review, translates the 
word (<greek>periodeutai</greek>) not visitors but physicians-physicians of the soul,— and for this he 
appeals to passages from the Fathers of the Church collected by Suicer in his Thesaurus. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. LXXX., c. v. 

CANON LVIII. 

THE Oblation must not be made by bishops or presbyters in any private houses. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LVIII. 

Neither a bishop nor a presbyter shall make the offering in private houses. 

VAN ESPEN. 

By "the oblation" here is intended the oblation of the unbloody sacrifice according to the mind of the Greek 
interpreters. Zonaras says: "The faithful can pray to God and be intent upon their prayers everywhere, 
whether in the house, in the field, or in any place they possess: but to offer or perform the oblation must by no 
means be done except in a church and at an altar." 

CANON LIX. 

No psalms composed by private individuals nor any uncanonical books may be read in the church, but 
only the Canonical Books of the Old and New Testaments. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LIX. 

Psalms of private origin, or books uncanonical are not to be sung in temples; but the canonical writings of 
the old and new testaments. 

HEFELE. 

Several heretics, for instance Bardesanes, Paul of Samosata, and Apollinaris-had composed psalms, i.e., 
Church hymns. The Synod of Laodicea forbade the use of any composed by private individuals, namely all 
unauthorized Church hymns. Luft remarks that by this it was not intended to forbid the use of all but the Bible 
psalms and hymns, for it is known that even after this Synod many hymns composed by individual 
Christians, for instance, Prudentius, Clement, Ambrose, came into use in the Church. Only those not 
sanctioned were to be banished. 

This idea was greatly exaggerated by some Gallicans in the seventeenth century who wished that all the 
Antiphons, etc., should be in the words of Holy Scripture. A learned but somewhat distorted account of this 
whole matter will be found in the Institutions Liturgiques by Dom Prosper Gueranger, tome ij., and a shorter 
but more temperate account in Dr. Batiffol's Histoire du Breviaire Romain, Chap. vj. 

CANON LX. 

[N. B.-This Canon is of most questionable genuineness.] 

THESE are all the books of Old Testament appointed to be read: 1 , Genesis of the world; 2, The Exodus 
from Egypt; 3, Leviticus; 4, Numbers; 5, Deuteronomy; 6, Joshua, the son of Nun; 7, Judges, Ruth; 8, Esther; 
9, Of the Kings, First and Second; 10, Of the Kings, Third and Fourth; 11, Chronicles, First and Second; 12, 
Esdras, First and Second; 13, The Book of Psalms; 14, The Proverbs of Solomon; 15, Ecclesiastes; 16, The 

Song of Songs;17, Job; 18, The Twelve Prophets; 19, Isaiah; 20, Jeremiah, and Baruch, the Lamentations, 
and the Epistle; 21, Ezekiel; 22, Daniel. 

And these are the books of the New Testament: Four Gospels, according to Matthew, Mark, Luke and John; 
The Acts of the Apostles; Seven Catholic Epistles, to wit, one of James, two of Peter, three of John, one of 
Jude; Fourteen Epistles of Paul, one to the Romans, two to the Corinthians, one to the Galatians, one to the 
Ephesians, one to the Philippians, one to the Colossians, two to the Thessalonians, one to the Hebrews, two 
to Timothy, one to Titus, and one to Philemon. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LX. 

But of the new, the four Gospels-of Matthew, of Mark, of Luke, of John ; Acts; Seven Catholic epistles, viz. of 
James one, of Peter two, of John three, of Jude one ; of Paul fourteen, viz.: to the Romans one, to the 
Corinthians two, to the Galatians one, to the Ephesians one, to the Phillipians one, to the Colossians one, to 
the Thessalonians two, to the Hebrews one, to Timothy two, to Titus one, and to Philemon one. 

It will be noticed that while this canon has often been used for controversial purposes it really has little or no 

value in this connexion, for the absence of the Revelation of St. John from the New Testament to all orthodox 

Christians is, to say the least, as fatal to its reception as an ecumenical definition of the canon of Holy 

Scripture, as the absence of the book of Wisdom, etc., from the Old Testament is to its reception by those 

who accept the books of what we may call for convenience the Greek canon, as distinguished from the 

Hebrew, as canonical. 

We may therefore leave this question wholly out of account, and merely consider the matter from the 

evidence we possess. 

In 1777 Spittler published a special treatise(1) to shew that the list of scriptural books was no part of the 

original canon adopted by Laodicea. Hefele gives the following resume of his argument:(2) 

(a) That Dionysius Exiguus has not this canon in his translation of the Laodicean decrees. It might, indeed, 
be said with Dallaeus and Van Espen, that Dionysius omitted this list of the books of Scripture because in 
Rome, where he composed his work, another by Innocent I. was in general use. 

(b) But, apart from the fact that Dionysius is always a most faithful translator, this sixtieth canon is also 
omitted by John of Antioch, one of the most esteemed and oldest Greek collectors of canons, who could 
have had no such reasons as Dionysius for his omission. 

(c) Lastly, Bishop Martin of Braga in the sixth century, though he has the fifty-ninth, has also not included in his 
collection the sixtieth canon so nearly related to it, nor does the Isidorian translation appear at first to have 
had this canon. (1) Herbst, in the Tubingen Review, also accedes to these arguments of Spittler's, as did 
Fuchs and others before him. Mr. Ffoulkes in his article on the Council of Laodicea in Smith and Cheetham's 
Dictionary of Christian Antiquities at length attempts to refute all objections, and affirms the genuineness of 
the list, put his conclusions can hardly be accepted when the careful consideration and discussion of the 
matter by Bishop Westcott is kept in mind. (History of the Canon of the New Testament, llld. Period, chapter 
ii. [p. 428 of the 4th Edition.])
