The Canons of the Council in Trullo (the Quinisext Council, 692)
Translation: Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Second Series, vol. 14, ed. Henry R. Percival (1900), Public Domain
Source: https://archive.org/details/EarlyChurchFathers38Volumes

THE CANONS OF THE COUNCIL IN TRULLO (THE 
QUINISEXT COUNCIL) 

THE CANONS OF THE COUNCIL IN TRULLO; 

OFTEN CALLED 

THE QUINISEXT COUNCIL, 

A.D. 692. 

Elenchus. 

Introductory Note. 

The Canons with the Ancient Epitome and Notes. 

Excursus to Canon VI., On the Marriage of the Clergy. 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE. 

From the fact that the canons of the Council in Trullo are included in this volume of the Decrees and Canons 
of the Seven Ecumenical Councils it must not for an instant be supposed that it is intended thereby to affirm 
that these canons have any ecumenical authority, or that the council by which they were adopted can lay 
any claim to being ecumenical either in view of its constitution or of the subsequent treatment by the Church 
of its enactments. 

It is true that it claimed at the time an ecumenical character, and styled itself such in several of its canons, it 
is true that in the mind of the Emperor Justinian II., who summoned it, it was intended to have been 
ecumenical. It is the that the Greeks at first declared it to be a continuation of the Sixth Synod and that by this 
name they frequently denominate and quote its canons. But it is also true that the West was not really 
represented at it at all (as we shall see presently); that when the Emperor afterwards sent the canons to the 
Pope to receive his signature, he absolutely refused to have anything to do with them; and it is further true 
that they were never practically observed by the West at all, and that even in the East their authority was 
rather theoretical than real. 

(Fleury. Histoire Ecclesiastique, Livre XL., Chap, xlix.) 

As the two last General Councils (in 553 and in 681)had not made any Canons, the Orientals judged it 
suitable to supply them eleven years after the Sixth Council, that is to say, the year 692, fifth indiction. For that 
purpose the Emperor Justinian convoked a Council, at which 211 Bishops attended, of whom the principal 
were the four Patriarchs, Paul of Constantinople, Peter of Alexandria, Anastasius of Jerusalem, George of 
Antioch. Next in the subscriptions are named John of Justinianopolis, Cyriacus of Cesarea in Cappadocia, 
Basil of Gortyna in Crete, who says that he represents the whole Council of the Roman Church, as he had 
said in subscribing the Sixth Council. But it is certain otherwise that in this latter council there were present 
Legates of the Holy See. This council, like the Sixth, (1) assembled in the dome of the palace called in Latin 
Trullus, which name it has kept. It is also named in Latin Quinisextum, in Greek Penthecton, as one might 
say, the fifth-sixth, to mark that it is only the supplement of the two preceding Councils, though properly it is a 
distinct one. 

The intention was to make a body of discipline to serve thenceforth for the whole Church, and it was 
distributed into 102 Canons. 

To this statement by Fleury some additions must be made. First, with regard to the date of the synod. This is 
not so certain as would appear at first sight. At the Seventh Ecumenical Council, the patriarch Tarasius of 
Constantinople asserted that, "four or five years after the sixth Ecumenical Council the same bishops, in a 
new assembly under Justinian II. had published the [Trullan] Canons mentioned," and this assertion the 
Seventh Council appears to have accepted as true, if we understand the sixth session aright. Now were this 
statement true, the date would be probably 686, but this is impossible by the words of the council itself, 
where we find mention made of the fifteenth of January of the past 4th indiction, or the year of the world, 6109. 

To make this agree at all, scholars tell us that for iv. must be read xiv. But the rest of the statement is equally 
erroneous, the bishops were not the same, as can readily be seen by comparing the subscriptions to the 
Acts. The year of the world 6109 is certainly wrong, and so other scholars would read 6199, but here a 
division takes place, for some reckon by the Constantinopolitan era, and so fix the date at 691 , and others 
following the Alexandrian era fix it at 706. But this last is certainly wrong, for the canons were sent for 
signature to Pope Sergius, who died as early as 701 . Hefele's conclusion is as follows: 

(Hefele. Hist, of the Councils, Vol. V., p. 222.) 

The year 61 99 of the Constantinopolitan era coincides with the year 691 after Christ and the IVth Indiction ran 
from September 1, 690, to August 31, 691. If then, our Synod, in canon iij., speaks of the 15th of January in the 
past Indiction IV., it means January 691 ; but it belongs itself, to the Vth Indiction, i.e., it was opened after 
September 1 , 691 , and before September 1 , 692. 

As this is not a history of the Councils but a collection of their decrees and canons with illustrative notes, the 
only other point to be considered is the reception these canons met with. 

The decrees were signed first by the Emperor, the next place was left vacant for the Pope, then followed the 
subscriptions of the Patriarchs of Constantinople, Alexandria, Jerusalem, and Antioch, the whole number 
being 21 1 , bishops or representatives of bishops. It is not quite certain whether any of the Patriarchs were 
present except Paul of Constantinople; but taking it all in all the probability is in favour of their presence. (1) 
Blank places were left for the bishops of Thessalonica, Sardinia, Ravenna and Corinth. The Archbishop of 
Gortyna in Crete added to his signature the phrase "Holding the place of the holy Church of Rome in every 
synod." He had in the same way signed the decrees of III. Constantinople, Crete belonging to the Roman 
Patriarchate; as to whether his delegation on the part of the Roman Synod continued or was merely made to 
continue by his own volition we have no information. The ridiculous blunder of Balsamon must be noted 
here, who asserts that the bishops whose names are missing and for which blank places were left, had 
actually signed. 

Pope Sergius refused to sign the decrees when they were sent to him, rejected them as "lacking authority" 
(invalidi) and described them as containing "novel errors." With the efforts to extort his signature we have no 
concern further than to state that they signally failed. Later on, in the time of Pope Constantine, a middle 
course seems to have been adopted, a course subsequently in the ninth century thus expressed by Pope 
John VIII., "he accepted all those canons which did not contradict the true faith, good morals, and the 
decrees of Rome," a truly notable statement! Nearly a century later Pope Hadrian I. distinctly recognizes all 
the Trullan decrees in his letter to Tenasius of Constantinople and attributes them to the Sixth Synod. "All the 
holy six synods I receive with all their canons, which rightly and divinely were promulgated by them, among 
which is contained that in which reference is made to a Lamb being pointed to by the Precursor as being 
found in certain of the venerable images." Here the reference is unmistakably to the Trullan Canon LXXXII. 
Hefele's summing up of the whole matter is as follows: 

(Hefele, Hist, of the Councils, Vol. V., p. 242.) 

That the Seventh Ecumenical Council at Nice ascribed the Trullan canons to the Sixth Ecumenical Council, 
and spoke of them entirely in the Greek spirit, cannot astonish us, as it was attended almost solely by 
Greeks. They specially pronounced the recognition of the canons in question in their own first canon; but 
their own canons have never received the ratification of the Holy See. 

Thus far Hefele, but it seems that Gratian's statement on the subject in the Decretum should not be omitted 

here. (Pars I. Dist. XVI., c. v.) 

"Canon V. The Sixth Synod is confirmed by the authority of Hadrian. "I receive the Sixth Synod with all its 

canons. 

"Gratian. There is a doubt whether it set forth canons but this is easily removed by examnining the fourth 

session of the Vllth [Vlth by mistake, vide Roman Correctors' note] Synod. "For Peter the Bp. of Nicomedia 

says: "C. VI. The Sixth Synod wrote canons. 

"I have a book containing the canons of the holy Sixth Synod. The Patriarch said: 1 . Some are scandalized 

through their ignorance of these canons, saying: Did the Sixth Synod make any canons? Let them know then 

that the Sixth Holy Synod was gathered together under Constantine against those who said there is one 

operation and one will in Christ, in which the holy Fathers anathematized these as heretics and explained 

the orthodox faith. 

"II. Pars 2. And the synod was dissolved in the XlVth year of Constantine. After four or five years the same 

holy Fathers met together under Justinian, the son of Constantine, and promulgated the aforementioned 

canons, of which let no one have any doubt. For they who under Constantine were in synod, these same 

bishops under Justinian subscribed to all these canons. For it was fitting that a Universal Synod should 

promulgate ecclesiastical canons. Item: 3. The Holy Sixth Synod after it promulgated its definition against 

the Monothelites, the emperor Constantine who had summoned it, dying soon after, and Justinian his son 

reigning in his stead, the same holy synod divinely inspired again met at Constantinople four or five years 

afterwards, and promulgated one hundred and two canons for the correction of the Church. 

"Gratian. From this therefore it may be gathered that the Sixth Synod was twice assembled: the first time 

under Constantine and then passed no canons; the second time under Justinian his son, and promulgated 

the aforesaid canons." 

Upon this passage of Gratian's the Roman Correctors have a long and interesting note, with quotations from 

Anastasius, which should be read with care by the student but is too long to cite here. 

I close with some eminently wise remarks by Prof. Michaud. 

(E. Michaud, Discussion sur lea Sept Conciles (Ecumeniques, p. 272.) 
Upon the canons of this council we must remark: 

1 . That save its acceptance of the dogmatic decisions of the six Ecumenical Councils, which is contained in 
the first canon, tiffs council had an exclusively disciplinary character; and consequently if it should be 
admitted by the particular churches, these would always remain, on account of their autonomy, judges of the 
fitness or non-suitability of the practical application of these decisions. 

2. That the Easterns have never pretended to impose this code upon the practice of the Western Churches, 
especially as they themselves do not practise everywhere the hundred and two canons mentioned. All they 
wished to do was to maintain the ancient discipline against the abuses and evil innovations of the Roman 
Church, and to make her pause upon the dangerous course in which she was already beginning to enter. 

3. That if among these canons, some do not apply to the actual present state of society, e.g., the 8th, 10th, 
11th, etc.; if others, framed in a spirit of transition between the then Eastern customs and those of Rome, do 
not appear as logical nor as wise as one might desire, e.g., the 6th, 12th, 48th, etc., nevertheless on the other 
hand, many of them are marked with the most profound sagacity. 

THE CANONS OF THE COUNCIL IN TRULLO. 

(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. VI., col. 1135 etseqq.) 

CANON I. 

THAT order is best of all which makes every word and act begin and end in God. Wherefore that piety may 
be clearly set forth by us and that the Church of which Christ is the foundation may be continually increased 
and advanced, and that it may be exalted above the cedars of Lebanon; now therefore we, by divine grace 
at the beginning of our decrees, define that the faith set forth by the God-chosen Apostles who themselves 
had both seen and were ministers of the Word, shall be preserved without any innovation, unchanged and 
inviolate. 

Moreover the faith of the three hundred and eighteen holy and blessed fathers who were assembled at Nice 
under Constantine our Emperor, against the impious Arius, and the gentile diversity of deity or rather (to 
speak accurately) multitude of gods taught by him, who by the unanimous acknowledgment of the faithful 
revealed and declared to us the consubstantiality of the Three Persons comprehended in the Divine 
Nature, not suffering this faith to lie hidden under the bushel of ignorance, but openly teaching the faithful to 
adore with one worship the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, confuting and scattering to the winds the 
opinion of different grades, and demolishing and overturning the puerile toyings fabricated out of sand by 
the heretics against orthodoxy. 

Likewise also we confirm that faith which was set forth by the one hundred and fifty fathers who in the time of 
Theoriesins the Elder, our Emperor, assembled in this imperial city, accepting their decisions with regard to 
the Holy Ghost in assertion of his godhead, and expelling the profane Macedonius (together with all 
previous enemies of the truth) as one who dared to judge Him to be a servant who is Lord, and who wished 
to divide, like a robber, the inseparable unity, so that there might be no perfect mystery of our faith. 
And together with this odious and detestable contender against the truth, we condemn Apollinaris, priest of 
the same iniquity, who impiously belched forth that the Lord assumed a body unendowed with a soul, (1) 
thence also inferring that his salvation wrought for us was imperfect. 

Moreover what things were set forth by the two hundred God-bearing fathers in the city of Ephesus in the 
days of Theodosius our Emperor, the son of Arcadius; these doctrines we assent to as the unbroken 
strength of piety, teaching that Christ the incarnate Son of God is one; and declaring that she who bare him 
without human seed was the immaculate Ever-Virgin, glorifying her as literally and in very truth the Mother of 
God. We condemn as foreign to the divine scheme the absurd division of Nestorius, who teaches that the 
one Christ consists of a man separately and of the Godhead separately and renews the Jewish impiety. 

Moreover we confirm that faith which at Chalcedon, the Metropolis, was set forth in accordance with 
orthodoxy by the six hundred and thirty God-approved fathers in the time of Marcian, who was our Emperor, 
which handed down with a great and mighty voice, even unto the ends of the earth, that the one Christ, the 
son of God, is of two natures, and must be glorified (2) in these two natures, and which cast forth from the 
sacred precincts of the Church as a black pestilence to be avoided, Eutyches, babbling stupidly and 
inanely, and teaching that the great mystery of the incarnation (<greek>oikonwmias</greek>) was perfected 
in thought only. And together with him also Nestorius and Dioseorus of whom the former was the defender 
and champion of the division, the latter of the confusion [of the two natures in the one Christ], both of whom 
fell away from the divergence of their impiety to a common depth of perdition and denial of God. 
Also we recognize as inspired by the Spirit the pious voices of the one hundred and sixty-five God-beating 
fathers who assembled in this imperial city in the time of our Emperor Justinian of blessed memory, and we 
teach them to those who come after us; for these synodically anathematized and execrated Theodore of 
Mopsuestia (the teacher of Nestorius), and Origen, and Didymus, and Evagrius, all of whom reintroduced 
feigned Greek myths, and brought back again the circlings of certain bodies and souls, and deranged 
turnings [or transmigrations] to the wanderings or dreamings of their minds, and impiously insulting the 
resurrection of the dead. Moreover [they condemned] what things were written by Theodoret against the 
right faith and against the Twelve Chapters of blessed Cyril, and that letter which is said to have been written 
by Ibas. 

Also we agree to guard untouched the faith of the Sixth Holy Synod, which first assembled in this imperial 
city in the time of Constantine, our Emperor, of blessed memory, which faith received still greater 
confirmation from the fact that the pious Emperor ratified with his own signet that which was written for the 
security of future generations. This council taught that we should openly profess our faith that in the 
incarnation of Jesus Christ, our true God, there are two natural wills or volitions and two natural operations; 
and condemned by a just sentence those who adulterated the true doctrine and taught the people that in the 
one Lord Jesus Christ there is but one will and one operation; to wit, Theodore of Pharan, Cyrus of 
Alexandria, Honorius of Rome, Sergius, Pyrrhus, Paul and Peter, who were bishops of this God-preserved 
city; Macarius, who was bishop of Antioch; Stephen, who was his disciple, and the insane Polychronius, 
depriving them henceforth from the communion of the body of Christ our God. 

And, to say so once for all, we decree that the faith shall stand firm and remain unsullied until the end of the 
world as well as the writings divinely handed down and the teachings of all those who have beautified and 
adorned the Church of God and were lights in the world, having embraced the word of life. And we reject and 
anathematize those whom they rejected and anathematized, as being enemies of the truth, and as insane 
ragers against God, and as lifters up of iniquity. 

But if any one at all shall not observe and embrace the aforesaid pious decrees, and teach and preach in 
accordance therewith, but shall attempt to set himself in opposition thereto, let him be anathema, according 
to the decree already promulgated by the up-proved holy and blessed Fathers, and let him be cast out and 
stricken off as an alien from the number of Christians. For our decrees add nothing to the things previously 
defined, nor do they take anything away, nor have we any such power. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON I. is 

No innovation upon the faith of the Apostles to be allowed. The faith of the Nicene fathers is perfect, which 

overthrows through the homousion the doctrines of Arius who introduced degrees into the Godhead. 

The Synod held under Theodosius the great shall be held inviolate, which deposed Macedonius who 

asserted that the Holy Ghost was a servant. 

The two hundred who under Theodosius the Younger assembled at Ephesus are to be reversed for they 

expelled Nestorius who asserted that the Lord was man and God separately (<greek>idikws</greek>). 

Those who assembled at Chalcedon in the time of Marcion are to be celebrated with eternal remembrance, 

who deposed Eutyches. who dared to say that the great mystery was accomplished only in image, as well 

as Nestorius and Dioseorus, observing equal things in an opposite direction. 

One hundred and sixty-five were assembled in the imperial city by Justinian, who anathematized Origen, for 

teaching periods (<greek>periodous</greek>) of bodies and souls, and Theodoret who dared to set 

himself up to oppose the Twelve Chapters of Cyril. 

At Constantinople a Synod was collected tinder Constantine which rejected Honorius of Rome and Sergius, 

prelate of Constantinople, for teaching one will and one operation. 

ARISTENUS. 

The fifth was held in the time of Justinian the Great at Constantinople against the crazy 
(<greek>parafrons</greek>) Origen, Evagrius and Didymus, who remodelled the Greek figments, and 
stupidly said that the same bodies they had joined with them would not rise again; and that Paradise was 
not subject to the appreciation of the sense, and that it was not from God, and that Adam was not formed in 
flesh, and that there would be an end of punishment, and a restitution of the devils to their pristine state, and 
other innumerable insane blasphemies. 

CANON II. 

IT has also seemed good to this holy Council, that the eighty-five canons, received and ratified by the holy 
and blessed Fathers before us, and also handed down to us in the name of the holy and glorious Apostles 
should from this time forth remain firm and unshaken for the cure of souls and the healing of disorders. And in 
these canons we are bidden to receive the Constitutions of the Holy Apostles [written] by Clement. But 
formerly through the agency of those who erred from the faith certain adulterous matter was introduced, 
clean contrary to piety, for the polluting of the Church, which obscures the elegance and beauty of the divine 
decrees in their present form. We therefore reject these Constitutions so as the better to make sure of the 
edification and security of the most Christian flock; by no means admitting the offspring of heretical error, and 
cleaving to the pure and perfect doctrine of the Apostles. But we set our seal likewise upon all the other holy 
canons set forth by our holy and blessed Fathers, that is, by the 318 holy God-bearing Fathers assembled 
at Nice, and those at Ancyra, further those at Neocaesarea and likewise those at Gangra, and besides, 
those at Antioch in Syria: those too at Laodicea in Phrygia: and likewise the 150 who assembled in this 
heaven-protected royal city: and the 200 who assembled the first time in the metropolis of the Ephesians, 
and the 630 holy and blessed Fathers at Chalcedon. In like manner those of Sardica, and those of 
Carthage: those also who again assembled in this heaven-protected royal city under its bishop Nectarins 
and Theophilus Archbishop of Alexandria. Likewise too the Canons [i.e. the decretal letters] of Dionysius, 
formerly Archbishop of the great city of Alexandria; and of Peter, Archbishop of Alexandria and Martyr; of 
Gregory the Wonder-worker, Bishop of Neocaesarea; of Athanasius, Archbishop of Alexandria; of Basil, 
Archbishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia; of Gregory, Bishop of Nyssa; of Gregory Theologus; of 
Amphilochius of Iconium; of Timothy, Archbishop of Alexandria; of Theophilus, Archbishop of the same 
great city of Alexandria; of Cyril, Archbishop of the same Alexandria; of Gennadius, Patriarch of this 
heaven-protected royal city. Moreover the Canon set forth by Cyprian, Archbishop of the country of the 
Africans and Martyr, and by the Synod under him, which has been kept only in the country of the aforesaid 
Bishops, according to the custom delivered down to them. And that no one be allowed to transgress or 
disregard the aforesaid canons, or to receive others beside them, supposititiously set forth by certain who 
have attempted to make a traffic of the truth. But should any one be convicted of innovating upon, or 
attempting to overturn, any of the afore-mentioned canons, he shall be subject to receive the penalty which 
that canon imposes, and to be cured by it of his transgression. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON II. 

Whatever additions have been made through guile by the heterodox in the Apostolic Constitutions edited 

by Clement, shall be cut out. 

This canon defines what canons are to be understood as having received the sanction of ecumenical 

authority, and since these canons of the Council in Trullo were received at the Seventh Ecumenical Council 

in its first canon as the canons of the Sixth Ecumenical (of which the Quinisext claimed to be a legitimate 

continuation) there can be no doubt that all these canons enumerated in this canon are set forth for the 

guidance of the Church. 

With regard to what councils are intended: there is difficulty only in two particulars, viz., the "Council of 

Constantinople under Nectarius and Theophilus, "(1) and the "Council under Cyprian;" the former must be the 

Council of 394, and the latter is usually considered to be the III. Synod of Carthage, A.D. 257. 

FLEURY. 

(H.E. Liv. xl., chap, xlix.) 

The Council of Constantinople under Nectarius and Theophilus of Alexandria must be that held in 394, at the 
dedication of Ruffinus's Church; but we have not its canons. ... "The canon published by St. Cyprian for the 
African Church alone." It is difficult to understand what canon is referred to unless it is the preface to the 

council of St. Cyprian where he says that no one should pretend to be bishop of bishops, or to oblige his 
colleagues to obey him by tyrannical fear. 

It will be noticed that while the canon is most careful to mention the exact number of Apostolic canons it 
received, thus deciding in favour of the larger code, it is equally careful not to assign them an Apostolic 
origin, but merely to say that they had come down to them "in the name of the Apostles. In the face of this it 
is strange to find Balsamon saying, "Through this canon their mouth is stopped who say that 85 canons 
were not set forth by the holy Apostles;" what the council did settle, so far as its authority went, was the 
number not the authorship of the canons. This, I think, is all that Balsamon intended to assert, but his words 
might easily be quoted as having a different meaning. 

This canon is found, in part, in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. XVI, c. VII. 

CANON III. 

SINCE our pious and Christian Emperor has addressed this holy and ecumenical council, in order that it 
might provide for the purity of those who are in the list of the clergy, and who transmit divine things to others, 
and that they may be blameless ministrants, and worthy of the sacrifice of the great God, who is both 
Offering and High Priest, a sacrifice apprehended by the intelligence: and that it might cleanse away the 
pollutions wherewith these have been branded by unlawful marriages: now whereas they of the most holy 
Roman Church purpose to keep the rule of exact perfection, but those who are under the throne of this 
heaven-protected and royal city keep that of kindness and consideration, so blending both together as our 
fathers have done, and as the love of God requires, that neither gentleness fall into licence, nor severity into 
harshness; especially as the fault of ignorance has reached no small number of men, we decree, that those 
who are involved in a second marriage, and have been slaves to sin up to the fifteenth of the past month of 
January, in the past fourth Indiction, the 6109th year, and have not resolved to repent of it, be subjected to 
canonical deposition: but that they who are involved in this disorder of a second marriage, but before our 
decree have acknowledged what is fitting, and have cut off their sin, and have put far from them this strange 
and illegitimate connexion, or they whose wives by second marriage are already dead, or who have turned 
to repentance of their own accord, having learnt continence, and having quickly forgotten their former 
iniquities, whether they be presbyters or deacons, these we have determined should cease from all priestly 
ministrations or exercise, being under punishment for a certain time, but should retain the honour of their seat 
and station, being satisfied with their seat before the laity and begging with tears from the Lord that the 
transgression of their ignorance be pardoned them: for unfitting it were that he should bless another who has 
to tend his own wounds. But those who have been married to one wife, if she was a widow, and likewise 
those who after their ordination have unlawfully entered into one marriage that is, presbyters, and deacons, 
and subdeacons, being debarred for some short time from sacred ministration, and censured, shall be 
restored again to their proper rank, never advancing to any further rank, their unlawful marriage being 
openly dissolved. This we decree to hold good only in the case of those that are involved in the aforesaid 
faults up to the fifteenth (as was said) of the month of January, of the fourth Indiction, decreeing from the 
present time, and renewing the Canon which declares, that he who has been joined in two marriages after 
his baptism, or has had a concubine, cannot be bishop, or presbyter, or deacon, or at all on the sacerdotal 
list; in like manner, that he who has taken a widow, or a divorced person, or a harlot, or a servant, or an 
actress, cannot be bishop, or presbyter, or deacon, or at all on the sacerdotal list. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON III. 

Priests who shall have contracted second marriages and will not give them up are to be deposed. But 
those who leave off the wickedness, let them cease for a fixed period. For he that is himself wounded does 
not bless. But who are implicated in nefarious marriage and who after ordination have contracted marriage, 
after a definite time they shall be restored to their grade, provided they remain without offence, having 
plainly brown off the marriage. But if after it shall have been prohibited by this decree they attempt to do so 
they shall remain deposed. 

ZONARAS. 

What things pertain to this third canon are only adapted to the time in which the canon was passed; and 
afterwards are of no force at all. But what things the Fathers wished to be binding on posterity are contained 
in the seventeenth and eighteenth canons of the holy Apostles, which as having been neglected during the 

course of time this synod wished to renew. 

VAN ESPEN. 

It is clear from this canon that the Emperor very especially intended that the indulgence which the Church of 
Constantinople extended to its presbyters and deacons in allowing them the use of marriage entered into 
before ordination, should not be allowed to go any further, nor to be an occasion for the violation of that truly 
Apostolic canon, "The bishop, the presbyter, and the deacon must be the husband of one wife." I. Tim. iii. 2. 
For never did the Constantinopolitan nor any other Eastern Church allow by canon a digamist (or a man 
successively the husband of many wives) to be advanced to the order of presbyter or deacon, or to use 
any second marriage. 

ANTONIO PEREIRA. 

(Tentativa Theologica. [Eng. trans.] III. Principle, p. 79.) 

In the same manner a second marriage always, and everywhere, incapacitated the clergy for Holy Orders 
and the Episcopate. This appears from St. Paul, 1 Tim. Chap, iii., and Titus, Chap, i., and it was expressly 
enacted by the sixteenth of the Apostolical Canons, renewed by the Popes Siricius, Innocent and Leo the 
Great, and may be gathered from the ancient fathers and councils generally received in the Church. 
Nevertheless we know from Theodoret, Bishop of Cyrus, that many bishops remarkable for their learning 
and sanctity, frequently dispensed with this Apostolical law; as Alexander of Antioch, Acacius of Berea, 
Prayline of Jerusalem, Proclus of Constantinople, and others, by whose example Theodoret defends his 
own conduct in the case of Irenaaeus, in ordaining him Archbishop of Tyre, although he had been twice 
married. But what is more surprising in this matter is that, notwithstanding the eleventh Decretal of Siricius, 
and the twelfth of Innocentius the First, that they who had either been twice married, or had married widows, 
were incapable of ordination, and ought to be deposed; the Council of Toledo, Canon 3, and the First 
Council of Orange, Canon 25, both dispensed with these Pontifical laws. The first, in order that those who 
had married widows might remain in holy orders; the second, that such as had twice married might be 
promoted to the order of subdeacon. Socrates also observes that although it was a general law not to admit 
catechumens to orders, the bishops of Alexandria were in the habit of promoting such to the order of 
readers and singers. 

FLEURY. 

(H. E.,Liv.XL,chap. 1.) 

These canons of the Council of Trullo have served ever since to the Greeks and to all the Christians of the 
East as the universal rule with regard to clerical continence, and they have been now in full force for a 
thousand years. That is to say, It is not permitted to men who are clerics in Holy Orders to marry after their 
ordination. Bishops must keep perfect continence, whether before their consecration they are married or 
not. Priests, deacons, and subdeacons already married can keep their wives and live with them, except on 
the days they are to approach the holy mysteries. 

CANON IV. 

IF any bishop, presbyter, deacon, sub-deacon, lector, cantor, or door-keeper has had intercourse with a 
woman dedicated to God, let him be deposed, as one who has corrupted a spouse of Christ, but if a layman 
let him be cut off. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON IV. 

A cleric coupled to a spouse of God shall be deposed In the case of a layman he shall be cut off. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa XXVII., Q. I., c. vj. 

A layman ravishing a nun, by secular law was punished by death. Balsamon gives the reference thus: V 
Cap. primi tit. iiij. lib. Basilic, or cxxiij. Novel. 

CANON V. 

LET none of those who are on the priestly list possess any woman or maid servant, beyond those who are 
enumerated in the canon as being persons free from suspicion, preserving himself hereby from being 
implicated in any blame. But if anyone transgresses our decree let him be deposed. And let eunuchs also 
observe the same rule, that by foresight they may be free of censure. But those who transgress, let them be 
deposed, if indeed they are clerics; but if laymen let them be excommunicated. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON V. 

A priest, even if a eunuch, shall not have in his house a maid or other woman except those on whom no 
suspicion can light. 

See Canon III., of First Ecumenical Council at Nice. This canon adds Eunuchs. 

CANON VI. 

SINCE it is declared in the apostolic canons that of those who are advanced to the clergy unmarried, only 
lectors and cantors are able to marry; we also, maintaining this, determine that henceforth it is in nowise 
lawful for any subdeacon, deacon or presbyter after his ordination to contract matrimony but if he shall have 
dared to do so, let him be deposed. And if any of those who enter the clergy, wishes to be joined to a wife in 
lawful marriage before he is ordained subdeacon, deacon, or presbyter, let it be done. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON VI. 

If any ordained person contracts matrimony, let him be deposed. If he wishes to be married he should 
become so before his ordination. 

Aristenus points out how this canon annuls the tenth canon of Ancyra, which allows a deacon and even a 
presbyter to marry after ordination and continue in his ministry, provided at the time of his ordination he had 
in the presence of witnesses declared his inability to remain chaste or his desire to marry. This present 
canon follows the XXVIth of the Apostolic canons. 

The last clause of this canon, limited in its application to subdeacons, is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, 
Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. XXXII., c. vi. 

EXCURSUS ON THE MARRIAGE OF THE CLERGY. 

On this subject there is a popular misconception which must first be removed. In the popular mind to-day 
there is no distinction between "a married clergy" being allowed, and "the marriage of the clergy" being 
allowed; even theological writers who have attained some repute have confused these two things in the 
most unfortunate and perplexing fashion. It will suffice to mention as an instance of this Bp. Harold Browne in 
his book on the XXXIX. Articles, in which not only is the confusion above spoken of made, but the very 
blunder is used for controversial purposes, to back up and support by the authority of the ancient Church in 
the East (which allowed a married clergy) the practice of the Nestorians and of the modern Church of 
England, both of which tolerate the marriage of the clergy, a thing which the ancient Church abhorred and 
punished with deposition. 

I cannot better express the doctrine and practice of the ancient Church in the East than by quoting the words 
of the Rev. John Fulton in the Introduction to the Third Edition of his Index Canonum.(1) He says: "Marriage 
was no impediment to ordination even as a Bishop; and Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, equally with other 
men, were forbidden to put away their wives under pretext of religion. The case was different when a man 
was unmarried at the time of his ordination. Then he was held to have given himself wholly to God in the 
office of the Holy Ministry, and he was forbidden to take back from his offering that measure of his cares and 
his affections which must necessarily be given to the maintenance and nurture of his family. In short, the 
married man might be ordained, but with a few exceptions no man was allowed to marry after ordination." In 

his "Digest" sub voce" Celibacy" he gives the earliest canon law on the subject as follows: "None of the 
clergy, except readers and singers may marry after ordination (Ap. Can. xxvi.); but deacons may marry, if at 
their ordination they have declared an intention to do so (Ancyra x.). A priest who marries is to be deposed 
(Neocaesarea i.). A deaconess who marries is to be anathematized (Chal. xv.); a monk or dedicated virgin 
who marries, is to be excommunicated (Chal. xvi.). Those who break their vows of celibacy are to fulfil the 
penance of digamists (Ancyra xix.)."(2) 

We may then take it for a general principle that in no part of the ancient Church was a priest allowed to 
contract holy matrimony; and in no place was he allowed to exercise his priesthood afterwards, if he should 
dare to enter into such a relation with a woman. As I have so often remarked it is not my place to approve or 
disapprove this law of the Church, my duty is the much simpler one of tracing historically what the law was 
and what it is in the East and West to-day. The Reformers considered that in this, as in most other matters, 
these venerable churches had made a mistake, but neither the maintenance nor the disproof of this opinion 
in any way concerns me, so far as this volume is concerned. All that is necessary for me to do is to affirm 
that if a priest were at any time to attempt to marry, he would be attempting to do that which from the earliest 
times of which we have any record, no priest has ever been allowed to do, but which always has been 
punished as a gross sin of immorality. 

In tracing the history of this subject, the only time during which any real difficulty presents itself is the first three 
centuries, after that all is much clearer, and my duty is simply to lay the undisputed facts of the case before 
the reader. 

We begin then with the debatable ground. And first with regard to the Lord, "the great High Priest of our 
profession," of course there can be no doubt that he set the example, or— if any think that he was not a 
pattern for the priests of his Church to follow-at least lived the life, of celibacy. When we come to the 
question of what was the practice of his first followers in this matter, there would likewise seem to be but little 
if any reasonable doubt. For while of the Apostles we have it recorded only of Peter that he was a married 
man, we have it also expressly recorded that in his case, as in that of all the rest who had "forsaken all" to 
follow him, the Lord himself said, "Every one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or 
mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my name's sake shall receive an hundred fold and shall inherit 
eternal life."(1) 

There can be no doubt that St. Paul in his epistles allows and even contemplates the probability that those 
admitted to the ranks of the clergy will have been already married, but distinctly says that they must have 
been the "husband of one wife, "(2) by which all antiquity and every commentator of gravity recognizes that 
digamists are cut off from the possibility of ordination, but there is nothing to imply that the marital connexion 
was to be continued after ordination. For a thorough treatment of this whole subject from the ancient and 
Patristic point of view, the reader is referred to St. Jerome. (3) 

The next stage in our progress is marked by the so-called Apostolical Canons. Now for those who hold that 
these canons had directly or indirectly the Apostles for their author, or that as we have them now they are all 
of even sub-Apostolic date, the matter becomes more simple, for while indeed these canons do not 
expressly set forth the law subsequently formulated for the East, they certainly seem to be not inconsistent 
therewith, but rather to look that way, especially Canons V. and LI. But few will be found willing to support so 
extreme an hypothesis, and while indeed many scholars are of opinion that most of the canons of the 
collection we style "Apostolical," are ante-Nicene, yet they will not be recognized as of more value than as 
so many mirrors, displaying what was at their date considered pure discipline. It is abundantly clear that the 
fathers in council in Trullo thought the discipline they were setting forth to be the original discipline of the 
Church in the matter, and the discipline of the West an innovation, but that such was really the case seems 
far from certain. Thomassinus treats this point with much learning, and I shall cite some of the authorities he 
brings forward. Of these the most important is Epiphanius, who as a Greek would be certain to give the 
tradition of the East, had there been any such tradition known in his time. I give the three great passages. 
"It is evident that those from the priesthood are chiefly taken from the order of virgins, or if not from virgins, at 
least from monks; or if not from the order of monks, then they are wont to be made priests who keep 
themselves from their wives, or who are widows after a single marriage. But he that has been entangled by 
a second marriage is not admitted to priesthood in the Church, even if he be continent from his wife, or be a 
widower. Anyone of this sort is rejected from the grade of bishop, presbyter, deacon, or subdeacon. The 
order of reader, however, can be chosen from all the orders these grades can be chosen from, that is to say 
from virgins, monks, the continent, widowers, and they who are bound by honest marriage. Moreover, if 
necessity so compel, even digamists may be lectors, for such is not a priest, etc., etc. "(4) 
"Christ taught us by an example that the priestly work and ornaments should be communicated to those who 
shall have preserved their continency after a single marriage, or shall have persevered in virginity. And this 
the Apostles thereafter honestly and piously decreed, through the ecclesiastical canon of the 
priesthood. "(5) 
"Nay, moreover, he that still uses marriage, and begets children, even though the husband of but one wife, 

is by no means admitted by the Church to the order of deacon, presbyter, bishop, or subdeacon. But for all 
this, he who shall have kept himself from the commerce of his one wife, or has been deprived of her, may be 
ordained, and this is most usually the case in those places where the ecclesiastical canons are most 
accurately observed. "(1) 

Nor is the weight of this evidence lessened, but much increased, by the acknowledgment of the same father 
that in some places in his days the celibate life was not observed by such priests as had wives, for he 
explains that such a state of things had come about "not from following the authority of the canons, but 
through the neglect of men, which is wont at certain periods to be the case. "(2) 

The witness of the Western Fathers although so absolutely and indisputably clear is not so conclusive as to 
the East, and yet one passage from St. Jerome should be quoted. "The Virgin Christ and the Virgin Mary 
dedicated the virginity of both sexes. The Apostles were chosen when either virgins or continent after 
marriage, and bishops, presbyters, and deacons are chosen either when virgins, or widowers, or at least 
continent forever after the priesthood. "(3) 

It would be out of place to enter into any detailed argument upon the force of these passages, but I shall lay 
before the reader the summing up of the whole matter by a weighty recent writer of the Ultramontane Roman 
School. 

"Is the celibate an Apostolic ordinance? Bickel affirmed that it is, and Funk denied it in 1 878. To-day [1 896] 
canonists commonly admit that one cannot prove the existence of any formal precept, either divine or 
apostolic, which imposes the celibate upon the clergy, and that all the texts, whether taken out of Holy 
Scripture or from the Fathers, on this subject contain merely a counsel, and not a command." "In the Fourth 
Century a great number of councils forbade bishops, priests, and deacons to live in the use of marriage with 
their lawful wives. ... But there does not appear to have been any disposition to declare by law as invalid the 
marriages of clerics in Holy Orders. In the Fifth and Sixth Centuries the law of the celibate was observed by 
all the Churches of the West, thanks to the Councils and to the Popes." "In the Seventh and down to the end 
of the Tenth Century, (4) as a matter of fact the law of celibacy was little observed in a great part of the 
Western Church, but as a matter of law the Roman Pontiffs and the Councils were constant in their 
proclamation of its obligation." By the canonical practice of the unreformed West, the reception of Holy 
Orders is an impedimentum dirimens matrimonii, which renders any marriage subsequently contracted not 
only illicit but absolutely null. On this diriment impediment the same Roman Catholic writer says: "The 
diriment impediment of Holy Orders is of ecclesiastical obligation and not of divine, and consequently the 
Church can dispense it. This is the present teaching which is in opposition to that of the old schools." 
"There is no question of the nullity of the marriages contracted by clerics before 1139. At the Council of the 
Lateran ofthatyear, Innocent II. declared that these marriages contracted in contempt of the ecclesiastical 
law are not true marriages in his eyes. His successors do not seem to have insisted much upon this new 
diriment impediment, although it was attacked most vigorously by the offending clergymen; but the School 
of Bologna, the authority of which was then undisputed, openly declared for the nullity of the marriages 
contracted by clerics in Holy Orders. Thus it is that this point of law has been settled rather by teaching, than 
by any precise text, or by any law of a known date. "(5) 

It should not, however, be forgotten that although this is true with regard to Pope Innocent II. in 1 1 39, it is also 
true that in 530 the Emperor Justinian declared null and void all marriages contracted by clerics in Holy 
Orders, and the children of such marriages to be spurious (spurii). 

The reader will be interested in reading the answer on this point made by King Henry VIII. to the letter sent 
him by the German ambassadors. (1) I can here give but a part translated into English. "Although the Church 
from the beginning admitted married men, as priests and bishops, who were without crime, the husband of 
one wife, (out of the necessity of the times, as sufficient other suitable men could not be found as would 
suffice for the teaching of the world) yet Paul himself chose the celibate Timothy; but if anyone came 
unmarried to the priesthood and afterwards took a wife, he was always deposed from the priesthood, 
according to the canon of the Council of Neocaesarea which was before that of Nice. So, too, in the Council 
of Chalcedon, in the first canon of which all former canons are confirmed, it is established that a deaconess, 
if she give herself over to marriage, shall remain under anathema, and a virgin who had dedicated herself to 
God and a monk who join themselves in marriage, shall remain excommunicated. ... No Apostolic canon 
nor the Council of Nice contain anything similar to what you assert, viz.: that priests once ordained can marry 
afterwards. And with this statement agrees the Sixth Synod, in which it was decreed that if any of the clergy 
should wish to lead a wife, he should do so before receiving the Subdiaconate, since afterwards it was by 
no means lawful; nor was there given in the Sixth Synod any liberty to priests of leading wives after their 
priesting, as you assert. Therefore from the beginning of the newborn Church it is clearly seen that at no time 
it was permitted to a priest to lead a wife after his priesting, and nowhere, where this was attempted, was it 
done with impunity, but the culprit was deposed from his priesthood." 

CANON VII. 

SINCE we have learned that in some churches deacons hold ecclesiastical offices, and that hereby some 
of them with arrogancy and license sit daringly before the presbyters: we have determined that a deacon, 
even if in an office of dignity, that is to say, in whatever ecclesiastical office he may be, is not to have his 
seat before a presbyter, except he is acting as representative of his own patriarch or metropolitan in another 
city under another superior, for then he shall be honoured as filling his place. But if anyone, possessed with 
a tyrannical audacity, shall have dared to do such a thing, let him be ejected from his peculiar rank and be 
last of all of the order in whose list he is in his own church; our Lord admonishing us that we are not to delight 
in taking the chief seats, according to the doctrine which is found in the holy Evangelist Luke, as put forth by 
our Lord and God himself. For to those who were called he taught this parable: "When ye are bidden by 
anyone to a marriage sit not down in the highest room lest a more honourable man than thou shall have 
been bidden by him; and he who bade thee and him come and say to thee: Give this man place, and thou 
begin with shame to take the lowest room. But when thou art bidden, sit down in the lowest place, so that 
when he who bade thee cometh he may say to thee, Friend go up higher: then thou shalt have worship in the 
presence of them that sit with thee. For whosoever exalteth himself shall be abased, and he that humbleth 
himself shall be exalted." But the same thing also shall be observed in the remaining sacred orders; seeing 
that we know that spiritual things are to be preferred to worldly dignity. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON VII. 

A deacon in the execution of his office, if he shall have occasion to sit in the presence of presbyters, shall 
take the lowest place unless he be the representative of the Patriarch or bishop. 

Balsamon, Zonaras, and following them Van Espen point out that this canon is a relaxation of the XVIII. 

Canon of Nice which punishes presumptuous deacons not only with loss of rank in their grade, but also with 

expulsion from their ministry. 

Van Espen well remarks that the Fathers of this synod had in mind not only the prescreation of the distinction 

between deacons and presbyters, but also between those in ecclesiastical orders and those enjoying 

secular dignities with regard to ecclesiastical matters, but who were not to gain there from ecclesiastical 

precedence. This is what is meant by the last clause of the canon. 

Beveridge gives a list of these quasi ecclesiastical dignitaries as follows: Magnus (Economus, Magno 

Sacello Praepositus, Magnus Vasorum Custos, Chartophylax, Parvo Sacello Praepositus, Primus 

Defensor. 

CANON VIM. 

SINCE we desire that in every point the things which have been decreed by our holy fathers may also be 
established and confirmed, we hereby renew the canon which orders that synods of the bishops of each 
province be held every year where the bishop of the metropolis shall deem best. But since on account of 
the incursions of barbarians and certain other incidental causes, those who preside over the churches 
cannot hold synods twice a year, it seems right that by all means once a year-on account of ecclesiastical 
questions which are likely to arise-a synod of the aforesaid bishops should be holden in every province, 
between the holy feast of Easter and October, as has been said above, in the place which the Metropolitan 
shall have deemed most fitting. And let such bishops as do not attend, when they are at home in their own 
cities and are in good health, and free from all unavoidable and necessary business, be fraternally 
reproved. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON VIM. 

Whenever it is impossible to hold two synods a year, one at least shall be celebrated, between er and the 
month of October. 

This canon under file name of the "Sixth Synod" is referred to in Canon VI. of the Seventh Ecumenical 
Council (II. Nice), and the bishops of Quinisext are called "Fathers." 

VAN ESPEN. 

What at first was only allowed on account of necessity, little by little passed into general law, and at last was 
received as law, that once a year there was to be a meeting of the provincial synod. 

CANON IX. 

Let no cleric be permitted to keep a "public house?" For if it be not permitted to enter a tavern, much more is 
it forbidden to serve others in it and to carry on a trade which is unlawful for him. But if he shall have done any 
such thing, either let him desist or be deposed. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON IX. 

If clerics are forbidden to enter public houses, much more are they forbidden to keep them. Let them either 

give them up or be deposed. 

Compare with this canon liv. of the Apostolic Canons; xxiv. of Laodicea; and xliij. of the Synod of 

Carthage.(l) 

CANON X. 

A BISHOP, or presbyter, or deacon who receives usury, or what is called hecatostoe, let him desist or be 
deposed. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON X. 

A bishop, presbyter, or deacon who takes usury shall be deposed unless he stops doing so. 

See notes on canon XVI. of Nice, and the Excursus thereto appended. 

CANON XI. 

LET no one in the priestly order nor any layman eat the unleavened bread of the Jews, nor have any 
familiar intercourse with them, nor summon them in illness, nor receive medicines from them, nor bathe with 
them; but if anyone shall take in hand to do so, if he is a cleric, let him be deposed, but if a layman let him be 
cut off. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XI. 

Jewish unleavened bread is to be refused. Whoever even calls in Jews as physicians or bathes with them 
is to be deposed. 

VAN ESPEN. 

Theodore Balsamon is of opinion that this canon does not forbid the eating of unleavened bread; but that 
what is intended is the keeping of feasts in a Jewish fashion, or in sacrifices to use unleavened bread 
(azymes), and this, says Balsamon, on account of the Latins who celebrate their feasts with azymes. 
Canon Ixix. [i.e., Ixx.] of those commonly called Apostolic forbids the observance of festivals with the Jews; 
and declares it to be unlawful to receive manuscula from them, but by this canon all familiar intercourse with 
them is forbidden. 

While there can be no doubt that in all the Trullan canons there is an undercurrent of hostility to the West, yet 
in this canon I can see no such spirit, and I think it has been read into it by the greater bitterness of later 
times. This seems the more certain from the fact that there is nothing new whatever in the provision with 
respect to the passover bread, vide canons of Laodicea xxxvij. and xxxviij. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici. Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa xxviij., can. xiii.(1) 

CANON XII. 

MOREOVER this also has come to our knowledge, that in Africa and Libya and in other places the most 
God-beloved bishops in those parts do not refuse to live with their wives, even after consecration, thereby 
giving scandal and offence to the people. Since, therefore, it is our particular care that all filings tend to the 
good of file flock placed in our harris and committed to us, -it has seemed good that henceforth nothing of 
the kind shall in any way occur. And we say this, not to abolish and overthrow what things were established 
of old by Apostolic authority, but as caring for the health of the people and their advance to better things, 
and lest the ecclesiastical state should suffer any reproach. For the divine Apostle says: "Do all to the glory 
of God, give none offence, neither to the Jews, nor to the Greeks, nor to the Church of God, even as I please 
all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit but the profit of many, that they may be saved. Be ye 
imitators of me even as I also am of Christ." But if any shall have been observed to do such a thing, let him 
be deposed. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XII. 

Although it has been decreed that wives are not to be cast forth, nevertheless that we may counsellor the 
better, we give command that no one ordained a bishop shall any longer live with his wife. 

ARISTENUS. 

The fifth Apostolic canon allows neither bishop, presbyter, nor deacon to cast forth his wife under pretext of 
piety; and assigns penalties for any that shall do so, and if he will not amend he is to be deposed. But this 
canon on the other hand does not permit a bishop even to live with his wife after his consecration. But by this 
change no contempt is meant to be poured out upon what had been established by Apostolic authority, but 
it was made through care for the people's health and for leading on to better things, and for fear that the 
sacerdotal estate might suffer some wrong. 

VAN ESPEN. 

([In Can. vi. Apost.) 

In the time of this canon [of the Apostles so called] not only presbyters and deacons, but bishops also, it is 
clear, were allowed by Eastern custom to have their wives;and Zonaras and Balsamon note that even until 
the Sixth Council, commonly called in Trullo bishops were allowed to have their wives. 

(The same on this canon.) 

But not only do they command [in this, canon] that bishops after their consecration no longer have 
commerce with their own wives, but further, they prohibit them even to presume to live with them. 

ZONARAS. 

When the faith first was born and came forth into the world, the Apostles treated with greater softness and 
indulgence those who embraced the truth, which as yet was not scattered far and wide, nor did they exact 
from them perfection in all respects, but made great allowances for their weakness and for the inveterate 
force of the customs with which they were surrounded, both among the heathen and among the Jews. But 
now, when far and wide our religion has been propagated, more strenuous efforts were made to enforce 
those things which pertain to a higher and holier life, as our angelical worship increased day by day, and to 
insist on by law a life of continence to those who were elevated to the episcopate, so that not only they 
should abstain from their wives, but that they should have them no longer as bed-fellows; and not only that 
they no longer admit them as sharers of their bed, but they do not allow them even to stop under the same 
roof or in the house. 

CANON XIII. 

SINCE we know it to be handed down as a rule of the Roman Church that those who are deemed worthy to 
be advanced to the diaconate or presbyterate should promise no longer to cohabit with their wives, we, 
preserving the ancient rule and apostolic perfection and order, will that the lawful marriages of men who are 
in holy orders be from this time forward firm, by no means dissolving their union with their wives nor depriving 
them of their mutual intercourse at a convenient time. Wherefore, if anyone shall have been found worthy to 
be ordained subdeacon, or deacon, or presbyter, he is by no means to be prohibited from admittance to 
such a rank, even if he shall live with a lawful wife. Nor shall it be demanded of him at the time of his 
ordination that he promise to abstain from lawful intercourse with his wife: lest we should affect injuriously 
marriage constituted by God and blessed by his presence, as the Gospel saith: "What God hath joined 
together let no man put asunder;" and the Apostle saith, "Marriage is honourable and the bed undefiled;" 
and again, "Art thou bound to a wife? seek not to be loosed." But we know, as they who assembled at 
Carthage (with a care for the honest life of the clergy) said, that subdeacons, who handle the Holy Mysteries, 
and deacons, and presbyters should abstain from their consorts according to their own course [of 
ministration]. So that what has been handed down through the Apostles and preserved by ancient custom, 
we too likewise maintain, knowing that there is a time for all things and especially for fasting and prayer. For 
it is meet that they who assist at the divine altar should be absolutely continent when they are handling holy 
things, in order that they may be able to obtain froth God what they ask in sincerity. 
If therefore anyone shall have dared, contrary to the Apostolic Canons, to deprive any of those who are in 
holy orders, presbyter, or deacon, or subdeacon of cohabitation and intercourse with his lawful wife, let him 
be deposed. In like manner also if any presbyter or deacon on pretence of piety has dismissed his wife, let 
him be excluded from communion; and if he persevere in this let him be deposed. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XIII. 

Although the Romans wish that everyone ordained deacon or presbyter should put away his wife, we wish 
the marriages of deacons and presbyters to continue valid and firm. 

FLEURY. 

(H.E., LivreXL, chap. 1.) 

What is said in this canon, that the council of Carthage orders priests to abstain from their wives at 
prescribed periods, is a misunderstanding of the decree, caused either by malice or by ignorance. This 
canon is one of those adopted by the Fifth Council of Carthage held in the year 400, and it is decreed that 
subdeacons, deacons; priests, and bishops shall abstain from their wives, following the ancient statutes, 
and shah be as though they had them not. The Greek version of this canon has rendered the Latin words 
priora statuta by these, idious horous, which may mean "fixed times": for the translator read, following 
another codex, propria for priora. Be this as it may, the Fathers of the Trullan council supposed that this 
obliged the clergy only to continence at certain fixed times, and were not willing to see that it included 
bishops as well. 

VAN ESPEN. 

Although the Latin Church does not disapprove, (1) as contrary to the law of the Gospel the discipline of the 
Greeks which allows the use of marriage to presbyters and deacons, provided it was contracted before 
ordination; yet never has it approved this canon which with too great zeal condemns the opposite custom, 
and rashly assigns great errors to the Roman Church. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Dist. XXXI., c. xiij. 
Antonius Augustinus in his proposed emendations of Gratian says (Lib. I. dial, de emend. Grat. c. 8.): "This 
canon can in no way be received; for it is written in opposition to the celibacy of the Latin priests, and openly 
is against the Roman Church." But to me the note which Gratian appends seems much more learned and 
true: "This however must be understood as of local application; for the Eastern Church, to which the VI. 
Synod prescribed this rule, did not receive a vow of chastity from the ministers of the altar." It may be well to 
note here that by the opinion of most Latin casuists the obligation to chastity among the Roman clergy rests 
upon the vow and not upon any law of the Church binding thereto. This evidently was the opinion of Gratian. 

CANON XIV. 

LET the canon of our holy God-bearing Fathers be confirmed in this particular also; that a presbyter be not 
ordained before he is thirty years of age, even if he be a very worthy man, but let him be kept back. For our 
Lord Jesus Christ was baptized and beg. an to teach when he was thirty. In like manner let no deacon be 
ordained before he is twenty-five, nor a deaconess before she is forty. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON 

A presbyter thirty years of age, a deacon twenty-five, and a deaconess forty. 

Compare Canon XI. of Neocaesarea. 

It may be interesting to note here that by the law of the Roman Communion the canonical ages are as 
follows: 

A subdeacon must have completed his twenty-first year, a deacon his twenty-second, a priest his 
twenty-fourth, and a bishop his thirtieth. None of the inferior clergy can hold a simple benefice before he has 
begun his fourteenth year. Ecclesiastical dignities, such as Cathedral canonries, cannot be conferred on 
any who have not finished the twenty-second year. A benefice to which is attached a cure of souls can be 
given only to one who is over twenty-four, and a diocese only to one who has completed his thirtieth year. 
(Vide Ferraris, Bibliotheca Prompta.) 

In the Anglican Communion the ages are, in England, for a bishop "fully thirty years of age," for a priest 
twenty-four, and for a deacon twenty-three:(2) and in the United States, for a bishop thirty years of age, for a 
priest twenty-four, and for a deacon twenty-one. 

CANON XV. 

A SUBDEACON is not to be ordained under twenty years of age. And if any one in any grade of the 
priesthood shall have been ordained contrary to the prescribed time let him be deposed. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XV. 

Those shall be chosen as Subdeacons who are twenty years of age. 

This age seems first to have been fixed by the Second Council of Toledo(1) (circa, A.D. 535) in its first 
canon. 

CANON XVI. 

SINCE the book of the Acts tells us that seven deacons were appointed by the Apostles, and the synod of 
Neocaesarea in the canons which it put forth determined that there ought to be canonically only seven 
deacons, even if the city be very large, in accordance with the book of the Acts; we, having fitted the mind of 
the fathers to the Apostles' words, find that they spoke not of those men who ministered at the Mysteries but 
in the administration which pertains to the serving of tables. For the book of the Acts reads as follows: "In 
those days, when the number of the disciples was multiplied, there arose a murmuring dissension of the 
Grecians against the Hebrews, because their widows were neglected in the daily ministrations. And the 
Twelve called the multitude of the disciples with them and said, It is not meet for us to leave the word of God 
and serve tables. Look ye out therefore, brethren, from among you seven men of good report full of the Holy 
Ghost and of wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business. But we will give ourselves continually unto 
prayer and unto the ministry of the word. And the saying pleased the whole multitude: and they chose 
Stephen a man full of faith and of the Holy Ghost, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and 
Parmends, and Nicolas a proselyte of Antioch: whom they set before the Apostles." 
John Chrysostom, a Doctor of the Church, interpreting these words, proceeds thus: "It is a remarkable fact 
that the multitude was not divided in its choice of the men, and that the Apostles were not rejected by them. 
But we must learn what sort of rank they had, and what ordination they received. Was it that of deacons? But 
this office did not yet exist in the churches. But was it fine dispensation of a presbyter? But there was not as 

yet any bishop, but only Apostles, whence I think it is clear and manifest that neither of deacons nor of 
presbyters was there then the name. "(2) 

But on this account therefore we also announce that the aforesaid seven deacons are not to be understood 
as deacons who served at the Mysteries, according to the teaching before set forth, but that they were those 
to whom a dispensation was entrusted for the common benefit of those that were gathered together, who to 
us in this also were a type of philanthropy and zeal towards those who are in need. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XVI. 

Whoever affirms that the number of deacons should be seven according to the saying of the Acts, should 
know that the reference in that passage is not to Deacons of the Mysteries but to such as serve tables. 

Van Espen here reminds us that this is, as Zonaras calls attention to in Iris scholion on this place, a 
correction rather than an interpretation oftheXVth Canon of Neocaesarea, and Balsamon also says the 
same. The only interest that the matter possesses is that a canon which had been received by the Fourth 
Ecumenical Council (Chalcedon) should receive such treatment from such an assembly as the Synod in 
Trullo. 

CANON XVII. 

SINCE clerics of different churches have left their own churches in which they were ordained and betaken 
themselves to other bishops, and without the consent of their own bishop have been settled in other 
churches, and thus they have proved themselves to be insolent and disobedient; we decree that from the 
month of January of the past IVth Indiction no cleric, of whatsoever grade he be, shall have power, without 
letters dimissory of his own bishop, to be registered in the clergy list of another church. Whoever in future 
shall not have observed this rule, but shall have brought disgrace upon himself as well as on the bishop 
who ordained him, let him be deposed together with him who also received him. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XVII. 

Whoever receives and ordains a wandering cleric shall be deposed together with him thus wickedly 
ordained. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa XXI., Quaest., ii. can. j. 

CANON XVIII. 

THOSE clerics who in consequence of a barbaric incursion or on account of any other circumstance have 
gone abroad, we order to return again to their churches after the cause has passed away, or when the 
incursion of the barbarians is at an end. Nor are they to leave them for long without cause. If anyone shall not 
have returned according to the direction of this present canon-let him be cut off until he shall return to his 
own church. And the same shall be the punishment of the bishop who received him. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XVIII. 

Whoever has emigrated on account of an invasion of the barbarians, shall return to the Church to whose 
clergy he belongs as soon as the incursion ceases. But if he shall not do so, he shall be cut off together with 
him to whom he has gone. 

BALSAMON. 

The Fathers are worthy of great praise. For having regard to the honour of the ecclesiastical order and of 
each bishop, they have decreed that clergymen, who from just and valid causes have gone forth without 
letters dimissory from those who ordained them, should return to their own clergy soon as the cause which 

drove them forth ceases; and that they should not be enrolled on the clergy list of any other church. But 
whosoever cannot be persuaded to return is to be cut off, as well as the bishop who detains him. But 
someone will say, If a bishop who does such a thing is cut off by his Metropolitan; and likewise if a 
Metropolitan spurns this canon he is punished by the Patriarch. But if an autocephalous archbishop or a 
Patriarch other than the Patriarch of Constantinople (for he has a faculty for doing so) should be convicted of 
a breach of this Canon, by whom would he be cut off? I suppose by the Supreme Pontiff(1) 
(<greek>oiomai</greek> <greek>oun</greek> <greek>para</greek> <greek>tou</greek> 
<greek>meixo</greek>-<greek>nos</greek> <greek>arkierews</greek>). 

CANON XIX. 

IT behoves those who preside over the churches, every day but especially on Lord's days, to teach all the 
clergy and people words of piety and of right religion, gathering out of holy Scripture meditations and 
determinations of the truth, and not going beyond the limits now fixed, nor varying from the tradition of the 
God-bearing fathers. And if any controversy in regard to Scripture shall have been raised, let them not 
interpret it. otherwise than as the lights and doctors of the church in their writings have expounded it, and in 
those let them glory rather than in composing things out of their own heads, lest through their lack of skill(2) 
they may have departed from what was fitting. For through the doctrine of the aforesaid fathers, the people 
coming to the knowledge of what is good and desirable, as well as what is useless and to be rejected, will 
remodel their life for the better, and not be led by ignorance, but applying their minds to the doctrine, they will 
take heed that no evil befall them and work out their salvation in fear of impending punishment. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XIX. 

The prelates of the Church, especially upon Lord's days, shall teach doctrine. 

VAN ESPEN. 

How great an obligation of preaching rests upon bishops, the successors of the Apostles, is evident from 
the words of St. Paul, "Christ sent me not to baptize but to preach" (1 Cor. i., 17), and his chief adjuration to 
Timothy though Jesus Christ and his coming, was "Preach the Word" (2 Tim. ii. 4.) For this reason the fathers 
formerly called the episcopate the preaching-office (officium predicationis), as is evident from the 
profession of Adelbert Morinensis, and the form of profession of a future Archbishop. Both of these will be 
found in Labbe, appendix to Tom. VIII., of his Concilia. 

COUNCIL OF TRENT. 

(Sess. V.,c. 2.) 

The preaching of the Gospel is the chief work of bishops. 

CONVOCATION OF CANTERBURY, A.D. 1571. 

(Cardwell. Synodalia, Vol. I., p. 126.) 

The clergy will be careful to teach nothing in their sermons to be religiously held and believed by the 
people except what is agreeable to the doctrine of the Old and New Testament, and what the Catholic 
Fathers and Ancient Bishops have collected out of the same.(1) 

COUNCIL OF TRENT. 

(Sess. IV.) 

No one shall dare to interpret the Holy Scripture contrary to the unanimous consent of the fathers. 

CANON XX. 

IT shall not be lawful for a bishop to teach publicly in any city which does not belong to him. If any shall have 

been observed doing this, let him cease from his episcopate, but let him discharge the office of a 
presbyter. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XX 

The bishop of one city shall not teach publicly in another. If he shall be shown to have dose so he shall be 
deprived of the episcopate and shall perform the functions of a presbyter. 

The meaning of this canon is most obscure. Balsamon and Zonaras think that the Bishop is not to be 
deposed from his Episcopate, but only shorn of his right of executing the Episcopal functions, so that he will 
virtually be reduced to a presbyter. Ariseanus, on the other hand, considers the deposition to be real and 
that this canon creates an exception to Canon XXIX. of Chalcedon. 

CANON XXI. 

THOSE who have become guilty of crimes against the canons, and on this account subject to complete and 
perpetual deposition, are degraded to the condition of layman. If, however, keeping conversion continually 
before their eyes, they willingly deplore the sin on account of which they fell from grace, and made 
themselves aliens therefrom, they may still cut their hair after the manner of clerics. But if they are not willing 
to submit themselves to this canon, they must wear their hair as laymen, as being those who have preferred 
the communion of the world to the celestial life. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXI. 

Whoever is already deposed and reduced to the lay estate, if he shall repent, let him continue deposed but 
be shorn. But if otherwise, he must let his hair grow. 

Beveridge wishes to read who have become canonically guilty of crimes," substituting 
<greek>kanonikps</greek> for <greek>kanonikois</greek>, in accordance with the Bodleian and 
Amerbachian codices. 

CANON XXII. 

THOSE who are ordained for money, whether bishops or of any rank whatever, and not by examination and 
choice of life, we order to be deposed as well as those also who ordained them. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXII. 

Whoever is ordained for pay shall be deposed together with his ordainer. 

VAN ESPEN. 

The present canon orders to be deposed not only the one simoniacally ordained, but also his ordainer, 
ordering that ordinations should take place on account, not of money, but of the excellence of the 
examination stood by the candidate and on account of his uprightness of life. And it evidently takes it for 
granted that, where money has been used, examination, excellence of life, and consideration of merit enter 
but little into the matter, or at least are paid no attention to. 

CANON XXIII. 

THAT no one, whether bishop, presbyter, or deacon, when giving the immaculate Communion, shall exact 
from him who communicates fees of any kind. For grace is not to be sold, nor do we give the sanctification of 
the Holy Spirit for money; but to those who are worthy of the gift it is to be communicated in all simplicity. But 
if any of those enrolled among the clergy make demands on those he communicates let him be deposed, 

as an imitator of the error and wickedness of Simon. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXIII. 

Whoever shall demand an obolus or anything else for giving the spotless communion shall be deposed. 

This canon is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decreturn, Pars. II., Causa I., Quaest. I., can. 100, 
attributed to the VI. Synod. Ivo reads, "From the Sixth Synod, III. Constantinople." 

CANON XXIV. 

No one who is on the priestly catalogue nor any monk is allowed to take part in horse-races or to assist at 
theatrical representations. But if any clergyman be called to a marriage, as soon as the games begin let 
him rise up and go out, for so it is ordered by the doctrine of our fathers. And if any one shall be convicted of 
such an offence let him cease therefrom or be deposed. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXIV. 

A clergyman or monk shall be deposed who goes to horse-races, or does not leave nuptials before the 
players are brought in. 

VAN ESPEN. 

Scarcely ever were these plays exhibited without the introduction of something contrary to honesty and 
chastity. As Lupus here notes, the word "obscene" has its derivation from these "scenic" representations. 
Rightly therefore has it been forbidden by the sacred canons that the clergy should witness any such plays. 
In the second part of this canon by the words "ordered by the doctrine of our fathers," the Synod 
understands the doctrine of the fathers of the synod of Laodicea, which in its canon liv. condemned the 
same abuse. 

Compare the canon given in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decreturn, Pars I., Dist. XXXIV. can. xix. 

CANON XXV. 

MOREOVER we renew the canon which orders that country (<greek>agroikikas</greek>) parishes and 
those which are in the provinces (<greek>egkwrious</greek>) shall remain subject to the bishops who had 
possession of them; especially if for thirty years they had administered them without opposition. But if within 
thirty years there had been or should be any controversy on the point, it is lawful for those who think 
themselves injured to refer the matter to the provincial synod. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXV 

Rural and out of town parishes held for thirty years may be retained. But within that time there may be a 
controversy. 

Compare notes on canon XVII. of Chalcedon. 

CANON XXVI. 

IF a presbyter has through ignorance contracted an illegal marriage, while he still retains the fight to his 
place, as we have defined in the sacred canons, yet he must abstain from all sacerdotal work. For it is 
sufficient if to such an one indulgence is granted. For he is until to bless another who needs to take care of 
his own wounds, for blessing is the imparting of sanctification. But how can he impart this to another who 
does not possess it himself through a sin of ignorance? Neither then in public nor in private can he bless nor 

distribute to others the body of Christ, [nor perform any other ministry]; but being content with his seat of 
honour let him lament to the Lord that his sin of ignorance may be remitted. For it is manifest that the 
nefarious marriage must be dissolved, neither can the man have any intercourse with her on account of 
whom he is deprived of the execution of his priesthood. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXVI. 

A priest who has fallen into an illicit marriage and been deposed, may still have his seat, but only when he 
abstains for the future from his wickedness. 

ARISTENUS. 

If any presbyter before his ordination had married a widow, or a harlot, or an actress, or any other woman 
such as are forbidden, in ignorance, he shall cease from his priesthood but shall still have his place among 
the presbyters. But such an illegitimate marriage, on account of which he was deprived of the Sacred 
Ministry, must be dissolved. 

VAN ESPEN. 

The sacred canon to which the Synod here refers is number xxvij. of St. Basil in his Canonical Epistle to 
Amphilochius. 

CANON XXVII. 

NONE of those who are in the catalogue of the clergy shall wear clothes unsuited to them, either while still 
living in town or when on a journey: but they shall wear such clothes as are assigned to those who belong to 
the clergy. And if any one shall violate this canon, he shall be cut off for one week. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXVII. 

A clergyman must not wear an unsuitable dress either when travelling or when at home. Should he do so, he 
shall be cut off for one week. 

CANON XXVIII. 

SINCE we understand that in several churches grapes are brought to the altar, according to a custom which 
has long prevailed, and the ministers joined this with the unbloody sacrifice of the oblation, and distributed 
both to the people at the same time, we decree that no priest shall do this for the future, but shall administer 
the oblation alone to the people for the quickening of their souls and for the remission of their sins. But with 
regard to the offering of grapes as first fruits, the priests may bless them apart [from the offering of the 
oblation] and distribute them to such as seek them as an act of thanksgiving to him who is the Giver of the 
fruits by which our bodies are increased and fed according to his divine decree. And if any cleric shall 
violate this decree let him be deposed. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXVIII. 

Grapes are by some joined with the unbloody sacrifice. It is hereby decreed that no one shall for the future 
dare to do this. 

VAN ESPEN. 

Similar blessings of fruit, and particularly of grapes, are found in more recent rituals as well as in the ancient 
Greek Euchologions and the Latin Rituales. In the Sacramentary of St. Gregory will be found a benediction 
of grapes on the feast of St. Sixtus. 

Cardinal Bona says (De Rob. Liturg, Lib. II., cap. xiv.), that immediately before the words Semper bona 
creas, sanctificas, etc., if new fruits or any other things adapted to human use were to be blessed, they were 

wont in former times to be placed before the altar, and there to be blessed by the priest; and when the 

benediction was ended with the accustomed words "Through Christ our Lord," there was added the 

following prayer: "Perquem haec omnia, etc.," which words are not so much to be referred to the body and 

blood of Christ, as to the things to be blessed, which God continually creates by renewing, and we ask that 

they may be sanctified by his benediction to our use. 

But in after ages when the fervour of the faithful had grown cold, that the mass might not be too long, they 

were separated and yet the prayer remained which, as said to-day over the consecrated species alone, 

can hardly be understood. 

This canon is found in a shortened form in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Pars. III. De Consecrat., Dist. II., can. vj. 

Compare Canon of the Apostles number iv. 

CANON XXIX. 

A CANON of the Synod of Carthage says that the holy mysteries of the altar are not to be performed but by 
men who are fasting, except on one day in the year on which the Supper of the Lord is celebrated. At that 
time, on account perhaps of certain occasions in those places useful to the Church, even the holy Fathers 
themselves made use of this dispensation. But since nothing leads us to abandon exact observance, we 
decree that the Apostolic and Patristic tradition shall be followed; and define that it is not right to break the 
fast on the fifth feria of the last week of Lent, and thus to do dishonour to the whole of Lent. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXIX. 

Some of the Fathers after they had supped on the day of the Divine Supper made the offering. (1) However, 
it has seemed good to the synod that this should not be done, and that the fast should not be broken upon 
the fifth feria(2) of the last week of Lent, and so the whole of Lent be dishonoured. 

Zonaras remarks that the "Apostolic and Patristic tradition" is a reference to canon Ixix. of the Apostolic 
Canons and to canon 1 . of Laodicea. See notes on this last canon. 

CANON XXX. 

WILLING to do all things for the edification of the Church, we have determined to take care even of priests 
who are in barbarian churches. Wherefore if they think that they ought to exceed the Apostolic Canon 
concerning the not putting away of a wife on the pretext of piety and religion, and to do beyond that which is 
commanded, and therefore abstain by agreement with their wives from cohabitation, we decree they ought 
no longer to live with them in any way, so that hereby they may afford us a perfect demonstration of their 
promise. But we have conceded this to them on no other ground than their narrowness, and foreign and 
unsettled manners. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXX. 

Those priests who are in churches among the barbarians, if with consent they have abstained from 
commerce with their wives shall never afterwards have any commerce with them in any way. 

FLEURY. 

(Hist. Eccl., Liv. XL, chap. 1.) 

"Priests who are among the barbarians," that is to say, it would seem, in Italy and in the other countries of the 
Latin rite. "Their narrowness and foreign and unsettled manners," that is to say that according to them it is an 
imperfection to aspire after perfect continence. 

I do not think that this explanation of Fleury's can be sustained, and it would seem that Van Espen is more 
near the truth when he says: "Some priests in barbarous countries thought they should abstain after the Latin 
custom even from wives taken before ordination. And although this was contrary to the discipline of the 
Greeks, and also to Canon V. of the Apostles, nevertheless the Fathers thought it might be tolerated, 

provided such priests should also not live any longer with their wives." There seems no reason to introduce 
anti-Roman bitterness where it is not already found. 

CANON XXXI. 

CLERICS who in oratories which are in houses offer the Holy Mysteries or baptize, we decree ought to do 
this with the consent of the bishop of the place. Wherefore if any cleric shall not have so done, let him be 
deposed. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXXI. 

Thou mayest not offer in an oratory in a private house without the consent of the bishop. 

On this whole subject the reader is referred to the curious and most interesting volume published by 
Venantius Monaldini of Venice, in 1765. 1 cannot better give its scope than by copying out its title in full. 
Commentarius Theologico-canonico-criticus De ecclcsiis, earum reverentia, et asylo atque concordia 
sacerdotii, et imperii, auctore Josepho Aloysio Assemani. Accesserunt tractatus el. virorum D. Josephi de 
Benis, De Oratoriis Publicis; ac. R.P. Fortunati a Brixia De Oratoriis Domesticis, in supplementum 
celeberrimi operis Joannis Baptistae Gattico De Oratoriis Domesticis, et usu altaris portatilis. 

CANON XXXII. 

SINCE it has come to our knowledge that in the region of Armenia they offer wine only on the Holy Table, 
those who celebrate, the unbloody sacrifice not mixing water with it, adducing, as authority thereof, John 
Chrysostom, a doctor of the Church, who says in his interpretation of the Gospel according to St. Matthew: 
"And wherefore did he not drink water after he was risen again, but wine? To pluck up by the roots another 
wicked heresy. For since there are certain who use water in the Mysteries to shew that both when he 
delivered the mysteries he had given wine and that when he had risen and was setting before them a mere 
meal without raysteries, he used wine, 'of the fruit,' saith he, 'of the vine.' But a vine produces wine, not 
water."(1) And from this they think the doctor overthrows the admixture of water in the holy sacrifice. Now, lest 
on the point from this time forward they be held in ignorance, we open out the orthodox opinion of the Father. 
For since there was an ancient and wicked heresy of the Hydroparastatae (i.e., of those who offered water), 
who instead of wine used water in their sacrifice, this divine, confuting the detestable teaching of such a 
heresy, and showing that it is directly opposed to Apostolic tradition, asserted that which has just been 
quoted. For to his own church, where the pastoral administration had been given him, he ordered that water 
mixed with wine should be used at the unbloody sacrifice, so as to shew forth the mingling of the blood and 
water which for the life of the whole world and for the redemption of its sins, was poured forth from the 
precious side of Christ our Redeemer; and moreover in every church where spiritual light has shined this 
divinely given order is observed. 

For also James, the brother, according to the flesh, of Christ our God, to whom the throne of the church of 
Jerusalem first was entrusted, and Basil, the Archbishop of the Church of Caesarea, whose glory has 
spread through all the world, when they delivered to us directions for the mystical sacrifice in writing, 
declared that the holy chalice is consecrated in the Divine Liturgy with water and wine. And the holy Fathers 
who assembled at Carthage provided in these express terms: "That in the holy Mysteries nothing besides 
the body and blood of the Lord be offered, as the Lord himself laid down, that is bread and wine mixed with 
water." Therefore if any bishop or presbyter shall not perform the holy action according to what has been 
handed down by the Apostles, and shall not offer the sacrifice with wine mixed with water, let him be 
deposed, as imperfectly shewing forth the mystery and innovating on the things which have been handed 
down. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXXII. 

Chrysostom, when overthrowing the heresy of the Hydroparastatae, says: "When the Lord suffered and rose 
again he used wine." The Armenians, laying hold on this, offer wine alone, not understanding that 
Chrysostom himself, and Basil, and James used wine mixed with water; and left the tradition that we should 
so make the offering. If, therefore, any one shall offer wine alone, or water alone, and not the mixed [chalice] 

let him be deposed. 

VAN ESPEN. 

Justin Martyr in his Second Apology, Ambrose, or whoever was the author of the books on the Sacraments 

(Lib. v., cap. i.), Augustine and many others make mention of this rite, and above all St. Cyprian, who wrote a 

long epistle on the subject to Cecilius, and seeking the reason of the ceremony as a setting forth of the union 

of the people, represented by the water, with Christ, figured by the wine. 

Another signification of this rite St. Augustine indicates in his sermon to Neophytes, saying: "Take this in 

bread, which hung upon the Cross: Take this in the cup which poured forth from the side," that is to say blood 

and water. 

Cardinal Bona (De Rebus Liturgies, Lib. II., cap. ix., n. 3 and 4) refers to many ancient rituals in which a similar 

prayer is used to that found in the Ambrosian rite, which says as the water is poured in: "Out of the side of 

Christ there flowed forth blood and water together. In the name of the Father, etc." Bona further notes that 

"The Greeks twice mingle water with the wine, once cold water, when in the prothesis they are preparing the 

Holy Gifts, and the Priest pierces the bread with the holy spear, and says, "One of the soldiers with a lance 

opened his side, and immediately there flowed forth blood and water," and the deacon pours in wine and 

water. From this it is evident that the Greeks agree with St. Augustine's explanation. 

For the second time the Greeks mix "hot water after consecration and immediately before communion, the 

deacon begging from the priest a blessing upon the warm water; and he blesses it in these words: 'Blessed 

be :the fervour of thy Saints, now and ever and to the ages of age;. Amen.' Then the deacon pours the water 

into the chalice, saying: 'The fervour of faith, full of the Holy Spirit.' " So Cardinal Bona as above. The third 

reason of this rite is assumed by some from the fact that Christ is believed thus to have instituted this 

sacrament at the last supper; and this the synod seems to intimate in the present canon when it says "as the 

Lord himself delivered." 

In this case the Greeks suppose that this rite was also handed down by the Apostles, and this is evident 

from their citing the Liturgy of St. James, which they believed to be a genuine work of his. 

CANON XXXIII. 

SINCE we know that, in the region of the Armenians, only those are appointed to the clerical orders who are 
of priestly descent (following in this Jewish customs); and some of those who are even untonsured are 
appointed to succeed cantors and readers of the divine law, we decree that henceforth it shall not be lawful 
for those who wish to bring any one into the clergy, to pay regard to the descent of him who is to be 
ordained; but let them examine whether they are worthy (according to the decrees set forth in the holy 
canons) to be placed on the list of the clergy, so that they may be ecclesiastically promoted, whether they 
are of priestly descent or not; moreover, let them not permit any one at all to read in the ambo, according to 
the order of those enrolled in the clergy, unless such an one have received the priestly tonsure and the 
canonical benediction of his own pastor; but if any one shall have been observed to act contrary to these 
directions, let him be cut off. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXXIII. 

Whoever is worthy of the priesthood should be ordained whether he is sprung of a priestly line or no. And he 
that has been blessed untonsured shalt not read the Holy Scriptures at the ambo. 

VAN ESPEN. 

Here not obscurely does the canon join the clerical tonsure received from the bishop with the office of 
Reader, so much so that he that has been tonsured by the bishop is thought to have received at the same 
time the tonsure and the order of lector. 

CANON XXXIV. 

BUT in future, since the priestly canon openly sets this forth, that the crime of conspiracy or secret society is 
forbidden by external laws, but much more ought it to be prohibited in the Church; we also hasten to observe 
that if any clerics or monks are found either conspiring or entering secret societies, or devising anything 
against bishops or clergymen, they shall be altogether deprived of their rank. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXXIV. 

If clerics or monks enter into conspiracies or fraternities, or plots against the bishop or their fellow clerics, 
they shall be cast out of their grade. 

This is but a renewal of Canon xviij. of Chalcedon, which see with the notes. 

CANON XXXV. 

IT shall be lawful for no Metropolitan on the death of a bishop of his province to appropriate or sell the 
private property of the deceased, or that of the widowed church: but these are to be in the custody of the 
clergy of the diocese over which he presided until the election of another bishop, unless in the said church 
there are no clergymen left. For then the Metropolitan shall protect the property without diminution, handing 
over everything to the bishop when he is appointed. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXXV. 

When the bishop is dead the clergy shall guard his goods. If, however, no clergyman remains, the 
Metropolitan shall take charge of them until another be ordained. 

Compare Canon xxii. of Chalcedon. This canon extends the prohibition to Metropolitans as well. 

ARISTENUS. 

Neither the clergy nor metropolitan after the death of the bishop are allowed to carry off his goods, but all 
should be guarded by the clergy themselves, until another bishop is chosen. But if by chance no clergyman 
is left in that church, the metropolitan is to keep all the possessions undiminished and to return them to the 
future bishop. 

CANON XXXVI. 

RENEWING the enactments by the 150 Fathers assembled at the God-protected and imperial city, and 
those of the 630 who met at Chalcedon; we decree that the see of Constantinople shall have equal 
privileges with the see of Old Rome, and shall be highly regarded in ecclesiastical matters as that is, and 
shall be second after it. After Constantinople shall be ranked the See of Alexandria, then that of Antioch, and 
afterwards the See of Jerusalem. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXXVI. 

Let the throne of Constantinople be next after that of Rome, and enjoy equal privileges. After it Alexandria, 
then Antioch, and then Jerusalem. 

BALSAMON. 

The Fathers here speak of the Second and Third canons of the Second Synod [i.e. I. Constantinople] and of 
canon xxviij. of the Fourth Synod [i.e. Chalcedon]. And read what we have said on these canons. 

ARISTENUS. 

We have explained the third canon of the Synod of Constantinople and the twenty-eighth canon of the 
Synod of Chalcedon as meaning, when asserting that the bishop of Constantinople should enjoy equal 
privileges after the Roman bishop, that he should be placed second from the Roman in point of time. So 
here too this preposition "after" denotes time but not honour. For after many years this throne of 

Constantinople obtained equal privileges with the Roman Church; because it was honoured by the 
presence of the Emperor and of the Senate. 

On this opinion of Aristenus's the reader is referred to the notes on Canon iij. of I. Constantinople. 

JUSTINIAN. 

(Novella CXXXI., Cap. ij.) 

We command that according to the definitions of the Four Councils the most holy Pope of Old Rome shall 
be first of all the priests. But the most blessed Archbishop of Constantinople, which is New Rome, shall have 
the second place after the Holy Apostolic See of Old Rome. 

This canon, in a mutilated form, is found in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars I., Diet. XXII., 
c. vj. 

CANON XXXVII. 

SINCE at different times there have been invasions of barbarians, and therefore very many cities have 
been subjected to the infidels, so that the bishop of a city may not be able, after he has been ordained, to 
take possession of his see, and to be settled in it in sacerdotal order, and so to perform and manage for it 
the ordinations and all things which by custom appertain to the bishop: we, preserving honour and 
veneration for the priesthood, and in no wise wishing to employ the Gentile injury to the ruin of ecclesiastical 
rights, have decreed that those who have been ordained thus, and on account of the aforesaid cause have 
not been settled in their sees, without any prejudice from this thing may be kept [in good standing] and that 
they may canonically perform the ordination of the different clerics and use the authority of their office 
according to the defined limits, and that whatever administration proceeds from them may be valid and 
legitimate. For the exercise of his office shall not be circumscribed by a season of necessity when the exact 
observance of law is circumscribed. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXXVII. 

A bishop who, on account of the incursions of the barbarians, is not set in his throne, shall have his own chair 
of state, and shall ordain, and shall enjoy most firmly all the rights of the priesthood. 

By Canon XVIII. of Antioch the principle of this canon was enunciated, that when a bishop did not take 
possession of his see because he could not do so, he was not to be held responsible or to lose any of his 
episcopal rights and powers, in that case the impossibility arose from the insubordination of the people, in 
this from the diocese being in the hands of the barbarians. 

It has been commonly thought that the Bishops in partibus infidelium had their origin in the state of things 
calling for this canon. 

CANON XXXVIII. 

THE canon which was made by the Fathers we also observe, which thus decreed: If any city be renewed by 
imperial authority, or shah have been renewed, let the order of things ecclesiastical follow the civil and 
public models. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXXVIII. 

If any city is or shall be renewed by the Emperor, the ecclesiastical order shall follow the political and public 
example. 

VAN ESPEN. 

The canon of the Fathers which the Synod wishes observed is XVII of Chalcedon, the notes on which see. 

Here it must be noted that by "civil and public models" is signified the "pragmatic" or imperial letters, by 
which the emperors granted to newly raised up or re-edified towns the privilege of other cities, or else 
annexed them to some Province. 

CANON XXXIX. 

SINCE our brother and fellow-worker, John, bishop of the island of Cyprus, together with his people in the 
province of the Hellespont, both on account of barbarian incursions, and that they may be freed from 
servitude of the heathen, and may be subject alone to the sceptres of most Christian rule, have emigrated 
from the said island, by the providence of file philanthropic God, and the labour of our Christ-loving and 
pious Empress; we determine that the privileges which were conceded by the divine fathers who first at 
Ephesus assembled, are to be preserved without any innovations, viz.: that new Justinianopolis shall have 
the rights of Constantinople and whoever is constituted the pious and most religious bishop thereof shall 
take precedence of all the bishops of the province of the Hellespont, and be elected [?] by his own bishops 
according to ancient custom. For tim customs which obtain in each church our divine Fathers also took 
pains should be maintained, the existing bishop of the city of Cyzicus being subject to the metropolitan of the 
aforesaid Justinianopolis, for the imitation of all the rest of the bishops who are under the aforesaid beloved 
of God metropolitan John, by whom, as custom demands, even the bishop of the very city of Cyzicus shall 
be ordained. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XXXIX. 

The new Justinianopolis shall have the rights of Constantinople, and its prelate shall rule over all the 
bishops the Hellespont to whom he has gone, and he shall be ordained by his own bishop: as the fathers of 
Ephesus decreed. 

HEFELE. 

Hitherto the bishop of Cyzicus was metropolitan of the province of the Hellespont. Now he too is to be 
subject to the bishop of New-Justinianopolis. What, however, is meant by "the right of Constantinople"? It 
was impossible that the Synod should place the bishop of Justinianopolis in equal dignity with the patriarch 
of Constantinople. But they probably meant to say: "The rights which the bishop of Constantinople has 
hitherto exercised over the province of the Hellespont, as chief metropolitan, fall now to the bishop of 
New-Justinianopolis." Or perhaps we should read, instead of Constantinople 

K<greek>wnstantinewn</greek> <greek>polews</greek>, as the Amerbachian MS. has it, and translate: 
"The same rights which Constantia (the metropolis of Cyprus) possessed, New Justinianopolis shall 
henceforth have." The latter is the more probable. 

VAN ESPEN. 

To understand this canon it must be remembered that the Metropolis of Cyprus, which was formerly called 
Constantia, when restored by the Emperor Justinian was called by his name, New Justinianopolis. 

CANON XL. 

SINCE to cleave to God by retiring from the noise and turmoil of life is very beneficial, it behoves us not 
without examination to admit before the proper time those who choose the monastic life, but to observe 
respecting them the limit handed down by our fathers, in order that we may then admit a profession of the life 
according to God as for ever firm, and the result of knowledge and judgment after years of discretion have 
been reached. He therefore who is about to submit to the yoke of monastic life should not be less than ten 
years of age, the examination of the matter depending on the decision of the bishop, whether he considers 
a longer time more conducive for his entrance and establishment in the monastic life. For although the great 
Basil in his holy canons decreed that she who willingly offers to God and embraces virginity, if she has 
completed her seventeenth year, is to be entered in the order of virgins: nevertheless, having followed the 
example respecting widows and deaconesses, analogy and proportion being considered, we have 
admitted at the said time those who have chosen the monastic life. For it is written in the divine Apostle that a 
widow is to be elected in the church at sixty years old: but the sacred canons have decreed that a 
deaconess shall be ordained at forty, since they saw that the Church by divine grace had gone forth more 

powerful and robust and was advancing still further, and they saw the firmness and stability of the faithful in 
observing the divine commandments. Wherefore we also, since we most rightly comprehend the matter, 
appoint the benediction of grace to him who is about to enter the struggle according to God, even as 
impressing speedily a certain seal upon him, hereupon introducing him to the not-long-to-be-hesitated-over 
and declined, or rather inciting him even to the choice and determination of good. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XL. 

A monk must be ten years old. Even if the Divine Basil thought the one shorn should be over seventeen. But 
although the Apostle ordains that a widow to be espoused to the Church must be sixty, yet the Fathers say a 
Deaconess is to be ordained at forty, the Church in the meanwhile having become stronger; so we place the 
seal on a monk at an earlier age. 

ARISTENUS. 

The eighteenth canon of Basil the Great orders that she who offers herself to the Lord and renounces 
marriage, ought to be over sixteen or even seventeen years of age: so that her promise may be firm and 
that if she violates it she may suffer the due penalties. For, says he, children's voices are not to be thought of 
any value in such matters. But the present canon admits him who is not less than ten years and desires to 
be a monk, but entrusts the determination of the exact time to the judgment of the hegumenos, whether he 
thinks it more advantageous to increase the age-requirement for the entering and being established in the 
married life. But the canon lessens the time defined by Basil the Great, because the Fathers thought that the 
Church by divine grace had grown stronger since then, and was going on more and more, and that the 
faithful seemed firmer and more stable for the observance of the divine commandments. And for the same 
reason, viz, that the Church was growing better, the sacred canons had lessened the age of deaconesses, 
and fixed it at forty years, although the Apostle himself orders that no widow is to be chosen into the Church 
under sixty years of age. 

CANON XLI. 

THOSE who in town or in villages wish to go away into cloisters, and take heed for themselves apart, before 
they enter a monastery and practise the anchorite's life,(1) should for the space of three years in the fear of 
God submit to the Superior of the house, and fulfil obedience in all things, as is right, thus shewing forth their 
choice of this life and that they embrace it willingly and with their whole hearts; they are then to be examined 
by the superior (<greek>proedros</greek>) of the place; and then to bear bravely outside the cloister one 
year more, so that their purpose may be fully manifested. For by this they will shew fully and perfectly that 
they are not catching at vain glory, but that they are pursuing the life of solitude because of its inherent 
beauty and honour. After the completion of such a period, if they remain in the same intention in their choice 
of the life, they are to be enclosed, and no longer is it lawful for them to go out of such a house when they so 
desire, unless they be induced to do so for the common advantage, or other pressing necessity urging on 
to death; and then only with the blessing of the bishop of that place. 

And those who, without the above-mentioned causes, venture forth of their convents, are first of all to be shut 
up in the said convent even against their wills, and then are to cure themselves with fasting and other 
afflictions, knowing how it is written that "no one who has put his hand to the plough and has looked back, is 
fit for the kingdom of heaven." 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XLI. 

Whoever is about to enter a cloister, let him live for three years in a monastery, and before he is shut up let 
him spend one year more, and so let him be shut up. And he shall not then go forth unless death or the 
common good demands. 

VAN ESPEN. 

This canon, so far as it sets forth the necessity of probation before admission to the Anchorite life, synods in 
after-years frequently approved, taught as they were by experience how perilous a matter it is to admit 

without sufficient probation to this solitary life and state of separation from the common intercourse with his 
fellow men. Vide the Synod ofVannes (about A.D. 465) canon vij., of Agde chap. Ixxviij., of Orleans the First 
can. xxij., of Frankfort can. xij., of Toledo the Seventh can. v., and the Capitular of Charlemagne To monks, 
Chap. ij. 

CANON XLII. 

THOSE who are called Eremites and are clothed in black robes, and with long hair go about cities and 
associate with the worldly both men and women and bring odium upon their profession-we decree that if 
they will receive the habit of other monks and wear their hair cut short, they may be shut up in a monastery 
and numbered among the brothers; but if they do not choose to do this, they are to be expelled from the 
cities and forced to live in the desert (<greek>erhmous</greek>) from whence also they derive their name. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XLII. 

An eremite dressed in black vesture and not having his hair cut, unless he has his hair cut shall be expelled 
the city and be shut up in his monastery. 

It may not be irreverent to remark that this species of impostors always has been common in the East, and 
many examples will be found of the dervishes in the Arabian Nights and other Eastern tales. The 
"vagabond" monks of the West also became a great nuisance as well as a scandal in the Middle Ages. 
The reader will find interesting instances of Spanish deceivers of the same sort in "Gil Bias" and other 
Spanish romances. 

CANON XLIII. 

IT is lawful for every Christian to choose the life of religious discipline, and setting aside the troublous 
surgings of the affairs of this life to enter a monastery, and to be shaven in the fashion of a monk, without 
regard to what faults he may have previously committed. For God our Saviour says: "Whose cometh to me, 
I will in no wise cast out." 

As therefore the monastic method of life engraves upon us as on a tablet the life of penitence, we receive(1) 
whoever approaches it(2) sincerely; nor is any custom to be allowed to hinder him from fulfilling his intention. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XLIII. 

Whoever flees from the surging billows of life and desires to enter a monastery, shall be allowed to do so. 

ZONARAS. 

The greatness or the number of a man's sins ought not to make him lose hope of propitiating the divinity by 
his penitence, if he turns his eyes to the divine mercy. This is what the canon asserts, and affirms that 
everyone, no matter how wicked and nefarious his life may have been, may embrace monastic discipline, 
which inscribes, as on a tablet, (3) to us a life of penitence. For as a tablet describes to us what is inscribed 
upon it, so the monastic profession writes and inscribes upon us penitence, so that it remains for ever. 

CANON XLIV. 

A MONK convicted of fornication, or who takes a wife for the communion of matrimony and for society, is to 
be subjected to the penalties of fornicators, according to the canons. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XLIV. 

A monk joined in marriage or committing fornication shall pay the penalty of a fornicator. 

The punishment here seems too light, so that Balsamon thinks that this canon only refers to such monks as 
freely confess their sin and desist from it, remaining in their monasteries; and that the sterner penalties 
assigned to unchaste religious by other synods (notably Chalcedon, can. xvj., and Ancyra, can. xix.) are for 
such as do not confess their faults but are after some time convicted of them. 

ARISTENUS. 

The monk will receive the same punishment whether he be a fornicator or has joined himself with a woman 
for the communion of marriage. 

VAN ESPEN. 

It is very likely from this canon that the Monastic vow at the time of this Synod was not yet an impedimentum 
dirimens of matrimony, for nothing is said about the dissolution of the marriage contracted by a monk 
although he had gravely sinned in violating his faith pledged to God. 

CANON XLV. 

WHEREAS we understand that in some monasteries of women those who are about to be clothed with the 
sacred habit are first adorned in silks and garments of all kinds, and also with gold and jewels, by those 
who bring them thither, and that they thus approach the altar and are there stripped of such a display of 
wealth, and that immediately thereafter the blessing of their habit takes place, and they are clothed with the 
black robe; we decree that henceforth this shall not be done. For it is not lawful for her who has already of 
her own free will put away every delight of life, and has embraced that method of life which is according to 
God, and has confirmed it with strong and stable reasons, and so has come to the monastery, to recall to 
memory the things which they had already forgotten, things of this world which perisheth and passeth away. 
For thus they raise in themselves doubts, and are disturbed in their souls, like the tossing waves, turning 
hither and thither. Moreover, they should not give bodily evidence of heaviness of heart by weeping, but if a 
few tears drop from their eyes, as is like enough to be the case, they may be supposed by those who see 
them to have flowed <greek>mh</greek> <greek>mallon</greek> on account of their affection 
(<greek>diaqesews</greek>, affectionem) for the ascetic struggle rather than (<greek>h</greek>) because 
they are quitting the world and worldly things. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XLV. 

Parents shall not deck out in silks a daughter who has chosen the monastic life, and thus clothe her, for this 
is a recalling to her mind the world she is leaving. 

This canon is at the present day constantly broken at the profession of Carmelites. 

CANON XLVI. 

THOSE women who choose the ascetic life and are settled in monasteries may by no means go forth of 

them. If, however, any inexorable necessity compels them, let them do so with the blessing and permission 

of her who is mother superior; and even then they must not go forth alone, but with some old women who are 

eminent in the monastery, and at the command of the lady superior. But it is not at all permitted that they 

should stop outside. 

And men also who follow the monastic life let them on urgent necessity go forth with the blessing of him to 

whom the rule is entrusted. 

Wherefore, those who transgress that which is now decreed by us, whether they be men or women, are to 

be subjected to suitable punishments. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XLVI. 

A nun shall not go out of her convent without the consent of her superior, nor shall she go alone but with an 
older one of the order. It is in no case permitted to her to spend the night outside. The same is the case with 

a monk; he cannot go out of the monastery without the consent of the superior. 

CANON XLVII. 

No woman may sleep in a monastery of men, nor any man in a monastery of women. For it behoves the 
faithful to be without offence and to give no scandal, and to order their lives decorously and honestly and 
acceptably to God. But if any one shall have done this, whether he be cleric or layman, let him be cut off. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XLVII. 

It is not allowed that a woman should sleep in a convent of men, nor a man in a monastery of women. 

The ground covered by this canon is also found in Justinian's Code, Book xliv., Of Bishops and Clergy. Vide 
also Novella cxxxiii., chap. v. 

VAN ESPEN. 

From the whole context of Justinian's law it is manifest that Justinian here is condemning "double 
monasteries," in which both men and women dwelt. And he wishes such to be separated, the men from the 
women, and e contra the women from the men, and that each should dwell in separate monasteries. 
The reader may be reminded of some curious double religious houses in England for men and women, of 
which sometimes a woman was the superior of both. 

CANON XLVIII. 

THE wife of him who is advanced to the Episcopal dignity, shall be separated from her husband by their 
mutual consent, and after his ordination and consecration to the episcopate she shall enter a monastery 
situated at a distance from the abode of the bishop, and there let her enjoy the bishop's provision. And if 
she is deemed worthy she may be advanced to the dignity of a deaconess. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XLVIII. 

She who is separated from one about to be consecrated bishop, shall enter a monastery after his 
ordination, situated at a distance from the See city, and she shall be provided for by the bishop. 

CANON XLIX. 

RENEWING also the holy canon, we decree that the monasteries which have been once consecrated by 
the Episcopal will, are always to remain monasteries, and the things which belong to them are to be 
preserved to the monastery, and they cannot any more be secular abodes nor be given by any one to 
seculars. But if anything of this kind has been done already, we declare it to be null; and those who hereafter 
attempt to do so are to be subjected to canonical penalties. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XLIX. 

Monasteries built with the consent of the bishop shall not afterwards be turned into secular houses, nor shall 
they pass into the hands of seculars. 

VAN ESPEN. 

This canon renews canon xxiv. of Chalcedon. And here it may be observed that the canons even of 
Ecumenical Synods fall into desuetude little by little, unless the care of bishops and pastors keeps them 
alive, and from the example of this synod it may be seen how often they need calling back again into 
observance. 

Nor can there be any doubt that frequently it would be more advantageous to renew the canons already set 
forth by the Fathers, rather than to frame new ones. 

CANON L. 

No one at all, whether cleric or layman, is from this time forward to play at dice. And if any one hereafter shall 
be found doing so, if he be a cleric he is to be deposed, if a layman let him be cut off. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON L. 

A layman should not plug at dice. 

This renews canons xlii. and xliij. of the Apostolic canons. 

CANON LI. 

THIS holy and ecumenical synod altogether forbids those who are called "players," and their "spectacles," 
as well as the exhibition of hunts, and the theatrical dances. If any one despises the present canon, and 
gives himself to any of the things which are forbidden, if he be a cleric he shall be deposed, but if a layman 
let him be cut off. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LI. 

Whose shall play as an actor or shall attend theatrical representations or hunts shall be cut off. Should he 
be a cleric he shall be deposed. 

BALSAMON. 

Some one will enquire why canon xxiiij. decrees that those in holy orders and monks, who are constantly 
attending horse-races, and scenic plays, are to cease or be deposed: but the present canon says without 
discrimination, that those who give themselves over to such things if clergymen are to be deposed, and if 
laymen to be cut off. The solution is this. It is one thing and more easily to be endured, that a man should be 
present at a horse-race, or be convicted of going to see a play; and another thing, and one that cannot be 
pardoned, that he should give himself over to such things, and to exercise this continually as his business. 
Wherefore those who have once sinned deliberately, are admonished to cease. If they are not willing to 
obey, they are to be deposed. But those who are constantly engaged in this wickedness, if they are clerics, 
they must be deposed from their clerical place, if laymen they must be cut off. 

CANON Lll. 

ON all days of the holy fast of Lent, except on the Sabbath, the Lord's day and the holy day of the 
Annunciation, the Liturgy of the Presanctified is to be said. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON Lll. 

Throughout the whole of Lent except upon the Lord's day, the Sabbath, and upon the day of the 
Annunciation, the presanctified gifts shall be offered. 

BALSAMON. 

We do not call the service of the Presanctified the unbloody sacrifice, but the offering of the previously 
offered, and of the perfected sacrifice, and of the completed priestly act. 

VAN ESPEN. 

The Greeks therefore confess that the bread once offered and consecrated, is not to be consecrated anew 
on another day; but a new offering is made of what was before consecrated and presanctified: just as in the 
Latin Church the consecrated or presanctified bread of Maundy Thursday is offered on Good Friday. 
The Patriarch Michael of Constantinople is quoted by Leo Allatius as saying that "none of the mystic 
consecratory prayers are said over the presanctified gifts, but the priest only recites the prayer that he may 
be a worthy communicant." 

Some among the later Greeks have been of opinion that the unconsecrated wine was consecrated by the 
commixture with the consecrated bread, and (without any words of consecration) was transmuted into the 
sacred blood, (1) and with this seems to agree the already quoted Michael, Patriarch of Constantinople, who 
is cited by Leo Allatius in his treatise on the rite of the presanctified. "The presanctified is put into the mystic 
chalice, and so the wine which was then in it, is changed into the holy blood of the Lord." And with this agrees 
Simeon, Archbishop of Thessalonica, in his answer to Gabriel of Pentapolis, when he writes: "In the mass of 
the Presanctified no consecration of what is in the chalice is made by the invocation of the Holy Spirit and of 
his sign, but by the participation and union of the life-giving bread, which is truly the body of Christ." 
From this opinion, which was held by some of the Greeks, it gradually became the practice at 
Constantinople not to dip the bread in the Sacred Blood, as Michael the patriarch of this very church 
testifies. But in the ordinary Euchologion of the Greeks it is expressly set forth that the presanctified bread 
before it is reserved, should be dipped in the sacred blood, and for this a rite is provided. 

Leo Allatius's Dissertatio de Missa Proesanctificatorum should be read; an outline of the service as found in 

the Euchologion, and as reprinted by Renaudotius is as follows. 

First of all vespers is said. After some lessons and prayers, including the "Great Ectenia" and that for the 

Catechumens, these are dismissed. 

After the Catechumens have departed there follows the Ectenia of the Faithful. After which, "Now the 

heavenly Powers invisibly minister with us; for, behold, the King of Glory is borne in. Behold the mystic 

sacrifice having been perfected is borne aloft by angels. 

"Let us draw near with faith and love, that we may become partakers of life eternal. Alleluia, Alleluia, 

Alleluia. 

"Deacon. Let us accomplish our evening prayer to the Lord. 

"For the precious and presanctified gifts that are offered, let us pray to the Lord. "That our man-loving God, 

etc." as in the ordinary liturgy past the Lord's prayer, and down to the Sancta Sanctis, which reads as 

follows: 

Priest. Holy things presanctified for holy persons. 

Choir. One holy, one Lord Jesus Christ, to the Glory of God the Father-Amen. 

Then the Communion Hymn and the Communion, and the rest as in the ordinary liturgy, except "this whole 

evening," is said for "this whole day," and another prayer is provided in the room of that beginning "Lord, 

who blessest them, etc."(1) 

It is curious to note that on Good Friday, the only day on which the Mass of the Presanctified is celebrated in 

the West, its use has died out in the East, and now it is used "on the Wednesdays and Fridays of the first six 

weeks of the Great Quadragesima, on the Thursday of the fifth week, and on the Monday, Tuesday, and 

Wednesday of Holy Passion Week. It may also be said, excepting on Saturdays and Sundays, and on the 

Festival of the Annunciation, on other days during the Fast, to wit, on those of festivals and their Vigils, and 

on the Commemoration of the Dedication of the Church." 

Symeon, who was bishop of Thessalonica, and flourished in the early part of the XVth Century, complains of 

the general neglect of the Mass of the Presanctified on Good Friday in his time, and says that his church 

was the only one in the Exarchate that then retained it. He ascribes the disuse to the example of the Church 

of Jerusalem. See the matter treated at length in his Quoestiones, Iv-lix. Migne's Pat. Groec. 

Cf. J. M. Neale Essays on Liturgiology, p. 109. 

CANON LIU. 

WHEREAS the spiritual relationship is greater than fleshly affinity; and since it has come to our knowledge 
that in some places certain persons who become sponsors to children in holy salvation-bearing baptism, 
afterwards contract matrimony with their mothers (being widows), we decree that for the future nothing of this 
sort is to be done. But if any, after the present canon, shall be observed to do this, they must, in the first 
place, desist from this unlawful marriage, and then be subjected to the penalties of fornicators. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LIU. 

Godfathers cannot be permitted to be married with the mother of their godchildren. If any one is so joined, let 
him do penance after separation. 

JOHNSON. 

(Clergyman's Vade Mecum.) 

The imperial law forbade the adopter parent to marry his or her adopted son or daughter; for the godchild 
was thought a sort of an adopted child. See Justin., Institut., Lib. I., Tit. x. 

Van Espen however refers, and to my mind with greater truth, to Justinian's law (xxvj of the Cod. de Nuptiis) 
which forbids the marriage of a man with his nurse or with whoever received him from the font, "because," 
says the law, "nothing can so incite to parental affection, and therefore induce a just prohibition of marriage, 
than a bond of this sort by which, through God's meditation, their souls are bound together." 

CANON LIV. 

THE divine scriptures plainly teach us as follows, "Thou shalt not approach to any that is near of kin to thee 
to uncover their nakedness." Basil, the bearer-of-God, has enumerated in his canons some marriages 
which are prohibited and has passed over the greater part in silence, and in both these ways has done us 
good service. For by avoiding a number of disgraceful names (lest by such words he should pollute his 
discourse) he included impurities under general terms, by which course he shewed to us in a general way 
the marriages which are forbidden. But since by such silence, and because of the difficulty of understanding 
what marriages are prohibited, the matter has become confused; it seemed good to us to set it forth a little 
more clearly, decreeing that from this time forth he who shall marry with the daughter of his father; or a father 
or son with a mother and daughter; or a father and son with two girls who are sisters; or a mother and 
daughter with two brothers; or two brothers with two sisters, fall under the canon of seven years, provided 
they openly separate from this unlawful union. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LIV. 

Thou shalt not permit the marriage of a son of a brother to the daughter of a brother; nor with a daughter and 
her mother shall there be the marriage of a son and his father; neither a mother and a daughter with two 
brothers; nor brothers with two sisters. But should anything of this sort have been done, together with 
separation, penance shall be done for seven years. 

CANON LV. 

SINCE we understand that in the city of the Romans, in the holy fast of Lent they fast on the Saturdays, 
contrary to the ecclesiastical observance which is traditional, it seemed good to the holy synod that also in 
the Church of the Romans the canon shah immovably stands fast which says: "If any cleric shall be found to 
fast on a Sunday or Saturday (except on one occasion only) he is to be deposed; and if he is a layman he 
shall be cut off." 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LV. 

The Romans fast the Sabbaths of Lent. Therefore this Synod admonishes that upon these days the 
Apostolical canon is of force. 

The canon quoted is LXVI. of the Apostolic Canons. 

VAN ESPEN. 

The Fathers of this Synod thought that this canon of the Apostles was edited by the Apostles themselves, 
and therefore they seem to have reprobated the custom of the Roman Church of fasting on the Sabbath 
more bitterly than was right. Whence it happens this is one of those canons which the Roman Church never 

received. 

ZONARAS. 

The synod took in hand to correct this failing (<greek>sfalma</greek>) of the Latins; but until this time they 
have arrogantly remained in their pertinacity, and so remain to-day. Nor do they heed the ancient canons 
which forbid fasting on the Sabbath except that one, to wit the great Sabbath, nor are they affected by the 
authority of this canon. Moreover the clerics have no regard for the threatened deposition, nor the laymen for 
their being cut off. 

CANON LVI. 

WE have likewise learned that in the regions of Armenia and in other places certain people eat eggs and 
cheese on the Sabbaths and Lord's days of the holy lent. It seems good therefore that the whole Church of 
God which is in all the world should follow one rule and keep the fast perfectly, and as they abstain from 
everything which is killed, so also should they from eggs and cheese, which are the fruit and produce of 
those animals from which we abstain. But if any shall not observe this law, if they be clerics, let them be 
deposed; but if laymen, let them be cut off. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LVI. 

Armenians eat eggs and cheese on the Sabbaths in Lent. It is determined that the whole world should 
abstain from these. If not let the offender be cast out. 

VAN ESPEN. 

This canon shows that the ancient Greeks, although they did not fast on the Sabbaths and Lord's days of 
Lent, nevertheless they abstained on them from flesh food; and it was believed by them that abstinence 
from flesh food involved also necessarily abstinence from all those things which have their origin from flesh. 
This also formerly was observed by the Latins in Lent, and in certain regions is known still to be the usage. 

CANON LVII. 

IT is not right to offer honey and milk on the altar. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LVII. 

No one should offer honey or milk at the altar. 

See canon iij. of the Apostles, canon xxviij. of the African code, also canon xxviij. of this synod. The Greeks 
apparently do not recognize the exception specified in the canon of the African Code. 

CANON LVIII. 

NONE of those who are in the order of laymen may distribute the Divine Mysteries to himself if a bishop, 
presbyter, or deacon be present. But whoso shall dare to do such a thing, as acting contrary to what has 
been determined shall be cut off for a week and thenceforth let him learn not to think of himself more highly 
than he ought to think. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LVIII. 

A layman shall not communicate himself. Should he do so, let him be cut off for a week. 
VAN ESPEN. 

It is well known that in the first centuries it was customary that the Holy Eucharist should be taken back by the 
faithful to their houses; and that at home they received it at their own hands. It is evident that this was what 
was done by the Anchorites and monks who lived in the deserts, as may be seen proved by Cardinal Bona. 
(De Rebus Liturg., Lib. II., cap. xvij.). From this domestic communion it is easily seen how the abuse arose 
which is condemned in this canon. 

CANON LIX. 

BAPTISM is by no means to be administered in an oratory which is within a house; but they who are about to 
be held worthy of the spotless illumination are to go to a Catholic Church and there to enjoy this gift. But if any 
one shall be convicted of not observing what we have determined, if he be a cleric let him be deposed, if a 
layman let him be cut off. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LIX. 

In oratories built in houses they shall not celebrate baptism. Whoever shall not observe this, if a cleric he 
shall be deposed, if a layman he shall be cut off. 

CANON LX. 

SINCE the Apostle exclaims that he who cleaves to the Lord is one spirit, it is clear that he who is intimate 
with his [i.e. the Lord's] enemy becomes one by his affinity with him. Therefore, those who pretend they are 
possessed by a devil and by their depravity of manners feign to manifest their form and appearance; it 
seems good by all means that they should be punished and that they should be subjected to afflictions and 
hardships of the same kind as those to which they who are truly demoniacally possessed are justly 
subjected with the intent of delivering them from the [work or rather] energy of the devil. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LX. 

Whoever shall pretend to be possessed by a devil, shall endure the penance of demoniacs. 

Zonaras says in his scholion that even in his day people made the same claim to diabolical possession. 

CANON LXI. 

THOSE who give themselves up to soothsayers or to those who are called hecatontarchs or to any such, in 
order that they may learn from them what things(1) they wish to have revealed to them, let all such, according 
to the decrees lately made by the Fathers concerning them, be subjected to the canon of six years. And to 
this [penalty] they also should be subjected who carry about(2) she-bears or animals of the kind for the 
diversion and injury of the simple; as well as those who tell fortunes and fates, and genealogy, and a 
multitude of words of this kind from the nonsense of deceit and imposture. Also those who are called 
expellers of clouds, enchanters, amulet-givers, and soothsayers. 

And those who persist in these things, and do not turn away and flee from pernicious and Greek pursuits of 
this kind, we declare are to be thrust out of the Church, as also the sacred canons say. "For what fellowship 
hath light with darkness?" as saith the Apostle, "or what agreement is there between the temple of God and 
idols? or what part hath he that believeth with an infidel? And what concord hath Christ with Belial?" 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME or CANON LXI. 

Whoever shall deliver himself over to a hecatontarch or to devils, so as to learn some secret, he shall be 
put under penance for six years. So too those who take around a bear, who join themselves with those who 
seek incantations and drive away the clouds, and have faith in fortune and fate, shall be cast out of the 
assembly of the Church. 

HEFELE. 

According to Balsamon (in Beveridge, Synod., Tom. I., p. 228) old people who had the reputation of special 
knowledge [were called "hecatontarchs"]. They sold the hair [of these she bears and other animals] as 
medicine or for an amulet. Cf. Balsamon and Zonaras ut supra. 

St. Chrysostom in his Homilies on the Statutes explains, in answer to certain who defended them on this 
ground, that if these incantations are made in the name of Christ they are so much the worse. The Saint 
says, "Moreover I think that she is to be hated all the more who abuses the name of God for this purpose, 
because while professing to be a Christian, she shows by her actions that she is a heathen." 

CANON LXII. 

THE so-called Calends, and what are called Bota and Brumalia, and the full assembly which takes place 
on the first of March, we wish to be abolished from the life of the faithful. And also the public dances of 
women, which may do much harm and mischief. Moreover we drive away from the life of Christians the 
dances given in the names of those falsely called gods by the Greeks whether of men or women, and which 
are performed after an ancient and un-Christian fashion; decreeing that no man from this time forth shall be 
dressed as a woman, nor any woman in the garb suitable to men. Nor shall he assume comic, satyric, or 
tragic masks; nor may men invoke the name of the execrable Bacchus when they squeeze out the wine in 
the presses; nor when pouring out wine into jars [to cause a laugh(3)], practising in ignorance and vanity the 
things which proceed from the deceit of insanity. Therefore those who in the future attempt any of these 
things which are written, having obtained a knowledge of them, if they be clerics we order them to be 
deposed, anti if laymen to be cut off. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXII. 

Let these betaken away from the lives of the faithful, viz.: the Bota, and the Calends, and the Brumalia, and 
salutations in honour of the gods, and comic, satyric and tragic masks, and the invocation of Bacchus at the 
wine press, and the laughing at the wine jars. Whoever shall persist in these after this canon shall be liable 
to give an account. 

On the Calends see Du Cange (Glossarium in loc). The Bota were feasts in honour of Pan, the Brumalia 
feasts in honour of Bacchus. Many particulars with regard to these superstitions will be found in Balsamon's 
scholion, to which the curious reader is referred. Van Espen also has some valuable notes on the Kalends 
of January. 

CANON LXIII. 

WE forbid to be publicly read in Church, histories of the martyrs which have been falsely put together by the 
enemies of the truth, in order to dishonour the martyrs of Christ and induce unbelief among those who hear 
them, but we order that such books be given to the flames. But those who accept them or apply their mind to 
them as true we anathematize. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXIII. 

Martyrologies made up by the ethnics (E<greek>llh</greek> <greek>niwn</greek>) shall not be published 
in church. 

What is condemned is false histories of true martyrs, not (as Johnson erroneously supposes) "false 
legends of pretended martyrs." There have been martyrs, both royal and plebeian, in much later times 
whose lives have been made ridiculous and whose memory has been rendered hateful to the ignorant 
people by so-called "histories" which might well have received the treatment ordered by the canon. 

CANON LXIV. 

IT does not befit a layman to dispute or teach publicly, thus claiming for himself authority to teach, but he 
should yield to the order appointed by the Lord, and to open his ears to those who have received the grace 
to teach, and be taught by them divine things; for in one Church God has made "different members," 

according to the word of the Apostle: and Gregory the Theologian, wisely interpreting this passage, 
commends the order in vogue with them saying:(1) "This order brethren we revere, this we guard. Let this 
one be the ear; that one the tongue, the hand or any other member. Let this one teach, but let that one learn." 
And a little further on: "Learning in docility and abounding in cheerfulness, and ministering with alacrity, we 
shall not all be the tongue which is the more active member, not all of us Apostles, not all prophets, nor shall 
we all interpret." And again: "Why dost thou make thyself a shepherd when thou art a sheep? Why become 
the head when thou art a foot? Why dost thou try to be a commander when thou art enrolled in the number of 
the soldiers?" And elsewhere: "Wisdom orders, Be not swift in words; nor compare thyself with the rich, 
being poor; nor seek to be wiser than the wise." But if any one be found weakening the present canon, he is 
to be cut off for forty days. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXIV. 

A layman shall not teach, for all are not prophets, nor all apostles. 

Zonaras points out that this canon refers only to public instruction and not to private. Van Espen further notes 
that in the West this restriction is limited to the solemn and public preaching and announcing of the Word of 
God, which is restricted to bishops, and only by special and express license given to the other clergy, and 
refers to his own treatment of the subject In jure Eccles, Tom I., part 1 , tit. xvj., cap. viij. 

CANON LXV. 

THE fires which are lighted on the new moons by some before their shops and houses, upon which 
(according to a certain ancient custom) they are wont foolishly and crazily to leap, we order henceforth to 
cease. Therefore, whosoever shall do such a thing, if he be a cleric, let him be deposed; but if he be a 
layman, let him be cut off. For it is written in the Fourth Book of the Kings "And Manasses built an altar to the 
whole host of heaven, in the two courts of the Lord, and made his sons to pass through the fire, he used lots 
and augurs and divinations by birds and made ventriloquists [or pythons(1)] and multiplied diviners, that he 
might do evil before the Lord and provoke him to anger."(2) 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXV. 

The fires which were made upon the new moons at the workshops are condemned and those who leaped 
upon them. 

Lupin remarks that the fires kindled on certain Saints' days are almost certainly remains of this heathen 
practice. These fires are often accompanied with leaping, drinking, and the wrestling of young men. 

CANON LXVI. 

FROM the holy day of the Resurrection of Christ our God until the next Lord's day, for a whole week, in the 
holy churches the faithful ought to be free from labour, rejoicing in Christ with psalms and hymns and spiritual 
songs; and celebrating the feast, and applying their minds to the reading of the holy Scriptures, and 
delighting in the Holy Mysteries; for thus shall we be exalted with Christ and together with him be raised up. 
Therefore, on the aforesaid days there must not be any horse races or any public spectacle. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXVI. 

The faithful shall every one of them go to church during the whole week after Easter. 

VAN ESPEN. 

It is certain that the whole of Easter week was kept as a feast by the whole Church both East and West; and 
this Synod did not introduce this custom by its canon, but adopted this canon to ensure its continuance. 

Here we have clearly set forth the Christian manner of passing a feast-day, viz., that the faithful on those 
days did give themselves up to "Psalms and Hymns and Spiritual Songs," from which the divine office 
which we call today canonical [i.e., chiefly Mattins and Vespers] are made up; and hence we understand 
that all the faithful ought to attend the choir-offices, which was indeed observed for many centuries, as I have 
shewn in my Dissertation on the Canonical Hours, cap. III., 1, and therefore it was called "public" [or 
common] prayer. 

CANON LXVII. 

THE divine Scripture commands us to abstain from blood, from things strangled, and from fornication. 
Those therefore who on account of a dainty stomach prepare by any art for food the blood of any animal, 
and so eat it, we punish suitably. If anyone henceforth venture to eat in any way the blood of an animal, if he 
be a clergyman, let him be deposed; if a layman, let him be cut off. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXVII. 

A cleric eating blood shall be deposed, but a layman shall be cut off. 

VAN ESPEN. 

The apostolic precept of abstaining "from blood and from things strangled" for some ages, not only among 
the Greeks but also among the Latins, was observed in many churches, but little by little and step by step it 
died out in the whole Church, at least in the Latin Church, altogether. 

In this the Latin Church followed the opinion of St. Augustine, Contra Faustum Manichoeum, Lib. XXXII., cap. 
xiij., where he teaches at great length that the precept was given to Christians only while the Gentile Church 
was not yet settled. This passage of Augustine also proves that at that time Africa did not observe this 
precept of the Apostles. 

CANON LXVIII. 

IT is unlawful for anyone to corrupt or cut up a book of the Old or New Testament or of our holy and 
approved preachers and teachers, or to give them up to the traders in books or to those who are called 
perfumers, or to hand it over for destruction to any other like persons: unless to be sure it has been rendered 
useless either by bookworms, or by water, or in some other way. He who henceforth shall be observed to 
do such a thing shall be cut off for one year. Likewise also he who buys such books (unless he keeps them 
for his own use, or gives them to another for his benefit to be preserved) and has attempted to corrupt them, 
let him be cut off. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXVIII. 

Thou shalt not destroy nor hand over copies of the Divine Scriptures to be destroyed unless they are 
absolutely useless. 

VAN ESPEN. 

(Foot-note.) 

I think that this canon was directed against certain Nestorian and Eutychian heretics, who, that they might find 
some patronage of their errors from the Holy Scriptures, dared in the sixth century most infamously to corrupt 
certain passages of the New Testament. 

CANON LXIX. 

IT is not permitted to a layman to enter the sanctuary (Holy Altar, Gk.), though, in accordance with a certain 
ancient tradition, the imperial power and authority is by no means prohibited from this when he wishes to 
offer his gifts to the Creator. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXIX. 

No layman except the Emperor shall go up to the altar. 

VAN ESPEN. 

That in the Latin Church as well as in the Greek for many centuries it was the constant custom, ratified by 
various councils, that lay-men are to be excluded from the sanctuary and from the place marked off for the 
priests who are celebrating the divine mysteries, is so notorious as to need no proof, and the present canon 
shows that among the Greeks the laity were not admitted to the sacrarium even to make offerings. 
The Synod makes but one exception, to wit, the Emperor, who can enter the rails of the holy altar by its 
permission "when he wishes to offer his gifts to the Creator, according to ancient custom." 
Not without foundation does the Synod claim "ancient custom" for this; for long before, it is evident, it was the 
case from the words of the Emperor Theodosius the Younger. See also Theodoret (H. E., lib. v., cap. xvij.). 
In the Latin Church, not only to emperors, kings, and great princes but also to patrons of churches, to 
toparchs of places, and even to magistrates, seats have been wont to be assigned honoris causa within the 
sanctuary or choir, and it has been contended that these are properly due to such persons. 
It is evident from Balsamon's note that the later Greeks at least looked upon the Emperor as being (like the 
kings of England and France) a persona mixta, sharing in some degree the sacerdotal character, as being 
anointed not merely with oil, but with the sacred chrism. Vide in this connexion J. Wickham Legg,The 
Sacring of the English Kings, in "The Archaeological Journal," March, 1894. 

CANON LXX. 

WOMEN are not permitted to speak at the time of the Divine Liturgy; but, according to the word of Paul the 
Apostle, "let them be silent. For it is not permitted to them to speak, but to be in subjection, as the law also 
saith. But if they wish to learn anything let them ask their own husbands at home." 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXX. 

Women are not permitted to speak in church. "Let your women keep silence in the churches; for it is not 
permitted unto them to speak," is the passage referred to. 1 Cor. xiv. 34. 

CANON LXXI. 

Those who are taught the civil laws must not adopt the customs of the Gentiles, nor be induced to go to the 
theatre, nor to keep what are called Cylestras, nor to wear clothing contrary to the general custom; and this 
holds good when they begin their training, when they reach its end, and, in short, all the time of its duration. If 
any one from this time shall dare to do contrary to this canon he is to be cut off. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXI. 

Whoever devotes himself to the study of law, uses the manner of the Gentiles, going to the theatre, and 
rolling in the dust, or dressing differently to custom, shall be cut off. 

Liddell and Scott identify <greek>kalistra</greek> with <greek>kalindhqra</greek> ,which they define as "a 
place for horses to roll after exercise," and note that it is a synonym of <greek>alindhqra</greek>. But it is 
interesting to note that <greek>alinhsis</greek> is "a rolling in the dust, an exercise in which wrestlers rolled 
on the ground." 

Hefele says that Balsamon and Zonaras have not been able rightly to explain what we are to understand by 
the forbidden "Cylestras," but I think Johnson is not far out of the way when he translates "nor to meddle with 
athletic exercises." 

CANON LXXII. 

AN orthodox man is not permitted to marry an heretical woman, nor an orthodox woman to be joined to an 
heretical man. But if anything of this kind appear to have been done by any [we require them] to consider 
the marriage null, and that the marriage be dissolved. For it is not fitting to mingle together what should not 
be mingled, nor is it right that the sheep be joined with the wolf, nor the lot of sinners with the portion of Christ. 
But if any one shall transgress the things which we have decreed let him be cut off. But if any who up to this 
time are unbelievers and are not yet numbered in the flock of the orthodox have contracted lawful marriage 
between themselves, and if then, one choosing the right and coming to the light of truth and the other 
remaining still detained by tile bond of error and not willing to behold with steady eye the divine rays, the 
unbelieving woman is pleased to cohabit with the believing man, or the unbelieving man with the believing 
woman, let them not be separated, according to the divine Apostle, "for the unbelieving husband is 
sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife by her husband." 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXII. 

A marriage contracted with heretics is void. But if they have made the contract before [conversion] let them 
remain [united] if they so desire. 

Perhaps none of the canons of this synod present greater and more insolvable difficulties than the present. 
It has been for long centuries the tradition of the Church that the marriage of a baptized Christian with an 
unbaptized person is null, but this canon seems to say that the same is the case if the one party be a heretic 
even though baptized. If this is what the canon means it elevates heresy into an impedimentum dirimens. 
Such is not and never has been the law of the West, and such is not to-day the practice of the Eastern 
church, which allows the marriage of its people with Lutherans and with Roman CatholiCs and never 
questions the validity of their marriages. Van Espen thinks "the Greek commentators seem" to think that the 
heretics referred to are unbaptized; I do not know exactly why he thinks so. 

CANON LXXIII. 

SINCE the life-giving cross has shewn to us Salvation, we should be careful that we render due honour to 
that by which we were saved from the ancient fall. Wherefore, in mind, in word, in feeling giving veneration 
(<greek>proskunhsin</greek>) to it, we command that the figure of the cross, which some have placed on 
the floor, be entirely removed therefrom, lest the trophy of the victory won for us be desecrated by the 
trampling under foot of those who walk over it. Therefore those who from this present represent on the 
pavement the sign of the cross, we decree are to be cut off. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXIII. 

If there is a cross upon a pavement it must be removed. 

This canon defines that to the image of the cross is to be "given veneration (<greek>proskunhsis</greek>) 
of the intellect, of the words, and of the sense," i.e., the cross is to be venerated with the interior cultus of the 
soul, is to be venerated with the exterior culture of praise, and also with sensible acts, such as kissings, 
bowings, etc. 

CANON LXXIV. 

IT is not permitted to hold what are called agapae, that is love-feasts, in the Lord's houses or churches, nor 
to eat within the house, nor to spread couches. If any dare to do so let him cease therefrom or be cut off. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXIV. 

Agapae are not to be held in the churches, nor shall beds be put up these, let them be cut off. Whoso refuse 

to give up. This is a renewal of canon xxviij., of Laodicea, on which canon see the notes. 

CANON LXXV. 

WE, will that those whose office it is to sing in the churches do not use undisciplined vociferations, nor force 
nature to shouting, nor adopt any of those modes which are incongruous and unsuitable for the church: but 
that they offer the psalmody to God, who is the observer of secrets, with great attention and compunction. 
For the Sacred Oracle taught that the Sons of Israel were to be pious. (1) 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXV. 

Inordinate vociferation of the psalms is not allowed, nor he that adopts things unsuited to the churches. 

This question of the character of churchmusic was one early discussed among Christians, and (long before 
the time of this synod), St. Augustine, in debating as to whether the chanting or the reading of the psalter was 
the more edifying, concludes, "when the psalms are chanted with a voice and most suitable modulation 
(liquida voce et convenientissima modulatione), I recognize that there is great utility in the practice," and 
further on he adds that singing is to be the rather approved, because "by the delight given to the ears the 
infirm soul is worked up to pious aspirations." (Confess. Lib. x., cap. xxxiij.). 

CANON LXXVI. 

IT is not right that those who are responsible for reverence to churches should place within the sacred 
bounds an eating place, nor offer food there, nor make other sales. For God our Saviour teaching us when 
he was tabernacling in the flesh commanded not to make his Father's house a house of merchandize. He 
also poured out the small coins of the money-changers, and drave out all those who made common the 
temple. If, therefore, anyone shall be taken in the aforesaid fault let him be cut off. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXVI. 

A public house should not be established within the sacred precincts; and it is wrong to sell food there; and 
whosever shall do so shall be cut off. 

Both Balsamon and Zonaras remark that this canon refers to the vestibule of the church and to the rest of the 
sacred inclosure, and not to the interior of the church proper, for there no one would ever think of having a 
shop. 

CANON LXXVII. 

IT is not right that those who are dedicated to religion, whether clerics or uscetics,(1) should wash in the bath 
with women, nor should any Christian man or layman do so. For this is severely condemned by the 
heathens. But if any one is caught in this thing, if he is a cleric let him be deposed; if a layman, let him be cut 
off. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXVII. 

A Christian man shall not bathe with women. Should a cleric do so he is to be deposed, and a layman cut 
off. 

This is a renewal of the XXXth canon of Laodicea. It will be noted, as Zonaras remarks, that the monks must 
be counted among the laymen who are to be cut off, since they have no clerical character or tonsure. 

CANON LXXVIII. 

IT behoves those who are illuminated to learn the Creed by heart and to recite it to the bishop or presbyters 
on the Fifth Feria of the Week. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXVIII. 

He that is illuminated is to recite(<greek>apaggelletw</greek>) the faith on the fifth feria of the week. 

This is a renewal of canon xlvi. of Laodicea. 

CANON LXXIX. 

As we confess the divine birth of the Virgin to be without any childbed, since it came to pass without seed, 
and as we preach this to the entire flock, so we subject to correction those who through ignorance do 
anything which is inconsistent therewith. Wherefore since some on the day after the holy Nativity of Christ our 
God are seen cooking <greek>semidalin</greek>, and distributing it to each other, on pretext of doing 
honour to the puerperia of the spotless Virgin Maternity, we decree that henceforth nothing of the kind be 
done by the faithful. For this is not honouring the Virgin (who above thought and speech bare in the flesh the 
incomprehensible Word) when we define(2) and describe, from ordinary things and from such as occur with 
ourselves, her ineffable parturition. If therefore anyone henceforth be discovered doing any such thing, if he 
be a cleric let him be deposed, but if a layman let him be cut off. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXIX. 

Whoever after the feast of the Mother of God shall prepare <greek>semidilin</greek>(semilam) or anything 
else on account of what is called puerperia, let him be cut off. 

As the Catholic Church has always taught the Virgin-birth as well as the Virgin-conception of our Blessed 
Lord, and has affirmed that Mary was ever-virgin, even after she had brought forth the incarnate Son, so it 
follows necessarily that there could be no childbed nor puerperal flux. It need hardly be remarked here that 
besides other texts that of the prophet is considered as teaching thus much, "Behold the Virgin (ha alma) 
shall conceive and bear a son," she that "bare" as well as she that "conceived" being a virgin. Some 
commentators have taken <greek>epilokeia</greek> for the afterbirth, but Christian Lupus, as Van Espen 
notes, has pointed out that the early fathers seem to have recognized that the Virgin did have the "afterbirth," 
and this St. Jerome expressly teaches in his book, Contra Helvidium. 

The Greeks, however, understood it as I have translated, and the witness of Zonaras will be sufficient. The 
words <greek>lokos</greek>, <greek>lokaios</greek> and the like all signify "lying in," "a place of lying in," 
and Liddell and Scott say that the latter word is used of "bearing down like heavy ears of corn," which would 
well express the labour pains. 

ZONARAS. 

This canon teaches that the parturition of the holy Virgin was without any childbed. For childbed 

(puerperium) is the emission of the foetus accompanied by pain and a flux of blood: but none of us eve 

believed that the Mother of God was subjected to sufferings of this sort, for these are the consequents of 

natural conception, but her conception was supernatural; and by the Holy Spirit it was brought to pass that 

she was not subjected to those evils which rightly are attached to natural parturition. 

On this canon should be read the extensive treatment of Asseman (Bib. Juris Orient., Tom. v., pp. 193 et 

seqq.) 

CANON LXXX. 

IF any bishop, or presbyter, or deacon, or any of those who are enumerated in the list of the clergy, or a 
layman, has no very grave necessity nor difficult business so as to keep him from church for a very long 
time, but being in town does not go to church on three consecutive Sundays-three weeks-if he is a cleric let 
him be deposed, but if a layman let him be cut off. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXX. 

If anyone without the constraint of necessity leaves his church for three Lord's days, he shall be deprived of 
communion. 

This is a renewal of canon xi. of Sardica (xiv. according to the numbering of Dionysins Exiguus.) 

CANON LXXXI. 

WHEREAS we have heard that in some places in the hymn Trisagion there is added after "Holy and 
Immortal," "Who was crucified for us, have mercy upon us," and since this as being alien to piety was by the 
ancient and holy Fathers cast out of the hymn, as also the violent heretics who inserted these new words 
were cast out of the Church; we also, confirming the things which were formerly piously established by our 
holy Fathers, anathematize those who after this present decree allow in church this or any other addition to 
the most sacred hymn; but if indeed he who has transgressed is of the sacerdotal order, we command that 
he be deprived of his priestly dignity, but if he be a layman or monk let him be cut off. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXXI. 

Whoever adds to the hymn Trisagion these words "Who wast crucified" shall be deemed heterodox. 

The addition of the phrase condemned by this canon was probably made first by Peter Fullo, and although 
indeed it was capable of a good meaning, if the whole hymn was understood as being addressed to Christ, 
and although this was admitted by very many of the orthodox, yet as it was chiefly used by the 
Monophysites and with an undoubtedly heretical intention, it was finally ousted from this position and its 
adherents were styled Theopaschites. From all this it came about that by 518 it was a source of 
disagreement among the Catholics, some affirming the expression, as looked at by itself, to be a 
touchstone of orthodoxy. The Emperor Justinian tried to, have it approved by Pope Hormisdas, but 
unsuccessfully, the pontiff only declaring that it was unnecessary, and even dangerous. Fulgentius of Ruspe 
and Dionysius Exiguus had declared it orthodox. Pope John II. almost came to the point of approving the 
phrase "one of the Trinity suffered," nor did his successor Agapetus I. speak any more definitely on the 
point, but the Fifth Ecumenical Council directly approved the formula. 

But this, of course, did not touch the point of its introduction into the Trisagion or, more accurately, of the 
introduction of the words "who was crucified for us." 

It should have been noted that at a Home Synod in 478, Peter Fullo had been deposed for the insertion of 
this clause, because he intended to imply that the true God had suffered death upon the cross. This 
sentence was a confirmation of one already pronounced against him by a synod held at Antioch which had 
raised a man, Stephen by name, to its episcopal throne. 

Such is the history of a matter which, while it seemed at first as of little moment, yet for many years was a 
source of trouble in the Church. (Vide Hefele, History of the Councils, Vol. III., pp. 454, 457; Vol. IV., p. 26.) 

CANON LXXXII. 

IN some pictures of the venerable icons, a lamb is painted to which the Precursor points his finger, which is 
received as a type of grace, indicating beforehand through the Law, our true Lamb, Christ our God. 
Embracing therefore the ancient types and shadows as symbols of the truth, and patterns given to the 
Church, we prefer "grace and truth," receiving it as the fulfilment of the Law. In order therefore that "that which 
is perfect" may be delineated to the eyes of all, at least in coloured expression, we decree that the figure in 
human form of the Lamb who taketh away the sin of the world, Christ our God, be henceforth exhibited in 
images, instead of the ancient lamb, so that all may understand by means of it the depths of the humiliation 
of the Word of God, and that we may recall to our memory his conversation in the flesh, his passion and 
salutary death, and his redemption which was wrought for the whole world. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXXII. 

Thou shalt not paint a lamb for the type of Christ, but himself. 

As from this canon, a century earlier than the iconoclastic controversy, the prevalence of pictures is evident, 
so from the canon of the same synod with regard to the veneration due to the image of the cross (number 
Ixxiii.), we learn that the teaching of the Church with regard to relative worship was the same as was 
subsequently set forth, so that the charge of innovating, sometimes rashly brought against the Seventh 
Ecumenical Council, has no foundation in fact whatever. 

This canon is further interesting as being the one cited by more than one Pope and Western Authority as 
belonging to "the Sixth Synod." 

CANON LXXXIII. 

No one may give the Eucharist to the bodies of the dead; for it is written "Take and eat." But the bodies of 
the dead can neither "take" nor "eat." 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXXIII. 

The Sacraments must not be given to a dead body. 

This is canon iv. of the Council of Hippo, in the year 393. (Vide Hefele, Vol. II, p. 397.) The earlier canon 
includes baptism also, in its prohibition. This is canons xviii. and xx. of the African code, according to the 
Greek numbering. 

CANON LXXXIV. 

FOLLOWING the canonical laws of the Fathers, we decree concerning infants, as often as they are found 
without trusty witnesses who say that they are undoubtedly baptized; and as often as they are themselves 
unable on account of their age to answer satisfactorily in respect to the initiatory mystery given to them; that 
they ought without any offence to be baptized, lest such a doubt might deprive them of the sanctification of 
such a purification. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXXIV. 

Whoever do not know nor can prove by documents that they have been baptized, let them be christened. 

This is canon VII., of the Sixth Council of Carthage, (Vide Hefele, Hist, of the Councils, Vol. II., p. 424); and 
Canon Ixxv., of the African code (to which Balsam on attributes this canon), by the Greek numbering, (Ixxii. by 
the Latin). 

CANON LXXXV. 

WE have received from the Scriptures that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word shall be 
established. Therefore we decree that slaves who are manumitted by their masters in the presence of three 
witnesses shall enjoy that honour; for they being present at the time will add strength and stability to the 
liberty given, and they will bring it to pass that faith will be kept in those things which they now witness were 
done in their presence. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXXV. 

A slave manumitted by his master before two witnesses shall be free. 

CANON LXXXVI. 

THOSE who to the destruction of their own souls procure and bring up harlots, if they be clerics, they are to 
be [cut off and] deposed, if laymen to be cut off. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXXVI. 

Whoever gathers together harlots to the ruin of souls, shall be cut off. 

The brackets enclose the reading of Hervetus. But Zonaras had this same text, and therefore it may be 
safely followed instead of that of Balsamon, as edited by Beveridge. 

CANON LXXXVII. 

SHE who has left her husband is an adulteress if she has come to another, according to the holy and divine 
Basil, who has gathered this most excellently from the prophet Jeremiah: "If a woman has become another 
man's, her husband shall not return to her, but being defiled she shall remain defiled;" and again, "He who 
has an adulteress is senseless and impious." If therefore she appears to have departed from her husband 
without reason, he is deserving of pardon and she of punishment. And pardon shall be given to him that he 
may be in communion with the Church. But he who leaves the wife lawfully given him, and shall take another 
is guilty of adultery by the sentence of the Lord. And it has been decreed by our Fathers that they who are 
such must be "weepers" for a year, "hearers" for two years, "prostrators" for three years, and in the seventh 
year to stand with the faithful and thus be counted worthy of the Oblation [if with tears they do penance.] 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXXVII. 

She who goes from her husband to another man is an adulteress. And he who from his wife goes to another 
woman is an adulterer according to the word of the Lord. 

Compare with this canon Iviij. of St. Basil. 

The words in brackets are found in Beveridge, but were lacking in Hervetus's text. 

JOHNSON. 

Here discipline is relaxed; formerly an adulteress did fifteen years' penance. See Can. Bas., 58. No wonder 
if in 200 years' time from St. Basil, the severity of discipline was abated. 

CANON LXXXVIII. 

No one may drive any beast into a church except perchance a traveller, urged thereto by the greatest 
necessity, in default of a shed or resting-place, may have turned aside into said church. For unless the 
beast had been taken inside, it would have perished, and he, by the loss of his beast of burden, and thus 
without means of continuing his journey, would be in peril of death. And we are taught that the Sabbath was 
made for man: wherefore also the safety and comfort of man are by all means to be placed first. But should 
anyone be detected without any necessity such as we have just mentioned, leading his beast into a church, 
if he be a cleric let him be deposed, and if a layman let him be cut off. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXXVIII. 

Cattle shall not be led into the holy halls, unless the greatest necessity compels it. 

CANON LXXXIX. 

THE faithful spending the days of the Salutatory Passion in fasting, praying and compunction of heart, ought 
to fast until the midnight of the Great Sabbath: since the divine Evangelists, Matthew and Luke, have shewn 
us how late at night it was [that the resurrection took place], the one by using the words <greek>oY</greek> 
<greek>sabbatwn</greek>, and the other by the words <greek>orqrou</greek> <greek>baqeos</greek> 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON LXXXIX. 

On the Great Sabbath the fast must be continued until midnight. 

CANON XC. 

WE have received from our divine Fathers the canon law that in honour of Christ's resurrection, we are not to 
kneel on Sundays. Lest therefore we should ignore the fulness of this observance we make it plain to the 
faithful that after the priests have gone to the Altar for Vespers on Saturdays (according to the prevailing 
custom) no one shall kneel in prayer until the evening of Sunday, at which time after the entrance for 
compline, again with banded knees we offer our prayers to the Lord. For taking the night after the Sabbath, 
which was the forerunner of our Lord's resurrection, we begin from it to sing in the spirit hymns to God, 
leading our feast out of darkness into light, and thus during an entire day and night, we celebrate the 
Resurrection. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XC. 

From the evening entrance of the Sabbath until the evening entrance of the Lord's day there must be no 
kneeling. 

VAN ESPEN. 

No doubt the synod by the words "we have received from the divine Fathers," referred to canon xx. of the 
Council of Nice. 

For many centuries this custom was preserved even in the Latin Church; and the custom of keeping feasts 
and whole days generally from evening to evening is believed to have been an Apostolic tradition, 
received by them from the Jews. At the end of the Vlllth Century the Synod of Frankfort declared in its xxj. 
canon, that "the Lord's day should be kept from evening to evening. "(1) 

CANON XCI. 

THOSE who give drugs for procuring abortion, and those who receive poisons to kill the foetus, are 
subjected to the penalty of murder. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XCI. 

Whoever gives or receives medicine to produce abortion is a homicide. 

See Canon XXI. of Ancyra, and Canon II. of St. Basil; to wit, "She who purposely destroys the foetus, shall 
suffer the punishment of murder. And we pay no attention to the subtile distinction as to whether the foetus 
was formed or unformed. And by this not only is justice satisfied for the child that should have been born, but 
also for her who prepared for herself the snares, since the women very often die who make such 
experiments." 

CANON XCII. 

THE holy synod decrees that those who in the name of marriage carry off women and those who in any way 
assist the ravishers, if they be clerics, they shall lose their rank, but if they be laymen they shall be 
anathematized. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XCII. 

Those who run away with women, and those who assist and give a hand, if they be clerics they shall be 
deposed, if laymen they shall be anathomatized. 

VAN ESPEN. 

This canon simply renews and confirms Canon xxvij of Chalcedon. 

CANON XCIII. 

IF the wife of a man who has gone away and does not appear, cohabit with another before she is assured of 
the death of the first, she is an adulteress. The wives of soldiers who have married husbands who do not 
appear are in the same case; as are also they who on account of the wanderings of their husbands do not 
wait for their return. But the circumstance here has some excuse, in that the suspicion of his death becomes 
very great. But she who in ignorance has married a man who at the time was deserted by his wife, and then 
is dismissed because his first wife returns to him, has indeed committed fornication, but through ignorance; 
therefore she is not prevented from marrying, but it is better if she remain as she is. If a soldier shall return 
after a long time, and find his wife on account of his long absence has been united to another man, if he so 
wishes, he may receive his own wife [back again], pardon being extended in consideration of their 
ignorance both to her and to the man who took her home in second marriage. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XCIII. 

A woman who when her husband does not turn up, before she is certain he is dead, takes another commits 
adultery. But when the man returns he may receive her again, if he so elects. 

Compare in the Corpus Juris Canonici, Gratian's Decretum, Pars II., Causa xxxiv., Quaest. I. and II. Epistle of 
St Leo to Nicetas. Also compare of St. Basil's canon's xxxj., xxxvj., and xlvj. 

CANON XCIV. 

THE canon subjects to penalties those who take heathen oaths, and we decree to them excommunication. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XCIV. 

Whoever uses Gentile oaths, is worthy of punishment, for he is cut off. 

The reference is to canon Ixxxj. of St. Basil's canons. 

VAN ESPEN. 

Tertullian (De Idolatria, cap. xx.) supposes that to swear by the false gods of the Gentiles, contains in itself 
some idolatry, an opinion shared by St. Basil, comparing those using such oaths with them who betrayed 
Christ, and who are partakers of the talk of devils. 

CANON XCV. 

THOSE who from the heretics come over to orthodoxy, and to the number of those who should be saved, 
we receive according to the following order and custom. Arians, Macedonians, Novatians, who call 
themselves Cathari, Aristeri, and Testareskaidecatitae, or Tetraditae, and Apollinarians, we receive on their 
presentation of certificates and on their anathematizing every heresy which does not hold as does the holy 
Apostolic Church of God: then first of all we anoint them with the holy chrism on their foreheads, eyes, 
nostrils, mouth and ears; and as we seal them we say-"The seal of the gift of the Holy Ghost." 
But concerning the Paulianists it has been determined by the Catholic Church that they shall by all means be 
rebaptized. The Eunomeans also, who baptize with one immersion; and the Montanists, who here are called 
Phrygians; and the Sabellians, who consider the Son to be the same as the Father, and are guilty in certain 
other grave matters, and all the other heresies-for there are many heretics here, especially those who 
come from the region of the Galatians-all of their number who are desirous of coming to the Orthodox faith, 
we receive as Gentiles. And on the first day we make them Christians, on the second Catechumens, then on 

the third day we exorcise them, at the same time also breathing thrice upon their faces and cars; and thus 

we initiate them, and we make them spend time in church and hear the Scriptures; and then we baptize 

them. 

And the Manichaeans, and Valentinians and Marcionites and all of similar heresies must give certificates 

and anathematize each his own heresy, and also Nestorius, Eutyches, Dioscorus, Severus, and the other 

chiefs of such heresies, and those who think with them, and all the aforesaid heresies; and so they become 

partakers of the holy Communion. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XCV. 

Thus we admit those converted from the heretics. We anoint with the holy chrism, upon the brow, eyes, 
nostrils, mouth, and ears, Arians, Macedonians, Novatians (who are called Cathari), Aristerians (who are 
called Quartadecimans or Tetraditae), and Apollinarians when they anathematize every heresy; and sign 
them with the cross as we say, "The Seal of the gift of the Holy Ghost. Amen." 

Compare with this Canon vii. of Laodicea, and the so-called vijth. canon of the First Council of 

Constantinople. 

The text I have translated is that ordinarily given, I now present to the reader Hefele's argument for its 

worthlessness. 

HEFFLE. 

This text is undoubtedly false, for (a) the baptism of the Gnostics was, according to the recognized 
ecclesiastical principle, invalid, and a Gnostic coming into the Church was required to be baptized anew; (b) 
besides, it would have us first to require of a Gnostic an anathema on Nestorius, Eutyches, etc. More 
accurate, therefore, is the text, as it is given by Beveridge, and as Balsamon had it, to the effect that: "In the 
same way (as the preceding) are the Munichaeans, Valentinians, Marcionites, and similar heretics to be 
treated (i.e., to be baptized anew); but the Nestorians must (merely) present certificates, and anathematize 
their heresy. Nestortius, Eutyches, etc." Here we have only this mistake, that the Nestorians must 
anathematize, among others, also Eutyches, which they would certainly have done very willingly. At the 
best, we must suppose that there is a gap in the text, and that after, "all of similar heresies," we must add "the 
later heretics must present certificates and anathematize Nestorius, Eutyches, etc." 
There seems but little doubt that whatever may be the truth in the matter, the early theologians and fathers 
held that even though the external rite of Holy Baptism might be validly performed by schismatics and 
heretics, yet that by it the person so baptized did not receive the Holy Ghost, and this opinion was not 
confined to the East, but was also prevalent in the West. Vide Rupertus, De Divinis Officiis, Lib. X., Cap. xxv. 

CANON XCVI. 

THOSE who by baptism have put on Christ have professed that they will copy his manner of life which he 
led in the flesh. Those therefore who adorn and arrange their hair to the detriment of those who see them, 
that is by cunningly devised intertwinings, and by this means put a bait in the way of unstable souls, we take 
in hand to cure paternally with a suitable punishment: training them and teaching them to live soberly, in 
order that having laid aside the deceit and vanity of material things, they may give their minds continually to 
a life which is blessed and free from mischief, and have their conversation in fear, pure, [and holy(1)]; and 
thus come as near as possible to God through their purity of life; and adorn the inner man rather than the 
outer, and that with virtues, and good and blameless manners, so that they leave in themselves no remains 
of the left-handedness of the adversary. But if any shall act contrary to the present canon let him be cut off. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XCVI. 

Whoever twist up their hair into artistic plaits for the destruction of the beholders are to be cut off. 

For the intricate manner of dressing the hair used in the East, and for a description of the golden dye, see 
the scholion of Zonaras. Van Espen remarks that the curious care for somebody else's hair in the form of 
wigs, so prevalent with many laymen and ecclesiastics of his day, is the same vice condemned by the 

canon in another shape. (2) 

CANON XCVII. 

THOSE who have commerce with a wife or in any other manner without regard thereto make sacred places 
common, and treat them with contempt and thus remain in them, we order all such to be expelled, even from 
the dwellings of the catechumens which are in the venerable temples. And if any one shall not observe 
these directions, if he be a cleric let him be deposed, but if a layman let him be cut off. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XCVII. 

Whoever in a temple has commerce with his wife and remains there out of contempt, shall be expelled even 
from the Catechumens. If any one shall not observe this he shall be deposed or cut off. 

ZONARAS. 

In the name of holy places, not the church itself but the adjoining and dependent buildings are intended such 
as those which are called the "Catechumena." For no one would be audacious enough to wish to cohabit 
with his wife in the very temple itself. 

CANON XCVIII. 

HE who brings to the intercourse of marriage a woman who is betrothed to another man who is still alive, is 
to lie under the charge of adultery. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XCVIII. 

He is an adulterer who takes one espoused to some one else. 

Aristenus's commentary on this canon is <greek>Safhs</greek>. A more extraordinary estimate of it could 
hardly be made. So far from the meaning being "perspicuous," as the Latin translation has it, the meaning 
seems to be past finding out; for, as Van Espen remarks, a man who sins with a betrothed woman is 
certainly not an "adulterer." He tries therefore to introduce the idea that though he is not an adulterer, yet he 
is to be punished as if he were. But the Greek hardly seems patient of this meaning, and the Ancient 
Epitome says in so many words that he is an adulterer. 

On account of this difficulty some have supposed that the espousals here mentioned were not de futuro but 
de proesenti, and that therefore it was the case of stealing a real wife of another man. But this explanation 
also is involved in many difficulties. 

CANON XCIX. 

WE have further learned that, in the regions of the Armenians, certain persons boil joints of meat within the 
sanctuary and offer portions to the priests, distributing it after the Jewish fashion. Wherefore, that we may 
keep the church undefiled, we decree that it is not lawful for any priest to seize the separate portions of flesh 
meat from those who offer them, but they are to be content with what he that offers pleases to give them; and 
further we decree that such offering be made outside the church. And if any one does not thus, let him be cut 
off. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON XCIX. 

There are some who like the Jews cook meat in the holy places. Whoever permits this, or receives aught 
from them, is not fit to be priest. But if any one should of his own free choice offer it, then he might receive as 
much as the offerer chose to give him, provided the offer were made outside the church. 

A similar Judaizing superstitious custom was also found in the West, of which Walafrid Strabo gives an 
account in the IX. Century (De Rebus Ecclesiasticis, cap. xviii.). 

CANON C. 

"LET thine eyes behold the thing which is right," orders Wisdom, "and keep thine heart with all care." For the 
bodily senses easily bring their own impressions into the soul. Therefore we order that henceforth there 
shall in no way be made pictures, whether they are in paintings or in what way so ever, which attract the eye 
and corrupt the mind, and incite it to the enkindling of base pleasures. And if any one shall attempt to do this 
he is to be cut off. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON C. 

Pictures which induce impurity are not to be painted. Whoso shall transgress shall be cut off. 

CANON CI. 

THE great and divine Apostle Paul with loud voice calls man created in the image of God, the body and 
temple of Christ. Excelling, therefore, every sensible creature, he who by the saving Passion has attained to 
the celestial dignity, eating and drinking Christ, is fitted in all respects for eternal life, sanctifying his soul and 
body by the participation of divine grace. Wherefore, if any one wishes to be a participator of the 
immaculate Body in the time of the Synaxis, and to offer himself for the communion, let him draw near, 
arranging his hands in the form of a cross, and so let him receive the communion of grace. But such as, 
instead of their hands, make vessels of gold or other materials for the reception of the divine gift, and by 
these receive the immaculate communion, we by no means allow to come, as preferring inanimate and 
inferior matter to the image of God. But if any one shall be found imparting the immaculate Communion to 
those who bring vessels of this kind, let him be cut off as well as the one who brings them. 

NOTES. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CI. 

Whoever comes to receive the Eucharist holds his hands in the form of a cross, and takes it with his mouth; 
whoever shall prepare a receptacle of gold or of any other material instead of his hand, shall be cut off. 

BALSAMON. 

At first, perchance, this was invented from pious feelings, because the hand which came in contact with base 
and unworthy things was not worthy to receive the Lord's body, but, as time went on, piety was turned to the 
injury of the soul, so that those who did this when they came to receive with an arrogant and insolent bearing, 
were preferred to the poor. 

ST. CYRIL OF JERUSALEM. 

(Cateches. Mystagog. v.(1)) 

When thou goest to receive communion go not with thy wrists extended, nor with thy fingers separated, but 
placing thy left hand as a throne for thy right, which is to receive so great a King, and in the hollow of the palm 
receive the body of Christ, saying, Amen. 

Vide also St. John Damascene, De Fide Orthodoxa, lib. iv., cap. xiv. On the whole matter cf. Card. Bona, De 
Rebus Lit., lib. ii., cap. xvij., n. 3. 

CANON CM. 

IT behoves those who have received from God the power to loose and bind, to consider the quality of the 
sin and the readiness of the sinner for conversion, and to apply medicine suitable for the disease, lest if he 
is injudicious in each of these respects he should fail in regard to the healing of the sick man. For the 
disease of sin is not simple, but various and multiform, and it germinates many mischievous offshoots, from 
which much evil is diffused, and it proceeds further until it is checked by the power of the physician. 

Wherefore he who professes the science of spiritual medicine ought first of all to consider the disposition of 
him who has sinned, and to see whether he tends to health or (on the contrary) provokes to himself disease 
by his own behaviour, and to look how he can care for his manner of life during the interval. And if he does 
not resist the physician, and if the ulcer of the soul is increased by the application of the imposed 
medicaments, then let him mete out mercy to him according as he is worthy of it. For the whole account is 
between God and him to whom the pastoral rule has been delivered, to lead back the wandering sheep 
and to cure that which is wounded by the serpent; and that he may neither cast them down into the 
precipices of despair, nor loosen the bridle towards dissolution or contempt of life; but in some way or other, 
either by means of sternness and astringency, or by greater softness and mild medicines, to resist this 
sickness and exert himself for the healing of the ulcer, now examining the fruits of his repentance and wisely 
managing the man who is called to higher illumination. For we ought to know two things, to wit, the things 
which belong to strictness and those which belong to custom, and to follow the traditional form in the case of 
those who are not fitted for the highest things, as holy Basil teaches us. 

ANCIENT EPITOME OF CANON CM. 

The character of a sin must be considered from all points and conversion expected. And so let mercy be 
meted out.
